Royal CrestMoldova No. 1 (2021) Strategic Partnership, Trade and Cooperation Agreement between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Republic of Moldova Chisinau, 24 December 2020 [The Agreement is not in force] Presented to Parliament  by the Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Affairs  by Command of Her Majesty January 2021 CP 370 OGL_Logo© Crown copyright 2021 This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit  Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at www.gov.uk/official-documents Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at Treaty Section, Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, King Charles Street, London, SW1A 2AH ISBN 978-1-5286-2357-5 CCS1220795432    01/21 Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP, TRADE AND COOPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA PREAMBLE THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, hereinafter referred to as ‘the United Kingdom’ or ‘the UK’, of the one part, and THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA of the other part, hereafter jointly referred to as ‘the Parties’, CONSIDERING the common values and strong links of the Parties, and recognising the common desire of the Parties to further develop, strengthen and extend their relations; ACKNOWLEDGING the European aspirations and the European choice of the Republic of Moldova; RECOGNISING the common values of democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law;  TAKING into account that this Agreement will not prejudice, and leaves open, the way for future progressive developments in UK-Republic of Moldova relations; ACKNOWLEDGING that the Republic of Moldova as a European country shares common values with the UK and is committed to implementing and promoting those values; COMMITTED to strengthening respect for fundamental freedoms, human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities, democratic principles, the rule of law, and good governance; RECALLING in particular the will of the Parties to promote human rights, democracy and the rule of law, including by cooperating to that end within the framework of the Council of Europe; WILLING to contribute to the political and socioeconomic development of the Republic of Moldova, through wide-ranging cooperation in a broad spectrum of areas of common interest, including in the field of good governance, freedom, security and justice, trade and enhanced economic cooperation, employment and social policy, financial management, public administration and civil service reform, civil society participation, institution building, reduction of poverty, and sustainable development;COMMITTED to all the principles and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), in particular of the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 of the Conference on Security and Co- operation in Europe and the concluding documents of the Madrid and Vienna Conferences of 1991 and 1992 respectively, and the Charter of Paris for a New Europe of 1990, as well as the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 1950; RECALLING the will of the Parties to promote international peace and security as well as engaging in effective multilateralism and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in particular by cooperating to that end within the framework of the United Nations (UN) and the OSCE; RECOGNISING the importance of the active participation of the Republic of Moldova in regional cooperation formats; DESIROUS to further develop regular political dialogue on bilateral and international issues of mutual interest;  TAKING ACCOUNT of the UK’s willingness to support the international effort to strengthen the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova and to contribute to the reintegration of the country; RECOGNISING the importance of the commitment of the Republic of Moldova to a viable settlement of the Transnistrian conflict, and the UK’s commitment to support post-conflict rehabilitation; COMMITTED to preventing and combating all forms of organised crime, trafficking in human beings and corruption, and to stepping up cooperation in the fight against terrorism; COMMITTED to deepening the Parties’ dialogue and cooperation on mobility, migration, asylum and border management aiming at cooperation on legal migration, including circular migration and tackling illegal migration, and on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation; RECOGNISING that the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member Sates, of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part, done at Brussels on 27 June 2014 (the EU-Moldova Agreement) will cease to apply to the United Kingdom at the end of any transitional arrangement during which the rights and obligations under these Agreements continue to apply to the United Kingdom; COMMITTED to the principles of free market economy and confirming the readiness of the UK to support the economic reforms in the Republic of Moldova; COMMITTED to respecting environmental needs, including transboundary cooperation on, and implementation of, multilateral international agreements, and to respecting the principles of sustainable development; DESIROUS to achieve greater economic cooperation, inter alia, through a Comprehensive Free Trade Area (CFTA), as an integral part of this Agreement, which will provide for far-reaching market access liberalisation, in compliance with the rights and obligations arising out of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) membership of the Parties and the transparent application of those rights and obligations; BELIEVING that this Agreement will create a new climate for economic relations between the Parties and above all for the development of trade and investment, and will stimulate competition, which are factors crucial to economic restructuring and modernisation; COMMITTED to enhancing the security of energy supply, facilitating the development of appropriate infrastructure, and promoting energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources; ACKNOWLEDGING the need for enhanced energy cooperation; WILLING to improve the level of public health safety and protection of human health as a precondition for sustainable development and economic growth; COMMITTED to enhancing people-to-people contacts, including through cooperation and exchanges in the fields of research and development, education and culture; RECOGNISING the commitment of both Parties to develop administrative and institutional infrastructure to the extent necessary to enforce this Agreement, HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: Objectives 1. A strategic partnership is hereby established between the UK of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part. 2. The aims of that partnership are: (a) to promote political partnership and economic cooperation between the Parties based on common values and close links; (b) to strengthen the framework for enhanced political dialogue in all areas of mutual interest, providing for the development of close political relations between the Parties; (c) to contribute to the strengthening of democracy and to political, economic and institutional stability on the basis of our shared values; (d) to promote, preserve and strengthen peace and stability in the regional and international dimensions, including through joining efforts to eliminate sources of tension, enhancing border security, promoting cross-border co- operation and good neighbourly relations; (e) to support and enhance cooperation in the area of freedom, security and justice with the aim of reinforcing the rule of law and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as well as in the area of mobility and people-to-people contacts; (f) to support the efforts of the Republic of Moldova to develop its economic potential via international cooperation; (g) to establish conditions for enhanced economic and trade relations, including by setting up a Comprehensive Free Trade Area, which will provide for far-reaching market access liberalisation, in compliance with the rights and obligations arising out of WTO membership and the transparent application of those rights and obligations; and (h) to establish conditions for increasingly close cooperation in other areas of mutual interest. TITLE I GENERAL PRINCIPLES ARTICLE 2 1. Respect for the democratic principles, human rights and fundamental freedoms, as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and as defined in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the Charter of Paris for a New Europe of 1990, shall form the basis of the domestic and external policies of the Parties and constitute an essential element of this Agreement. Countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, related materials and their means of delivery also constitutes an essential element of this Agreement. 2. The Parties reiterate their commitment to the principles of a free market economy, sustainable development and effective multilateralism. 3. The Parties reaffirm their respect for the principles of the rule of law and good governance, as well as their international obligations, notably under the UN, the Council of Europe and the OSCE. 4. The Parties commit themselves to fostering cooperation and good neighbourly relations, including cooperation on the development of projects of common interest, notably those related to preventing and combating corruption, criminal activities, organised or otherwise, including those of a transnational character, and terrorism. That commitment constitutes a key factor in the development of the relations and cooperation between the Parties and contributes to regional peace and stability. TITLE II POLITICAL DIALOGUE AND REFORM, COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY ARTICLE 3 Aims of political dialogue 1. Political dialogue on all areas of mutual interest, including foreign and security matters as well as domestic reform, shall be further developed and strengthened between the Parties. That will increase the effectiveness of political co- operation and promote cooperation on foreign and security matters. 2. The aims of political dialogue shall be: (a) to deepen political partnership and increase political and security policy cooperation and effectiveness; (b) to promote international stability and security based on effective multilateralism; (c) to strengthen cooperation and dialogue between the Parties on international security and crisis management, particularly in order to address global and regional challenges and key threats; (d) to foster result-oriented and practical cooperation between the Parties for achieving peace, security and stability on the European continent; (e) to strengthen respect for democratic principles, the rule of law and good governance, human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities, and to contribute to consolidating domestic political reforms; (f) to develop dialogue and to deepen cooperation of the Parties in the field of security and defence; and (g) to respect and promote the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, inviolability of borders and independence. ARTICLE 4 Domestic reform The Parties shall cooperate on the following areas: (a) developing, consolidating and increasing the stability and effectiveness of democratic institutions and the rule of law; (b) ensuring respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms; (c) making further progress on judicial and legal reform, so as to secure the independence of the judiciary, strengthen its administrative capacity and guarantee impartiality and effectiveness of law enforcement bodies; (d) further pursuing the public administration reform and building an accountable, efficient, transparent and professional civil service; and (e) ensuring effectiveness in the fight against corruption, particularly in view of enhancing international cooperation on preventing and combating corruption, and ensuring effective implementation of relevant international legal instruments, such as the United Nations Convention Against Corruption of 2003. ARTICLE 5 1. The Republic of Moldova may benefit from financial assistance to contribute to achieving the objectives of this Agreement, if agreed by both Parties. 2. Financial assistance covers a range of forms and means, including assistance provided through multilateral and regional organisations. 3. In order to make the best use of the resources available, the Parties shall endeavour to implement any assistance in close cooperation and coordination with other donor countries, donor organisations and international financial institutions, and in line with international principles of aid effectiveness. 4. The Parties shall implement any assistance in accordance with the principles of sound financial management and shall cooperate in protecting the financial interests of the UK and of The Republic of Moldova. The Parties shall take effective measures to prevent and fight fraud, corruption and any other illegal activities, inter alia by means of mutual administrative assistance and mutual legal assistance in the fields covered by this Agreement. 5. Where assistance is provided by the UK authorities to the entities of the public sector in the Republic of Moldova, the details of the UK contribution shall be laid out in specific agreements between the Parties. For assistance delivered by the UK in the Republic of Moldova, outside the public sector of the Recipient country, the UK shall keep the Republic of Moldova authorities informed of the volume and objectives of such cooperation. ARTICLE 6 The Government of Moldova shall exempt any financial non-reimbursable assistance, technical assistance and humanitarian aid provided and financed by the Government of the UK under this Agreement from the payment of all duties, fees, levies or any costs whatsoever, including VAT. ARTICLE 7 Foreign and security policy 1. The Parties shall intensify their dialogue and cooperation in the area of foreign and security policy, and shall address in particular issues of conflict prevention and crisis management, regional stability, disarmament, non-proliferation, arms control and export control. Cooperation shall be based on common values and mutual interests, and shall aim at increasing policy effectiveness, making use of bilateral, international and regional fora. 2. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to the principles of respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, inviolability of borders and independence, as established in the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and their commitment to promote those principles in their bilateral and multilateral relations. ARTICLE 8 International Criminal Court 1. The Parties reaffirm that the most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole must not go unpunished and that their effective prosecution must be ensured by taking measures at the national and international level, including the International Criminal Court (ICC). 2. The Parties consider that the establishment and effective functioning of the ICC constitutes an important development for international peace and justice. The Parties agree to support the ICC by implementing the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and its related instruments, giving due regard to preserving its integrity. Conflict prevention and crisis management The Parties shall enhance practical cooperation in conflict prevention and crisis management. ARTICLE 10 Regional stability 1. The Parties shall intensify their joint efforts to promote stability, security and democratic development in the region and, in particular, shall work together for the peaceful settlement of regional conflicts. 2. The Parties reiterate their commitment to a sustainable solution to the Transnistrian conflict, in full respect of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova within its internationally recognised borders, as well as to jointly facilitating post-conflict rehabilitation. Pending its resolution and without prejudice to the established negotiating format, the Transnistrian conflict in will constitute one of the central subjects on the agenda of political dialogue and cooperation between the Parties, as well as in the dialogue and cooperation with other interested international actors. 3. Those efforts shall follow commonly shared principles of maintaining international peace and security as established by the Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 of the Conference on Security and Co- operation in Europe and other relevant multilateral documents. ARTICLE 11 Weapons of mass destruction 1. The Parties consider that the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery, both to state and non-state actors, represents one of the most serious threats to international peace and stability. The Parties therefore agree to cooperate and contribute to countering the proliferation of WMD and their means of delivery through full compliance with, and national implementation of, their existing obligations under international disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements, and other relevant international obligations. The Parties agree that this provision constitutes an essential element of this Agreement. 2. The Parties furthermore agree to cooperate and to contribute to countering the proliferation of WMD and their means of delivery by: (a) taking steps to ratify, or accede to, as appropriate, and fully implement all other relevant international instruments; and (b) establishing an effective system of national export controls, controlling the export as well as transit of WMD-related goods, including a WMD end-use control on dual-use technologies, and containing effective sanctions for breaches of export controls. 3. The Parties agree to make this a subject of the political dialogue provided for in this Agreement. ARTICLE 12 Small arms and light weapons and conventional arms export control 1. The Parties recognise that the illicit manufacture, transfer and circulation of small arms and light weapons (SALW), including their ammunition, and their excessive accumulation, poor management, inadequately secured stockpiles and uncontrolled spread continue to pose a serious threat to peace and international security. 2. The Parties agree to observe and fully implement their respective obligations to deal with the illicit trade in SALW, including their ammunition, under existing international agreements and UN Security Council resolutions, as well as their commitments within the framework of other international instruments applicable in that area, such as the UN Programme of Action to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in SALW in all its aspects. 3. The Parties shall undertake to cooperate and to ensure coordination, complementarity and synergy in their efforts to deal with the illicit trade in SALW, including their ammunition, and the destruction of excessive stockpiles, at a global, regional, sub-regional and national level. 4. Furthermore, the Parties agree to continue to cooperate in the area of conventional arms export control. 5. The Parties agree to make this a subject of the political dialogue provided for in this Agreement. ARTICLE 13 International cooperation in the fight against terrorism 1. The Parties agree to work together at a bilateral, regional and international level to prevent and combat terrorism in accordance with international law, relevant UN resolutions, international human rights standards, and refugee and humanitarian law. 2. To that effect, the Parties shall in particular cooperate so as to deepen international consensus on the fight against terrorism, including on the legal definition of terrorist acts and by working towards an agreement on the Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism. 3. The Parties shall, in the framework of the full implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant UN instruments and of applicable international conventions and instruments, exchange information on terrorist organisations and groups and their activities and support networks in accordance with international law and the legislation of the Parties. TITLE III FREEDOM, SECURITY AND JUSTICE Rule of law 1. In their cooperation in the area of freedom, security and justice the Parties shall attach particular importance to the promotion of the rule of law, including the independence of the judiciary, access to justice, and the right to a fair trial. 2. The Parties will cooperate fully on the effective functioning of institutions in the areas of law enforcement and the administration of justice. 3. Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms will guide all cooperation on freedom, security and justice. ARTICLE 15 Protection of personal data 1. The Parties affirm their commitment to ensuring a high level of personal data protection and shall endeavour to work together to promote high international standards. 2. Any processing of personal data shall be subject to the legal provisions referred to in Annex I to this Agreement. The transfer of personal data between the Parties shall only take place if such transfer is necessary for the implementation, by the competent authorities of the Parties, of this agreement. ARTICLE 16 Cooperation on migration, asylum and border management 1. The Parties reaffirm the importance of a joint management of migration flows between their territories, including legal migration, international protection, illegal migration, smuggling and trafficking in human beings. 2. Cooperation will be based on a specific needs assessment, conducted in mutual consultation between the Parties, and implemented in accordance with their relevant legislation in force. It will, in particular, focus on: (a) the root causes and the consequences of migration; (b) the development and implementation of national legislation and practices as regards international protection, with a view to satisfying the provisions of the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 and of the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967 and of other relevant international instruments, and to ensuring the respect of the principle of ‘non-refoulement’; (c) the admission rules and rights and status of persons admitted, fair treatment and integration of lawfully residing non-nationals, education and training, and measures against racism and xenophobia; (d) the establishment of an effective and preventive policy against illegal immigration, smuggling of migrants and trafficking in human beings, including the issue of how to combat networks of smugglers and traffickers and how to protect the victims of such trafficking; (e) the promotion and facilitation of the return of illegal migrants; and (f) in the area of border management and document security, on issues of organisation, training, best practices and other operational measures. ARTICLE 17 Movement of persons The Parties agree that they may enter into dialogue regarding the movement of people within the current or future national frameworks governing these issues, particularly the movement of skilled individuals. ARTICLE 18 Preventing and combating organised crime, corruption and other illegal activities 1. The Parties shall cooperate on preventing and combating all forms of criminal and illegal activities, organised or otherwise, including those of a transnational character, such as: (a) smuggling and trafficking in human beings; (b) smuggling and trafficking in goods, including in small arms and illicit drugs; (c) illegal economic and financial activities such as counterfeiting, fiscal fraud and public procurement fraud; (d) fraud, as defined in Protocol III of this Agreement, in projects funded by international donors; (e) acts of corruption and related acts, both in the private and public sector, including the abuse of office or abuse of power and trading in influence; (f) fraud and forging documents and submitting false statements; and (g) cyber crime. 2. The Parties shall enhance bilateral, regional and international cooperation among law enforcement bodies, including strengthening cooperation with the relevant authorities of the Republic of Moldova. The Parties are committed to implementing effectively the relevant international standards, and in particular those enshrined in the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (UNTOC) of 2000 and its three Protocols, the United Nations Convention against Corruption of 2003, and relevant Council of Europe instruments on preventing and combating corruption. ARTICLE 19 Tackling illicit drugs 1. Within their respective powers the Parties shall cooperate to ensure a balanced and integrated approach towards drug issues. Drug policies and actions shall be aimed at reinforcing structures for tackling illicit drugs, reducing the supply of, trafficking in and the demand for illicit drugs, coping with the health and social consequences of drug abuse, as well as at a more effective prevention of diversion of chemical precursors used for the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. 2. The Parties shall agree on the necessary methods of cooperation to attain those objectives. Actions shall be based on commonly agreed principles along the lines of the relevant international conventions, and taking into account the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem and the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly 2016 on the world drug problem, entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem”. ARTICLE 20 Preventing and combating money laundering and financing of terrorism 1. The Parties shall cooperate in order to prevent the use of their financial and relevant non-financial systems to launder the proceeds of criminal activities, as well as for the purpose of financing of terrorism. That cooperation extends to the recovery of assets or funds derived from the proceeds of crime. 2. Cooperation in this area shall allow exchanges of relevant information within the framework of respective legislations and the adoption of appropriate standards to combat money laundering and financing of terrorism, equivalent to those adopted by relevant international bodies active in this area, such as the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing (FATF). ARTICLE 21 Combating terrorism The Parties agree to cooperate in the prevention and suppression of acts of terrorism in full respect for the rule of law, international human rights, and refugee and humanitarian law and in accordance with the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy of 2006 as well as their respective laws and regulations. They shall do so in particular in the framework of the full implementation of UN Security Council Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 1904 (2009) and other relevant UN instruments, and applicable international conventions and instruments: (a) by exchanging information on terrorist groups and their support networks in accordance with international and national law; (b) by exchanging views on terrorism trends and on means and methods of combating terrorism, including in technical areas and training, and by exchanging experiences in respect of the prevention of terrorism; and (c) by sharing best practices in the area of protection of human rights in the fight against terrorism. ARTICLE 22 Legal cooperation 1. The Parties agree to develop judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters as regards the negotiation, ratification and implementation of multilateral conventions on civil judicial cooperation and, in particular, the conventions of the Hague Conference on Private International Law in the field of international legal cooperation and litigation as well as the protection of children. 2. As regards judicial cooperation in criminal matters, the Parties will seek to enhance cooperation on mutual legal assistance. That would include, where appropriate, accession to, and implementation of, the relevant international instruments of the UN and the Council of Europe. and closer cooperation with Eurojust, where that is possible. TITLE IV ECONOMIC AND OTHER SECTORAL COOPERATION CHAPTER 1 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM ARTICLE 23 Cooperation shall focus on the development of efficient and accountable public administration in the Republic of Moldova, with the aim of supporting implementation of the rule of law, ensuring that state institutions work for the benefit of the entire population of the Republic of Moldova, and promoting the smooth development of relations between the Republic of Moldova and its partners. Particular attention will be given to the modernisation and development of executive functions, with the goal of providing quality services to the citizens of the Republic of Moldova. ARTICLE 24 Cooperation shall cover the following areas: (a) the institutional and functional development of public authorities, in order to increase the efficiency of their activity and to ensure an efficient, participatory and transparent decision-making and strategic planning process; (b) modernisation of public services, including the introduction and implementation of e-Governance, with a view to increasing the efficiency of service delivery to citizens and reducing the costs of doing business; (c) creation of a professional civil service based on the principle of managerial accountability and effective delegation of authority, as well as fair and transparent recruitment, training, assessment and remuneration; (d) effective and professional human resource management and career development; and (e) the promotion of ethical values in the civil service. ARTICLE 25 Cooperation shall cover all levels of public administration, including local administration. CHAPTER 2 ECONOMIC DIALOGUE ARTICLE 26 1. The UK and the Republic of Moldova shall facilitate the process of economic reform by improving the understanding of the fundamentals of their respective economies. Cooperation between the Parties shall aim to promote economic policies pertinent to functioning market economies as well as the formulation and implementation of those economic policies. 2. The Parties shall remain committed to a functioning market economy in accordance with the guiding principles of sound macroeconomic and fiscal policies. ARTICLE 27 To those ends, the Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas: (a) exchange of information on macroeconomic policies and structural reforms as well as on macroeconomic performance and prospects, and on strategies for economic development; (b) joint analysis of economic issues of mutual interest, including economic policy measures and the instruments for implementing them, such as methods for economic forecasting and elaboration of strategic policy documents, with a view to strengthening the policy-making of the Republic of Moldova; (c) exchange of expertise in the macroeconomic and macrofinancial sphere, including public finances, financial sector developments and regulation, monetary and exchange rate policies and frameworks, external financial assistance, and economic statistics. ARTICLE 28 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 3 COMPANY LAW, ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ARTICLE 29 1. Recognising the importance of an effective set of rules and practices in the areas of company law and corporate governance, as well as in accounting and auditing, for creating a fully-functioning market economy and for fostering trade, the Parties agree to cooperate in relation to: (a) protecting shareholders, creditors and other stakeholders; (b) using relevant international standards at a national level, and developing appropriate domestic systems, in the field of accounting and auditing; (c) further developing of corporate governance policy in line with international standards, in particular the OECD Principles on Corporate Governance. ARTICLE 30 The Parties will aim at sharing information and expertise on both existing systems and relevant new developments in those areas. In addition, the Parties may seek to improve information exchange between the business registers of the UK and the national register of companies of the Republic of Moldova. ARTICLE 31 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 4 EMPLOYMENT, SOCIAL POLICY AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ARTICLE 32 The Parties shall strengthen their dialogue and cooperation on promoting the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Decent Work Agenda, employment policy, health and safety at work, social dialogue, social protection, social inclusion, gender equality and anti-discrimination, and social rights, and thereby contribute to the promotion of more and better jobs, poverty reduction, enhanced social cohesion, sustainable development and improved quality of life. The Parties agree to cooperate in the field of social policies. ARTICLE 33 Cooperation, based on exchange of information and best practices, may cover a selected number of issues to be identified among the following areas: (a) poverty reduction and the enhancement of social cohesion; (b) employment policy, aiming at more and better jobs with decent working conditions, including with a view to reducing the informal economy and informal employment; (c) promoting active labour market measures and efficient employment services to modernise the labour markets and to adapt to labour market needs; (d) fostering more inclusive labour markets and social safety systems that integrate disadvantaged people, including people with disabilities and people from minority groups; (e) efficient management of labour migration, aiming at strengthening its positive impact on development; (f) equal opportunities, aiming at enhancing gender equality and ensuring equal opportunities between women and men, as well as preventing and combating discrimination on all grounds; (g) social policy, aiming at enhancing the level of social protection, including social assistance and social insurance, and modernising social protection systems, in terms of quality, accessibility and financial sustainability; (h) enhancing the participation of social partners and promoting social dialogue, including through strengthening the capacity of all relevant stakeholders; and (i) promoting health and safety at work. ARTICLE 34 The Parties shall encourage the involvement of all relevant stakeholders, including civil society organisations and in particular social partners, in policy development and reforms in the Republic of Moldova and in the cooperation between the Parties under this Agreement. ARTICLE 35 The Parties shall aim at enhancing cooperation on employment and social policy matters in all relevant regional, multilateral and international fora and organisations. ARTICLE 36 The Parties shall promote corporate social responsibility and accountability and encourage responsible business practices, such as those promoted by the UN Global Compact and the ILO tripartite declaration of principles concerning multinational enterprises and social policy. ARTICLE 37 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 5 CONSUMER PROTECTION ARTICLE 38 The Parties shall cooperate in order to ensure a high level of consumer protection. ARTICLE 39 In order to achieve that objectives, the cooperation may comprise, when appropriate: (a) promoting exchange of information on consumer protection systems, including consumer legislation and its enforcement, consumer product safety, including market surveillance, consumer information systems and tools, consumer education, empowerment and consumer redress, and sales and service contracts concluded between traders and consumers; (b) promoting training activities for administration officials and other consumer interest representatives; and (c) encouraging the development of independent consumer associations, including non-governmental consumer organisations (NGOs), and contacts between consumer representatives, as well as collaboration between authorities and NGOs in the field of consumer protection. CHAPTER 6 STATISTICS ARTICLE 40 The Parties shall develop and strengthen their cooperation on statistical issues, thereby contributing to the long-term objective of providing timely, internationally comparable and reliable statistical data. It is expected that a sustainable, efficient and professionally independent national statistical system shall produce information relevant for citizens, businesses and decision makers in the UK and in the Republic of Moldova, enabling them to take informed decisions on that basis. The national statistical system should respect the UN Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics,, taking into account international standards and best practice, in order to align the national statistical system with internationally comparable norms and standards. ARTICLE 41 Cooperation shall aim at: (a) further strengthening the capacity of the national statistical system, focusing on the sound legal basis, production of adequate data and metadata, dissemination policy and user-friendliness, taking into account various groups of users, including public and private sectors, the academic community and other users; (b) fine-tuning of data provision, taking into account the application of relevant international methodologies, including classifications; (c) enhancing the professional and management capacity of the national statistical staff to facilitate the application of statistical standards and to contribute to the development of the statistical system of the Republic of Moldova; (d) exchanging experience between the Parties on the development of statistical know-how; and (e) promoting total quality management of all statistical production processes and dissemination. ARTICLE 42 The Parties shall further cooperate , inter alia, on the areas of: (a) demographic statistics, including censuses, and social statistics; (b) agricultural statistics, including agricultural censuses and environment statistics; (c) business statistics, including business registers and use of administrative sources for statistical purposes; (d) macroeconomic statistics, including national accounts, foreign trade statistics, and foreign direct investment statistics; (e) energy statistics, including balances; (f) regional statistics; and (g) horizontal activities, including statistical classifications, quality management, training, dissemination and use of modern information technologies. ARTICLE 43 The Parties shall, inter alia, exchange information and expertise and shall develop their cooperation, taking into account the already accumulated experience in the reform of the statistical system. The emphasis in the statistical data production process shall be the further development of sample surveys and usage of administrative records, while taking into account the need to reduce the response burden. The data shall be relevant for the designing and monitoring of policies in key areas of social and economic life. A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter.  CHAPTER 7 MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC FINANCES: BUDGET POLICY, INTERNAL CONTROL, FINANCIAL INSPECTION AND EXTERNAL AUDIT ARTICLE 45 Cooperation in the field covered by this Chapter will focus on the implementation of international standards as well as good practice in this field, which will contribute to the development of a modern public finance management system in the Republic of Moldova, and international principles of transparency, accountability, economy, efficiency and effectiveness. ARTICLE 46 Budget and accounting systems The Parties shall cooperate in relation to: (a) improvement and systematisation of regulatory documents on the budgetary, treasury, accounting and reporting systems and their harmonisation on the basis of international standards; (b) continuous development of multi-annual budget planning; (c) exchange of information, experiences and good practice, including through personnel exchange and joint training in this field. ARTICLE 47 Internal control, financial inspection and external audit The Parties shall also cooperate in relation to: (a) further improvement of the internal control system (including a functionally independent internal audit function) in state and local authorities by means of harmonisation with generally accepted international standards and methodologies;  (b) the development of an adequate financial inspection system that will complement but not duplicate the internal audit function and will ensure adequate control coverage of government income and expenditure during a transitional period and thereafter; (c) effective cooperation between the actors involved in financial management and control, audit and inspection with the actors for budget, treasury and accounting to foster the development of governance; (d) strengthening the competences of the Central Harmonisation Unit for the Public Internal Financial Control (PIFC); (e) the implementation of internationally accepted external audit standards by the International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI); and (f) exchange of information, experiences and good practice through, inter alia, personnel exchange and joint training in this field. ARTICLE 48 Fight against fraud and corruption The Parties shall also cooperate in relation to: (a) exchanging information, experience and good practice; (b) improving methods to combat and prevent fraud and corruption in the areas covered by this Chapter, including co- operation between relevant administrative bodies. ARTICLE 49 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 8 TAXATION ARTICLE 50 The Parties shall cooperate to enhance good governance in the tax area, with a view to the further improvement of economic relations, trade, investment and fair competition. ARTICLE 51 1. With reference to Article 50 of this Agreement, the Parties recognise and commit themselves to implement the principles of good governance in the tax area, i.e. the principles of transparency, exchange of information and fair tax competition. 2. Nothing in this Agreement affects the rights and obligations, under any tax convention, of the United Kingdom and Moldova. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such tax convention, the tax convention prevails to the extent of the inconsistency. 3. For the purposes of this Article “tax convention” means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation, or any other international taxation agreement or arrangement (including, for the avoidance of doubt, such a convention, agreement or arrangement which is made after this Agreement is ratified, or any amendment to such a convention, agreement or arrangement). ARTICLE 52 The Parties shall enhance and strengthen their cooperation, with the aim of ensuring effective tax collection and reinforcing the fight against tax fraud and tax avoidance.ARTICLE 53 The Parties shall develop their cooperation in counteracting and fighting fraud and the smuggling of excisable products. To that end, the Parties will strive to strengthen their cooperation within the regional context. ARTICLE 54 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 9 FINANCIAL SERVICES ARTICLE 55 Recognising the relevance of an effective set of rules and practices in the areas of financial services to establish a fully-functioning market economy and in order to foster trade exchanges among the Parties, the Parties agree to cooperate in the area of financial services in line with the following objectives: (a) supporting the process of adapting financial services regulation to the needs of an open market economy; (b) ensuring effective and adequate protection of investors and other consumers of financial services; (c) ensuring the stability and integrity of the financial system of the Republic of Moldova in its entirety; (d) promoting cooperation between different actors of the financial system, including regulators and supervisors; and (e) ensuring independent and effective supervision. ARTICLE 56 1. The Parties shall encourage cooperation between relevant regulatory and supervisory authorities, including information exchange, sharing of expertise on financial markets and other such measures. 2. Special attention shall be paid to the development of administrative capacity of such authorities, including through personnel exchange and joint training. ARTICLE 57 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 10 INDUSTRIAL AND ENTERPRISE POLICY ARTICLE 58 The Parties shall develop and strengthen their cooperation on industrial and enterprise policy, thereby improving the business environment for all economic operators, but with particular emphasis on small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Enhanced cooperation should improve the administrative and regulatory framework for both UK businesses and businesses of the Republic of Moldova operating in the UK and in the Republic of Moldova, taking into account internationally recognised principles and practices in this field. ARTICLE 59 To those ends, the Parties shall cooperate in order to: (a) implement strategies for SME development. That cooperation will also include a focus on micro enterprises, which are extremely important for both the economies of the UK and of the Republic of Moldova; (b) create better framework conditions, via the exchange of information and good practice, thereby contributing to improving competitiveness. That cooperation may include the management of structural changes (restructuring), the development of public-private partnerships, and environmental and energy issues, such as energy efficiency and cleaner production; (c) simplify and rationalise regulations and regulatory practice, with specific focus on exchange of good practice on regulatory techniques; (d) encourage the development of innovation policy, via the exchange of information and good practice regarding the commercialisation of research and development (including support instruments for technology-based business start-ups), cluster development and access to finance; (e) encourage greater contacts between UK businesses and businesses of the Republic of Moldova and between those businesses and the authorities of the UK and the Republic of Moldova; (f) support the establishment of export promotion activities in the Republic of Moldova; and (g) facilitate the modernisation and restructuring of the industry of the Republic of Moldova in certain sectors. ARTICLE 60 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. That may also involve representatives of UK businesses and businesses of the Republic of Moldova. CHAPTER 11 MINING AND RAW MATERIALS ARTICLE 61 The Parties may develop and strengthen cooperation covering mining industries and trade in raw materials, with the objectives of promoting mutual understanding, improvement of the business environment, information exchange and cooperation on non-energy issues, relating in particular to the mining of metallic ores and industrial minerals. ARTICLE 62 To that end, the Parties may cooperate in the following areas: (a) exchange of information by the Parties on developments in their mining and raw material sectors; (b) exchange of information on matters related to trade in raw materials, with the aim of promoting bilateral exchanges; (c) exchange of information and best practices in relation to sustainable development aspects of the mining industries; and (d) exchange of information and best practices in relation to training, skills and safety in the mining industries. CHAPTER 12 AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE 63 The Parties shall cooperate to promote agricultural and rural development. ARTICLE 64 Cooperation between the Parties in the field of agriculture and rural development shall cover, inter alia, the following areas: (a) facilitating the mutual understanding of agricultural and rural development policies; (b) enhancing the administrative capacities at central and local level in the planning, evaluation and implementation of policies; (c) promoting the modernisation and the sustainability of agricultural production; (d) sharing knowledge and best practices of rural development policies to promote economic well-being for rural communities; (e) improving the competitiveness of the agricultural sector and the efficiency and transparency of the markets; (f) promoting quality policies and their control mechanisms, in particular geographical indications and organic farming; (g) disseminating knowledge and promoting extension services to agricultural producers; and (h) enhancing the harmonisation of issues dealt within the framework of international organisation of which the Parties are members. ARTICLE 65 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. FISHERIES & MARITIME POLICY SECTION 1 FISHERIES POLICY ARTICLE 66 The Parties shall develop and strengthen their cooperation on issues covering fisheries and maritime governance, thereby developing closer bilateral and multilateral cooperation in the fisheries sector. The Parties shall also encourage an integrated approach to fisheries issues and promote sustainable fisheries development. ARTICLE 67 The Parties shall take joint actions, exchange information and provide support to each other in order to promote: (a) good governance and best practices in fisheries management with a view to ensuring conservation and management of fish stocks in a sustainable manner and based on the ecosystem approach; (b) responsible fishing and fisheries management consistent with the principles of sustainable development, so as to conserve fish stocks and ecosystems in a healthy state; and (c) cooperation through appropriate regional organisations responsible for management and conservation of living aquatic resources. ARTICLE 68 The Parties will support initiatives, such as mutual exchange of experience and providing support, in order to ensure the implementation of a sustainable fisheries policy, including: (a) management of fisheries and aquaculture resources; (b) inspection and control of fishing activities, as well as development of corresponding administrative and judicial structures capable of applying appropriate measures; (c) collection of catch, landing, biological and economic data; (d) improving the efficiency of the markets, in particular by promoting producer organisations, providing information to consumers, and through marketing standards and traceability; and (e) development of a structural policy for the fisheries sector, with particular attention to the sustainable development of fisheries areas which are defined as an area with lake shore or including ponds or a river estuary and with a significant level of employment in the fisheries sector. SECTION 2 MARITIME POLICY ARTICLE 69 Taking into account their cooperation in the spheres of fisheries, transport, environment and other sea-related policies, the Parties shall also develop cooperation and mutual support, when appropriate, on maritime issues. ARTICLE 70 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 14 ENERGY COOPERATION ARTICLE 71 The Parties agree to continue their current cooperation on energy matters on the basis of the principles of partnership, mutual interest, transparency and predictability. The cooperation should aim at energy efficiency, taking into account the need to ensure competitiveness and access to secure, environmentally sustainable and affordable energy, including, in the case of the Republic of Moldova, through the provisions of the Energy Community Treaty. ARTICLE 72 The cooperation shall cover, among others, the following areas and objectives: (a) energy strategies and policies; (b) the development of competitive, transparent and non-discriminatory energy markets , through regulatory reforms and through the participation in regional energy cooperation; (c) development of an attractive and stable investment climate by addressing institutional, legal, fiscal and other conditions; (d) energy infrastructure, in order to diversify energy sources, suppliers and transportation routes in an efficient economic and environmentally sound manner; (e) enhancement and strengthening of long-term stability and security of energy supply and trade, transit and transport on a mutually beneficial and non-discriminatory basis in accordance with international rules; (f) promotion of energy efficiency and energy saving, inter alia, concerning energy performance of buildings, and the development and support of renewable energies in an economic and environmentally sound manner; (g) reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases, including through energy efficiency and renewable energy projects; (h) scientific and technical cooperation and exchange of information for the development and improvement of technologies in energy production, transportation, supply and end use, with particular attention to energy efficient and environmentally friendly technologies; and (i) cooperation in the Civil Nuclear sector, focusing on ensuring a high level of nuclear safety, the clean and peaceful use of nuclear energy, covering all civil nuclear energy activities and stages of the fuel cycle, including production of and trade in nuclear materials, safety and security aspects of nuclear energy, and emergency preparedness, as well as health-related and environmental issues and non-proliferation. In this context, cooperation will also include the further development of policies and legal and regulatory frameworks based on International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) standards. ARTICLE 73 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 15 TRANSPORT ARTICLE 74 The Parties shall: (a) expand and strengthen their transport cooperation in order to contribute to the development of sustainable transport systems; (b) promote efficient, safe and secure transport operations as well as intermodality and interoperability of transport systems; and (c) endeavour to enhance the main transport links between their territories based on provisions of current or future bilateral agreements. ARTICLE 75 That cooperation shall cover, among others, the following areas: (a) development of a sustainable national transport policy covering all modes of transport, particularly with a view to ensuring efficient, safe and secure transport systems and promoting the integration of considerations in the sphere of transport into other policy areas; (b) development of sector strategies in light of the national transport policy (including legal requirements for the upgrading of technical equipment and transport fleets to meet highest international standards) for road, rail, inland waterway, aviation, and intermodality, including timetables and milestones for implementation, administrative responsibilities as well as financing plans; (c) improvement of the infrastructure policy in order to better identify and evaluate infrastructure projects in the various modes of transport; (d) development of funding strategies focusing on maintenance, capacity constraints and missing link infrastructure as well as activating and promoting the participation of the private sector in transport projects; (e) accession to relevant international transport organisations and agreements, including procedures for ensuring strict implementation and effective enforcement of international transport agreements and conventions; (f) scientific and technical cooperation and exchange of information for the development and improvement of technologies in transport, such as intelligent transport systems; and  (g) promotion of the use of intelligent transport systems and information technology in managing and operating all modes of transport as well as supporting intermodality and cooperation in the use of space systems and commercial applications facilitating transport. ARTICLE 76 1. Cooperation shall also aim at improving the movement of passengers and goods, increasing fluidity of transport flows, by removing administrative, technical and other obstacles, improving transport networks and upgrading the infrastructure. That cooperation shall include actions to facilitate border crossings. 2. Cooperation shall include information exchange and joint activities: (a) at the regional level, in particular taking into consideration and integrating progress achieved under various regional transport cooperation arrangements; (b) at the international level, including with regard to international transport organisations and international agreements and conventions ratified by the Parties. ARTICLE 77 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 16 ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE 78 The Parties shall develop and strengthen their cooperation on environmental issues, thereby contributing to the long-term objective of sustainable development and greening the economy. It is expected that enhanced environment protection will bring benefits to citizens and businesses in the UK and in the Republic of Moldova, including through improved public health, preserved natural resources, increased economic and environmental efficiency, integration of the environment into other policy areas, as well as the use of modern, cleaner technologies contributing to more sustainable production patterns. Cooperation shall be conducted considering the interests of the Parties on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, as well as taking into account the interdependence existing between the Parties in the field of environment protection, and multilateral agreements in that field. ARTICLE 79 Cooperation shall aim at preserving, protecting, improving, and rehabilitating the quality of the environment, protecting human health, sustainable utilisation of natural resources and promoting measures at the international level to deal with regional or global environmental problems, including in the areas of: (a) environmental governance and horizontal issues, including Environmental Impact Assessment and Strategic Environmental Assessment, education and training, environmental liability, combating environmental crime, trans- boundary cooperation, access to environmental information, decision-making processes and effective administrative and judicial review procedures; (b) air quality; (c) water quality and resource management, including flood risk management, water scarcity and droughts; (d) waste and resource management and shipment of waste; (e) nature protection, including conservation and protection of biological and landscape diversity; (f) industrial pollution and industrial hazards; (g) chemicals;  (h) noise pollution; (i) soil protection; (j) urban and rural environment; (k) environmental fees and taxes; (l) monitoring and environmental information systems; (m) inspection and enforcement; and (n) eco-innovation including best available technologies. ARTICLE 80 The Parties shall, inter alia: (a) exchange information and expertise; (b) cooperate in joint research activities and exchange of information on cleaner technologies; (c) cooperate in handling of industrial hazards and accidents; (d) implement joint activities at regional and international level, including with regard to multilateral environment agreements ratified by the Parties, and joint activities in the framework of relevant agencies, as appropriate. The Parties shall pay special attention to transboundary issues and regional cooperation. ARTICLE 81 The cooperation shall cover, as appropriate, the following objectives: (a) effective implementation of environment policies, including procedures for the promotion of the integration of the environment into other policy areas; and promotion of green economy measures and eco-innovation; and (b) issues related to air quality; water quality and resource management; waste and resource management; biodiversity and nature protection; industrial pollution and industrial hazards and chemicals, noise pollution, soil protection, urban and rural environment, eco-innovation in line with timetables and milestones to which both Parties are committed through international agreements. ARTICLE 82 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 17 CLIMATE ACTION ARTICLE 83 The Parties may develop and strengthen their cooperation to combat climate change. Cooperation shall be conducted considering the interests of the Parties on the basis of equality and mutual benefit and taking into account the interdependence existing between bilateral and multilateral commitments in this field. ARTICLE 84 Cooperation may promote measures at the domestic, regional and international level, including in the areas of: (a) mitigation of climate change; (b) adaptation to climate change; (c) carbon trading; (d) research, development, demonstration, deployment and diffusion of safe and sustainable low-carbon and adaptation technologies; (e) mainstreaming of climate considerations into sector policies; and (f) awareness raising, education and training. ARTICLE 85 The Parties may, inter alia: (a) exchange information and expertise; (b) implement joint research activities and exchanges of information on cleaner technologies; (c) implement joint activities at the regional and international level, including with regard to multilateral environment agreements ratified by the Parties, and joint activities in the framework of relevant agencies, as appropriate. The Parties may pay special attention to transboundary issues. ARTICLE 86 The cooperation may cover, among others, the development and implementation of: (a) an overall climate strategy and action plan for the long-term mitigation of and adaptation to climate change; (b) vulnerability and adaptation assessments; (c) a National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change; (d) a low-carbon development strategy; (e) long-term measures to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases; (f) measures to prepare for carbon trading; (g) measures to promote technology transfer on the basis of a technology needs assessment; (h) measures to mainstream climate considerations into sector policies; and (i) measures related to ozone-depleting substances. ARTICLE 87 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter.CHAPTER 18 INFORMATION SOCIETY ARTICLE 88 The Parties shall strengthen cooperation on the development of the Information Society to benefit citizens and businesses through the widespread availability of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and through better quality of services at affordable prices. That cooperation should aim at facilitating access to electronic communications markets, encouraging competition and investment in the sector, and promoting the development of public services online. ARTICLE 89 Cooperation may cover the following subjects: (a) exchange of information and best practices on the implementation of national Information Society strategies, including, inter alia, initiatives aiming at promoting broadband access, improving network security and informational systems, and developing public services online; (b) exchange of information, best practices and experience to promote the development of a comprehensive regulatory framework for electronic communications, and in particular to strengthen the administrative capacity of the national administration in Information and Communication Technologies, as well as of the independent regulator, to foster a better use of spectrum resources and to promote interoperability of networks in the Republic of Moldova and with the UK; (c) encouraging and promoting the implementation of ICT tools for a better governance, e-learning and research, public healthcare, digitisation of cultural heritage, development of e-content and electronic commerce; and (d) enhancing the level of security of personal data and the protection of privacy in electronic communications. ARTICLE 90 The Parties shall promote cooperation between UK regulators and the national regulatory authorities of the Republic of Moldova in the field of electronic communications. The Parties shall also consider cooperation in other relevant areas, including through regional initiatives. ARTICLE 91 A regular dialogue will take place on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 19 TOURISM ARTICLE 92 The Parties shall cooperate in the field of tourism, with the aim of strengthening the development of a competitive and sustainable tourism industry as a generator of economic growth, empowerment, employment and foreign exchange. ARTICLE 93 Cooperation at a bilateral level would be based on the following principles: (a) respect for the integrity and interests of local communities, particularly in rural areas; (b) the importance of cultural heritage; and (c) positive interaction between tourism and environmental preservation. ARTICLE 94 Cooperation shall focus on the following topics: (a) exchange of information, best practices, experience and ‘know-how’ transfer, including on innovative technologies; (b) establishment of a strategic partnership between public, private and community interests in order to ensure the sustainable development of tourism; (c) promotion and development of tourism products and markets, infrastructure, human resources and institutional structures as well as the identification and elimination of barriers to travel services; (d) development and implementation of efficient policies and strategies including appropriate legal, administrative and financial aspects; (e) tourism training and capacity building in order to improve service standards; and (f) development and promotion of community-based tourism. ARTICLE 95 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 20 REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE 96 1. The Parties shall promote mutual understanding and bilateral cooperation in the field of regional policy, including methods for formulating and implementing regional policies, governance and multilevel partnership, with particular emphasis on the development of disadvantaged areas and on territorial cooperation, as an objective to establish channels of communication and to improve exchanges of information and experience between national, regional and local authorities, as well as civil society; 2. The Parties shall cooperate to strengthen the institutional and operational capacities of national and regional institutions in the field of regional development and spatial planning, inter alia by: (a) improving the mechanism of vertical and horizontal interaction of central and local public administration in the process of developing and implementing regional policies; (b) the exchange of knowledge, information and best practices on regional development policies to promote the economic well-being of local communities and the homogenous development of regions. CHAPTER 21 PUBLIC HEALTH ARTICLE 97 The Parties agree to develop their cooperation in the field of public health, with a view to raising the level of public health safety and protection of human health as a precondition for sustainable development and economic growth. ARTICLE 98 The cooperation shall cover, in particular, the following areas: (a) strengthening of the public health system of the Republic of Moldova, in particular through implementing health sector reform, ensuring high-quality of healthcare, and improving health governance and healthcare financing; (b) epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, viral hepatitis and tuberculosis, as well as increased preparedness for public health threats and emergencies; (c) prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, mainly through exchange of information and best practices, promoting healthy lifestyles and addressing major health determinants, such as nutrition and addiction to alcohol, drugs and tobacco; (d) quality and safety of substances of human origin; (e) health information and knowledge; and (f) full and timely implementation of international health agreements, in particular the International Health Regulations and the World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control of 2003. CHAPTER 22 CIVIL PROTECTION ARTICLE 99 The Parties shall develop and strengthen their cooperation on natural and man-made disasters. Cooperation shall be conducted considering the interests of the Parties on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, as well as taking into account the interdependence existing between the Parties and multilateral activities in the field of civil protection. ARTICLE 100 Cooperation shall aim at improving the prevention of, preparation for and response to natural and man-made disasters. ARTICLE 101 The Parties shall, inter alia, exchange information and expertise and implement joint activities at a national, regional and international level. Cooperation shall include the implementation of specific agreements and administrative arrangements in this field, concluded between the Parties and in accordance with the legal procedures of the Parties. ARTICLE 102 The cooperation shall cover, amongst others, the following objectives: (a) facilitating mutual assistance in case of emergencies; (b) exchanging as necessary early warnings and updated information on large scale emergencies affecting the UK or the Republic of Moldova, including requests for and offers of assistance; (c) assessment of the environmental impact of disasters; (d) inviting experts to specific technical workshops and symposia on civil protection issues; (e) inviting, on a case by case basis, observers to specific exercises and trainings organised by the UK and/or the Republic of Moldova; and (f) strengthening cooperation on the most effective use of available civil protection capabilities. ARTICLE 103 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 23 COOPERATION ON EDUCATION, TRAINING, MULTILINGUALISM, YOUTH AND SPORT ARTICLE 104 The Parties shall cooperate to promote lifelong learning and encourage cooperation and transparency at all levels of education and training, with a special focus on higher education. ARTICLE 105 That cooperation shall focus, inter alia, on the following areas: (a) promoting lifelong learning, which is a key to growth and jobs and can allow citizens to participate fully in society; (b) modernising education and training systems, enhancing quality, relevance and access; (c) promoting convergence in higher education, deriving from the Bologna process; (d) reinforcing international academic cooperation and participation in cooperation programmes, increasing student and teacher mobility; (e) establishing a national qualification framework to improve the transparency and recognition of qualifications and competences; and (f) promoting cooperation in vocational education and training. ARTICLE 106 The Parties shall promote cooperation and exchanges in areas of mutual interest, such as linguistic diversity and lifelong language learning, through an exchange of information and best practices. ARTICLE 107 The Parties agree to cooperate in the field of youth to: (a) reinforce cooperation and exchanges in the field of youth policy and non-formal education for young people and youth workers; (b) facilitate active participation of all young people in society; (c) support young people and youth workers' mobility as a means to promote intercultural dialogue and the acquisition of knowledge, skills and competences outside the formal educational systems, including through volunteering; and (d) promote cooperation between youth organisations to support civil society. ARTICLE 108 The Parties shall promote cooperation in the field of sport and physical activity through the exchange of information and good practices in order to promote a healthy lifestyle, the social and educational values of sport and good governance in sport within the societies of the UK and the Republic of Moldova. CHAPTER 24 COOPERATION IN RESEARCH, TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION ARTICLE 109 The Parties may promote cooperation in all areas of civil scientific research and technological development and demonstration (RTD) on the basis of mutual benefit and subject to appropriate and effective protection of intellectual property rights. ARTICLE 110 Cooperation in RTD may cover: (a) policy dialogue and the exchange of scientific and technological information; (b) facilitating adequate access to the respective programmes of the Parties; (c) increasing research capacity; (d) the promotion of joint projects for research in all areas of RTD; (e) training activities and mobility programmes for scientists, researchers and other research staff engaged in RTD activities on both sides; (f) facilitating, within the framework of applicable legislation, the free movement of research workers participating in the activities covered by this Agreement and the cross-border movement of goods intended for use in such activities; and (g) other forms of cooperation in RTD (including through regional approaches and initiatives), on the basis of the Parties' mutual agreement. CHAPTER 25 COOPERATION ON CULTURE, AUDIO-VISUAL POLICY AND MEDIA ARTICLE 111 The Parties will promote cultural cooperation in accordance with the principles enshrined in the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation UNESCO) Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions of 2005. The Parties will seek a regular policy dialogue in areas of mutual interest, including the development of cultural industries in the UK and the Republic of Moldova. Cooperation between the Parties will foster intercultural dialogue, including through the participation of the culture sector and civil society of the UK and of the Republic of Moldova. ARTICLE 112 1. The Parties may develop a regular dialogue and cooperate to promote the audiovisual industry in Europe and encourage co-production in the fields of cinema and television. 2. Cooperation could include, inter alia, the issue of the training of journalists and other media professionals, as well as support to the media, so as to reinforce their independence, professionalism and links with UK media in compliance with European standards, including standards of the Council of Europe and the 2005 Unesco Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. ARTICLE 113 The Parties shall concentrate their cooperation on a number of fields: (a) cultural cooperation and cultural exchanges, as well as the mobility of art and artists; (b) intercultural dialogue; (c) policy dialogue on cultural policy and audiovisual policy; (d) cooperation in international fora such as Unesco and the Council of Europe, in order to, inter alia, develop cultural diversity and preserve and valorise cultural and historical heritage; and (e) cooperation in the field of media. CHAPTER 26 CIVIL SOCIETY COOPERATION ARTICLE 114 The Parties shall establish a dialogue on civil society cooperation, with the following objectives: (a) to strengthen contacts and the exchange of information and experience between all sectors of civil society in the UK and in the Republic of Moldova; (b) to ensure a better knowledge and understanding of the Republic of Moldova, including its history and culture, in the UK, thus allowing for a better awareness of the opportunities and challenges for future relations; and (c) to ensure, reciprocally, a better knowledge and understanding of the UK in the Republic of Moldova and in particular among civil society organisations of the Republic of Moldova. ARTICLE 115 The Parties shall promote dialogue and cooperation between civil society stakeholders from both sides as an integral part of the relations between the UK and the Republic of Moldova. The aims of such a dialogue and such cooperation are: (a) to ensure the involvement of civil society in UK-Republic of Moldova relations, in particular in the implementation of this Agreement; (b) to enhance civil society participation in the public decision-making process, particularly by establishing an open, transparent and regular dialogue between the public institutions and representative associations and civil society; (c) to facilitate a process of institution-building and consolidation of civil society organisations in various ways, including advocacy support, informal and formal networking, mutual visits and workshops, in particular with a view to improving the legal framework for civil society; and (d) to enable civil society representatives from each side to become acquainted with the processes of consultation and dialogue between civil and social partners on the other side, in particular with a view to further integrating civil society in the public policy-making process in the Republic of Moldova. ARTICLE 116 A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. CHAPTER 27 COOPERATION IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION OF THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD ARTICLE 117 The Parties agree to cooperate in ensuring the promotion of the rights of the child according to international laws and standards, in particular the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989, taking into account the priorities identified in the specific context of the Republic of Moldova, in particular for vulnerable groups. ARTICLE 118 Such cooperation shall include, in particular: (a) the prevention and combating of all forms of exploitation (including child labour), abuse, negligence and violence against children, including by developing and strengthening the legal and institutional framework as well as through awareness-raising campaigns in that domain; (b) the improvement of the system of identification and assistance of children in vulnerable situations, including increased participation by children in decision-making processes and the implementation of efficient mechanisms to handle individual complaints made by children; (c) exchange of information and best practices on the alleviation of poverty among children, including on measures to focus social policies on children's wellbeing, and to promote and facilitate children's access to education; (d) the implementation of measures aimed at promoting children's rights within the family and institutions, and strengthening the capacity of parents and carers in order to ensure child development; and (e) accession to, ratification and implementation of the relevant international documents, including those developed within the United Nations, the Council of Europe and the Hague Conference on Private International Law, with the purpose of promoting and protecting of children's rights in line with the highest standards in the field. A regular dialogue may take place between the Parties on the issues covered by this Chapter. TITLE V TRADE AND TRADE-RELATED MATTERS CHAPTER 1 NATIONAL TREATMENT AND MARKET ACCESS FOR GOODS  SECTION 1 COMMON PROVISIONS ARTICLE 120 Objective The Parties shall continue to progressively establish a free trade area over a transitional period of a maximum of 10 years starting from 1 September 2014, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in accordance with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994). ARTICLE 121 Scope and coverage 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to trade in goods(1) between the Parties. (1) For the purposes of this Agreement, ‘goods’ means products as understood in GATT 1994 unless otherwise provided in this Agreement. 2. For the purposes of this Chapter, ‘originating’ means qualifying under the rules of origin set out in Protocol I to this Agreement. SECTION 2 ELIMINATION OF CUSTOMS DUTIES, FEES AND OTHER CHARGES ARTICLE 122 Definition of customs duties  For the purposes of this Chapter, a ‘customs duty’ includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed on, or in connection with, the import or export of a good, including any form of surtax or surcharge imposed on, or in connection with, such import or export. A ‘customs duty’ does not include any of the following:  (a) a charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed in accordance with Article 129 of this Agreement;  (b) duties imposed in accordance with Chapter 2 (Trade Remedies) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement; or (c) fees or other charges imposed in accordance with Article 128 of this Agreement. ARTICLE 123  Classification of goods  The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be that set out in accordance with the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System of 1983 (HS) in the Republic of Moldova’s tariff nomenclature based on HS 2017 and the UK’s tariff nomenclature based on HS 2017 and in subsequent amendments to those nomenclatures. ARTICLE 124  Elimination of customs duties on imports  1. Each Party shall reduce or eliminate customs duties on goods originating in the other Party in accordance with Annex II to this Agreement.  2. For each good the base rate of customs duties to which the successive reductions and eliminations are to be applied under paragraph 1 of this Article are specified in Annex II to this Agreement.   3. If, at any moment following the date of entry into force of this Agreement, a Party reduces its applied most-favoured-nation (MFN) customs duty rate, such duty rate shall apply as base rate if and for as long as it is lower than the customs duty rate calculated in accordance with Annex II to this Agreement.  4. After the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may agree to consider accelerating and broadening the scope of the elimination of customs duties on trade between the Parties. A decision of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, on the acceleration or elimination of a customs duty on a good shall supersede any duty rate or staging category determined pursuant to Annex II to this Agreement.  5. During the third year after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall assess the situation, taking account of the pattern of trade in agricultural products between the Parties, the particular sensitivities of such products and the development of agricultural policy on both sides.  6. The Parties shall examine, in the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, on an appropriate reciprocal basis, the opportunities for granting each other further concessions with a view to improving liberalisation of trade in agricultural products, in particular those subject to tariff-rate quotas (TRQs).   ARTICLE 125  Anti-circumvention mechanism for agricultural products and processed agricultural products  1. The products listed in Annex II-C to this Agreement are subject to the anti-circumvention mechanism. The average annual volume of imports from the Republic of Moldova into the UK for each category of those products is provided in Annex II-C to this Agreement.  2. When the volume of imports of one or more categories of products referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article reaches 70 % of the volume indicated in Annex II-C in any given year starting on 1 January, the UK shall notify the Republic of Moldova about the volume of imports of the product(s) concerned. Following that notification and within 14 calendar days from the date on which the volume of imports of one or more categories of products referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article reaches 80 % of the volume indicated in Annex II-C to this Agreement, the Republic of Moldova shall provide the UK with a sound justification for the increase of imports. If those imports reach 100 % of the volume indicated in Annex II-C to this Agreement, and in the absence of a sound justification by the Republic of Moldova, the UK may temporarily suspend the preferential treatment for the products concerned.    The suspension shall be applicable for a period of six months and shall take effect on the date of publication of the decision to suspend preferential treatment. Upon entry into force of this agreement, the UK shall provide Moldova with details on the UK’s means of publication. The UK’s means of publication shall be directly accessible by electronic means free of charge through a single point of access on the internet.  3. All temporary suspensions adopted pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be notified by the UK to the Republic of Moldova without undue delay.  4. A temporary suspension may be lifted before the expiry of six months from its entry into force by the UK if the Republic of Moldova provides evidence within the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, that the volume of the relevant category of products imported in excess of the volume referred to in Annex II-C to this Agreement results from a change in the level of production and export capacity of the Republic of Moldova for the product(s) concerned.  5. Annex II-C to this Agreement may be amended and the volume modified by mutual consent of the UK and the Republic of Moldova in the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration at the request of the Republic of Moldova, in order to reflect changes in the level of production and export capacity of the Republic of Moldova for the product(s) concerned.   ARTICLE 126  Standstill  Neither Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on a good originating in the other Party. That shall not preclude either Party from:  (a) raising a customs duty to the level established in Annex I following a unilateral reduction; or  (b) maintaining or increasing a customs duty as authorised by the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) of the WTO.   ARTICLE 127  Customs duties on exports  Neither Party shall adopt or maintain any duty or tax, other than internal charges applied in accordance with Article 129 of this Agreement, on or in connection with the export of goods to the territory of the other Party.   ARTICLE 128  Fees and other charges  Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII of GATT 1994 and the interpretative notes thereon, that all fees and charges of whatever character other than customs duties or other measures referred to in Article 124 of this Agreement, imposed on, or in connection with, the import or export of goods are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent an indirect protection of domestic goods or a taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes. SECTION 3 NON-TARIFF MEASURES  ARTICLE 129 National treatment Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of GATT 1994, including the interpretative notes thereon. To that end, Article III of GATT 1994 and the interpretative notes thereon are incorporated into this Agreement and made an integral part thereof. ARTICLE 130 Import and export restrictions Neither Party shall adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the import of any good of the other Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement or in accordance with Article XI of GATT 1994 and the interpretative notes thereon. To that end, Article XI of GATT 1994 and the interpretative notes thereon are incorporated into this Agreement and made an integral part thereof. SECTION 4 SPECIFIC PROVISIONS RELATED TO GOODS  ARTICLE 131 General exceptions 1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by any Party of measures in accordance with Articles XX and XXI of GATT 1994 and any relevant interpretative notes to those Articles under GATT 1994, which are hereby incorporated into this Agreement and made an integral part thereof. 2. The Parties understand that before taking any measures for which justification could be sought under sub-paragraphs (i) and (j) of Article XX of GATT 1994, the Party intending to take the measures shall provide the other Party with all relevant information and seek a solution acceptable to the Parties. If no agreement is reached within 30 days of providing such information, the Party may apply measures under this paragraph on the good concerned. Where exceptional and critical circumstances require immediate action and make prior information or examination impossible, the Party intending to take the measures may apply forthwith the precautionary measures necessary to deal with the situation and shall inform the other Party immediately thereof. SECTION 5  ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION AND COORDINATION WITH OTHER COUNTRIES   ARTICLE 132  Special provisions on administrative cooperation  1. The Parties agree that administrative cooperation and assistance are essential for the implementation and the control of the preferential treatment granted under this Chapter and underline their commitment to combat irregularities and fraud in customs and related matters.  2. Where a Party has made a finding, on the basis of objective information, of a failure of the other Party to provide administrative cooperation or assistance and/or of irregularities or fraud under this Chapter, the Party concerned may temporarily suspend the relevant preferential treatment of the product(s) concerned in accordance with this Article and, in particular, the procedure provided for under paragraph 5.  3. For the purposes of this Article, failure to provide administrative cooperation or assistance shall mean, inter alia:  (a) a repeated failure to respect the obligations to verify the originating status of the good(s) concerned;  (b) a repeated refusal or undue delay in carrying out and/or communicating the results of a subsequent verification of the proof of origin;  (c) repeated refusal or undue delay in obtaining authorisation to conduct enquiry visits to determine the authenticity of documents or accuracy of information relevant to the granting of the preferential treatment in question.  4. For the purposes of this Article a finding of irregularities or fraud may be made, inter alia, where there is a rapid increase, without satisfactory explanation, in the volume of imports of goods exceeding the usual level of production and export capacity of the other Party that is linked to objective information concerning irregularities or fraud.   5. The application of a temporary suspension shall be subject to the following conditions:  (a) the Party which has made a finding, on the basis of objective information, of a failure to provide administrative co-operation or assistance and/or of irregularities or fraud shall, without undue delay, notify the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, of its finding together with the objective information and enter into consultations within the Political and Strategic Dialogue, on the basis of all relevant information and objective findings, with a view to reaching a solution acceptable to both Parties;  (b) where the Parties have entered into consultations within the aforementioned Political and Strategic Dialogue and have failed to agree on an acceptable solution within three months following the notification, the Party concerned may temporarily suspend the relevant preferential treatment of the good(s) concerned. A temporary suspension shall be notified to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration without undue delay;  (c) temporary suspensions under this Article shall be limited to what is necessary to protect the financial interests of the Party concerned. They shall not exceed a period of six months, which may be renewed if at the date of expiry nothing has changed with respect to the conditions that gave rise to the initial suspension. They shall be subject to periodic consultations within the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, in particular with a view to their termination as soon as the conditions for their application no longer apply.  6. Each Party shall publish all notices to importers concerning any notification referred to in paragraph 5(a), any decision referred to in paragraph 5(b), and any extension or termination as referred to in paragraph 5(c), according to its internal procedures.   ARTICLE 133  Management of administrative errors  In case of an error by the competent authorities in the proper management of the preferential system at export, and in particular in the application of the provisions of Protocol I to this Agreement concerning the definition of originating products and methods of administrative cooperation, where that error leads to consequences in terms of import duties, the Party facing such consequences may request that the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, examines the possibility of adopting all appropriate measures with a view to resolving the situation.   ARTICLE 134  Agreements with other countries  1. This Agreement shall not preclude the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, other free trade areas or arrangements for frontier traffic except in so far as they conflict with the trade arrangements provided for in this Agreement.  2. Consultations between the Parties shall take place within the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, concerning agreements establishing customs unions, other free trade areas or arrangements for frontier traffic and, where requested, on other major issues related to their respective trade policies with third countries.   CHAPTER 2 TRADE REMEDIES SECTION 1 GLOBAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES ARTICLE 135 General provisions 1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards contained in Annex 1A to the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation (the WTO Agreement) (the Agreement on Safeguards) and Article 5 of the Agreement on Agriculture, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (the Agreement on Agriculture). 2. The preferential rules of origin established under Chapter 1 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement shall not apply to this Section. 3. The provisions of this Section shall not be subject to Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. ARTICLE 136 Transparency 1. The Party initiating a safeguard investigation shall notify the other Party of such initiation, provided the latter has a substantial economic interest. 2. Notwithstanding Article 135 of this Agreement, at the request of the other Party, the Party initiating a safeguard investigation and intending to apply safeguard measures shall provide immediately ad hoc written notification of all the pertinent information leading to the initiation of a safeguard investigation and the imposition of safeguard measures, including, where relevant, information on the initiation of a safeguard investigation, on the provisional findings and on the final findings of the investigation, as well as offer the possibility for consultations to the other Party. 3. For the purposes of this Article, a Party shall be considered as having a substantial economic interest when it is among the five largest suppliers of the imported product during the most recent three-year period, measured in terms of either absolute volume or value. ARTICLE 137  Application of measures  1. When imposing safeguard measures, the Parties shall endeavour to impose them in a way that affects their bilateral trade the least.  2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, if a Party considers that the legal requirements for the imposition of definitive safeguard measures are met and intends to apply such measures, that Party shall notify the other Party and give the latter the possibility to hold bilateral consultations. If no satisfactory solution has been reached within 30 days of the notification, the importing Party may take the appropriate measures to remedy the problem. SECTION 2  ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING MEASURES ARTICLE 138  General provisions  1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under Article VI of GATT 1994, the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of GATT 1994, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (the Anti-Dumping Agreement), and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (the SCM Agreement).  2. The preferential rules of origin established under Chapter 1 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement shall not apply to this Section.  3. The provisions of this Section shall not be subject to Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 139  Transparency  1. The Parties agree that anti-dumping and countervailing measures should be used in full compliance with the requirements of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and the SCM Agreement, respectively, and should be based on a fair and transparent system.  2. The Parties shall ensure, immediately after the imposition of provisional measures and before the final determination is made, full and meaningful disclosure of all essential facts and considerations which form the basis for the decision to apply measures, without prejudice to Article 6(5) of the Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12(4) of the SCM Agreement. Disclosures shall be made in writing and allow interested parties sufficient time to make their comments.  3. Provided it does not unnecessarily delay the conduct of the investigation, each interested party shall be granted the possibility to be heard in order to express its views during anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigations.     ARTICLE 140  Consideration of public interest  Anti-dumping or countervailing measures may not be applied by a Party where, on the basis of the information made available during the investigation, it can clearly be concluded that it is not in the public interest to apply such measures. The public interest determination shall be based on an appreciation of all the various interests taken as a whole, including the interests of the domestic industry, users, consumers and importers to the extent that they have provided relevant information to the investigating authorities.   ARTICLE 141  Lesser duty rule  Should a Party decide to impose a provisional or a definitive anti-dumping or countervailing duty, the amount of such duty shall not exceed the margin of dumping or the total amount of countervailable subsidies, but it should be less than the margin of dumping or the total amount of countervailable subsidies if such a lesser duty would be adequate to remove the injury to the domestic industry.     SECTION 3 BILATERAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES ARTICLE 142 Application of a bilateral safeguard measure 1. If, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, goods originating in a Party are being imported into the territory of the other Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production, and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry producing like or directly competitive goods, the importing Party may adopt the measures provided for in paragraph 2 in accordance with the conditions and procedures laid down in this Section. 2. The importing Party may take a bilateral safeguard measure which: (a) suspends further reduction of the rate of customs duty on the good concerned provided for under this Agreement; or (b) increases the rate of customs duty on the good to a level which does not exceed the lesser of: (i) the MFN applied rate of customs duty on the good in effect at the time the measure is taken; or (ii) the base rate of customs duty specified in the Schedules included in Annex II pursuant to Article 124 of this Agreement. Conditions and limitations 1. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing of the initiation of an investigation described in paragraph 2 and consult with the other Party, as far in advance of applying a bilateral safeguard measure as practicable, with a view to reviewing the information arising from the investigation and exchanging views on the measure. 2. A Party shall apply a bilateral safeguard measure only following an investigation by its competent authorities in accordance with Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the Agreement on Safeguards. To that end, Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into this Agreement and made part thereof, mutatis mutandis. 3. When conducting the investigation described in paragraph 2 of this Article, the Party shall comply with the requirements of Article 4.2(a) of the Agreement on Safeguards. To that end, Article 4.2(a) of the Agreement on Safeguards is incorporated into this Agreement and made part thereof, mutatis mutandis.  4. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete any investigation described in paragraph 2 within one year of the date of its initiation.  5. Neither Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure:  (a) except to the extent, and for such time, as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate the adjustment of the domestic industry;  (b) for a period exceeding two years. However, that period may be extended by up to two years if the competent authorities of the importing Party determine, in accordance with the procedures specified in this Article, that the measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate the adjustment of the domestic industry and that there is evidence that the industry is adjusting, provided that the total period of application of a safeguard measure, including the period of initial application and any extension thereof, shall not exceed four years;  (c) beyond the expiration of the transitional period; or  (d) with respect to the same product, at the same time as a measure under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards is applied.  6. When a Party terminates a bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of customs duty shall be the rate that, according to its Schedule included in Annex II to this Agreement, would have been in effect but for the measure.     ARTICLE 144  Provisional measures  In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage that would be difficult to repair, a Party may apply a bilateral safeguard measure on a provisional basis pursuant to a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that the imports of a good originating in the other Party have increased as the result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, and such imports cause serious injury, or a threat thereof, to the domestic industry. The duration of any provisional measure shall not exceed 200 days, during which time the Party shall comply with the requirements of Articles 143(2) and 143(3) of this Agreement. The Party shall promptly refund any duty paid in excess of the customs duty set out in Annex II to this Agreement if the investigation described in Article 143(2) of this Agreement does not result in a finding that the requirements of Article 142 of this Agreement have been met. The duration of any provisional measure shall be counted as part of the period prescribed in Article 143(5)(b) of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 145  Compensation  1. A Party applying a bilateral safeguard measure shall consult with the other Party in order to arrive at a mutually agreed appropriate trade-liberalising compensation in the form of concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from the safeguard measure. The Party shall provide an opportunity for such consultations no later than 30 days after the application of the bilateral safeguard measure.  2. If the consultations under paragraph 1 do not result in an agreement on trade-liberalising compensation within 30 days after the consultations begin, the Party whose goods are subject to the safeguard measure may suspend the application of substantially equivalent concessions to the Party applying the safeguard measure.  3. The right of suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall not be exercised for the first 24 months during which a bilateral safeguard measure is in effect, provided that the safeguard measure conforms to the provisions of this Agreement. ARTICLE 146  Definitions  For the purposes of this Section:  (a) ‘serious injury’ and ‘threat of serious injury’ shall be understood in accordance with Article 4.1(a) and (b) of the Agreement on Safeguards. To that end, Article 4.1(a) and (b) of the Agreement on Safeguards is incorporated into this Agreement and made part thereof, mutatis mutandis; and  (b) ‘transitional period’ means a period of 10 years from 01 September 2014. CHAPTER 3  TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE, STANDARDISATION, METROLOGY, ACCREDITATION AND CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT ARTICLE 147  Scope and definitions   1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures as defined in the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (the TBT Agreement), that may affect trade in goods between the Parties.  2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, this Chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures as defined in Annex A to the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement (the SPS Agreement), nor to purchasing specifications prepared by public authorities for their own production or consumption requirements.  3. For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of Annex 1 to the TBT Agreement shall apply.   ARTICLE 148  Affirmation of the TBT Agreement  The Parties affirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under the TBT Agreement which is hereby incorporated into this Agreement and made part thereof.   Article 149  Technical cooperation  1. The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field of standards, technical regulations, metrology, market surveillance, accreditation and conformity assessment systems with a view to increasing the mutual understanding of their respective systems and facilitating access to their respective markets. To that end, they may establish regulatory dialogues at both horizontal and sectoral levels.   2. In their cooperation, the Parties shall seek to identify, develop and promote trade facilitating initiatives which may include, but are not limited to:  (a) reinforcing regulatory cooperation through the exchange of data and experience and through scientific and technical cooperation, with a view to improving the quality of their technical regulations, standards, market surveillance, conformity assessment and accreditation, and making efficient use of regulatory resources;  (b) promoting and encouraging cooperation between their respective organisations, public or private, responsible for metrology, standardisation, market surveillance, conformity assessment and accreditation;  (c) fostering the development of the quality infrastructure for standardisation, metrology, accreditation, conformity assessment and the market surveillance system in the Republic of Moldova;  (d) promoting the participation of the Republic of Moldova in the work of related United Kingdom;  (e) seeking solutions to technical barriers to trade that may arise; and  (f) coordinating their positions in international trade and regulatory organisations such as the WTO and the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE).   ARTICLE 150  Technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment  Building on relevant efforts, the Republic of Moldova shall:  (a) carry on the administrative and institutional reforms that are necessary to provide the effective and transparent system that is required for the implementation of this Chapter; and  (b) ensure the participation of its relevant national bodies in European and international organisations for standardisation, legal and fundamental metrology, and conformity assessment, including accreditation, in accordance with the respective areas of activity of those bodies and the membership status available to them.ARTICLE 151  Agreement on Conformity Assessment and Acceptance of Industrial Products (ACAA)  The Parties shall ultimately agree to add an Agreement on Conformity Assessment and Acceptance of Industrial Products (ACAA) as a Protocol to this Agreement, covering sectors agreed upon by the Parties.   ARTICLE 152  Marking and labelling  1. Without prejudice to Articles 150 and 151 of this Agreement, and with respect to technical regulations relating to labelling or marking requirements, the Parties reaffirm the principles of Chapter 2.2 of the TBT Agreement that such requirements are not prepared, adopted or applied with a view to or with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to international trade. For that purpose, such labelling or marking requirements shall not be more trade-restrictive than necessary to fulfil a legitimate objective, taking account of the risks that non-fulfilment would create.  2. Regarding obligatory marking or labelling in particular, the Parties agree that:  (a) they will endeavour to minimise their needs for marking or labelling, except as required for the protection of health, safety or the environment, or for other reasonable public policy purposes; and  (b) they retain the right to require the information on the label or marking to be in a specified language.   CHAPTER 4  SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES   ARTICLE 153  Objective  1. The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate trade in commodities covered by sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS measures) between the Parties, whilst safeguarding human, animal or plant life or health, by:  (a) ensuring full transparency as regards measures applicable to trade, listed in Annex III to this Agreement;  (b) recognising the animal and plant health status of the Parties and applying the principle of regionalisation;  (c) establishing a mechanism for the recognition of equivalence of measures, maintained by a Party and listed in Annex III to this Agreement;  (d) continuing to implement the SPS Agreement;  (e) establishing mechanisms and procedures for trade facilitation; and  (f) improving communication and cooperation between the Parties on measures listed in Annex III to this Agreement.  2. This Chapter aims at reaching a common understanding between the Parties concerning animal welfare standards.   ARTICLE 154  Multilateral obligations  The Parties re-affirm their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreements, and in particular the SPS Agreement.   ARTICLE 155  Scope  This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties, including all measures listed in Annex III to this Agreement.  ARTICLE 156  Definitions  For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:  1. ‘sanitary and phytosanitary measures’ (SPS measures) means measures, as defined in paragraph 1 of Annex A to the SPS Agreement;  2. ‘animals’ means animals, as defined in the Terrestrial Animal Health Code or the Aquatic Animal Health Code of the World Organisation for Animal Health (‘OIE’);  3. ‘animal products’ means products of animal origin, including aquatic animal products, as defined in the Aquatic Animal Health Code of the OIE;  4. ‘animal by-products not intended for human consumption’ means animal products as listed in Part 2 (II) of Annex III-A to this Agreement;  5. ‘plants’ means living plants and specified living parts thereof, including seeds: (a) fruit, in the botanical sense, other than those preserved by deep freezing; (b) vegetables, other than those preserved by deep freezing; (c) tubers, corms, bulbs, rhizomes; (d) cut flowers; (e) branches with foliage; (f) cut trees retaining foliage; (g) plant tissue cultures; (h) leaves, foliage; (i) live pollen; and (j) bud-wood, cuttings, scions;            6. ‘plant products’ means products of plant origin, unprocessed or having undergone simple preparation insofar as they are not plants, set out in Part 3 of Annex III-A to this Agreement;  7. ‘seeds’ means seeds in the botanical sense, intended for planting;   8. ‘pests’ or ‘harmful organisms’ means any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent injurious to plants or plant products;  9. ‘animal disease’ means a clinical or pathological manifestation in animals of an infection;  10. ‘aquaculture disease’ means clinical or non-clinical infection with one or more of the aetiological agents of the diseases referred to in the Aquatic Animal Health Code of the OIE;  11. ‘infection in animals’ means the situation where animals maintain an infectious agent with or without the presence of clinical or pathological manifestation of an infection;  12. ‘animal welfare standards’ means standards for the protection of animals, developed and applied by the Parties and, as appropriate, in line with the OIE standards;  13. ‘appropriate level’ of sanitary and phytosanitary protection means the appropriate level of sanitary and phytosanitary protection as defined in paragraph 5 of Annex A to the SPS Agreement;  14. ‘region’ means, with regard to animal health, a zone or a region as defined in the Terrestrial Animal Health Code of the OIE and, with regard, to aquaculture a zone as defined in the Aquatic Animal Health Code of the OIE;  15. ‘pest free area’ (PFA) means an area in which a specific pest does not occur as demonstrated by scientific evidence and in which, where appropriate, that condition is being officially maintained;  16. ‘regionalisation’ means the concept of regionalisation as described in Article 6 of the SPS Agreement;  17. ‘consignment’ means a number of live animals or quantity of animal products of the same type, covered by the same certificate or document, conveyed by the same means of transport, consigned by a single consignor and originating in the same exporting Party or region(s) of the Party. A consignment of animals may be composed of one or more lots. A consignment of animal products may be composed of one or more commodities or lots;  18. ‘consignment of plants or plant products’ means a quantity of plants, plant products and/or other objects being moved from a Party to another Party and covered, when required, by a single phytosanitary certificate. A consignment may be composed of one or more commodities or lots;  19. ‘lot’ means a number or units of a single commodity, identifiable by its homogeneity of composition and origin, and forming part of a consignment;  20. ‘equivalence for trade purposes’ (equivalence) means the situation where the importing Party shall accept the measures listed in Annex III to this Agreement of the exporting Party as equivalent, even if those measures differ from its own, if the exporting party objectively demonstrates to the importing Party that its measures achieve the importing Party’s appropriate level of sanitary and phytosanitary protection or acceptable level of risk;  21. ‘sector’ means the production and trade structure for a product or category of products in a Party;  22. ‘sub-sector’ means a well-defined and controlled part of a sector;  23. ‘commodity’ means the products or objects being moved for trade purpose, including those referred to in points 2 to 7;  24. ‘specific import authorisation’ means a formal prior authorisation by the competent authorities of the importing Party addressed to an individual importer as a condition for import of a single consignment or multiple consignments of a commodity from the exporting Party, within the scope of this Chapter;  25. ‘working days’ means week days except Sunday, Saturday and public holidays in one of the Parties;  26. ‘inspection’ means the examination of any aspect of feed, food, animal health and animal welfare in order to verify that such aspect(s) comply with the legal requirements of feed and food law and animal health and animal welfare rules;  27. ‘plant health inspection’ means official visual examination of plants, plant products or other regulated objects to determine if pests are present and/or to determine compliance with phytosanitary regulations;  28. ‘verification’ means checking, by examination and consideration of objective evidence, whether specified requirements have been fulfilled.   ARTICLE 157  Competent authorities  The Parties shall inform each other about the structure, organisation and division of competences of their competent authorities during the first meeting of the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Sub-Committee (SPS Sub-Committee) referred to in Article 167 of this Agreement. The Parties shall inform each other of any change of the structure, organisation and division of competences, including of the contact points, concerning such competent authorities.     ARTICLE 158  Recognition for trade purposes of animal health and pest status and regional conditions  Recognition of status for animal diseases, infections in animals or pests  1. As regards animal diseases and infections in animals (including zoonosis), the following shall apply:  (a) the importing Party shall recognise for trade purposes the animal health status of the exporting Party or its regions determined in accordance with the procedure set out in Annex V Part A to this Agreement, with respect to animal diseases specified in Annex IV-A to this Agreement;  (b) where a Party considers that it has, for its territory or a region within its territory, a special status with respect to a specific animal disease other than a disease listed in in Annex IV-A to this Agreement, it may request recognition of that status in accordance with the procedure laid down in Annex V Part C to this Agreement. The importing Party may request guarantees in respect of imports of live animals and animal products, which are appropriate to the agreed status of the Parties;  (c) the Parties recognise as the basis for trade between them the status of the territories or the regions, or the status in a sector or a sub-sector of the Parties related to the prevalence or the incidence of an animal disease other than a disease listed in Annex IV-A to this Agreement, or related to infections in animals and/or the associated risk, as appropriate, as determined by the OIE. The importing Party may request guarantees in respect of imports of live animals and animal products, which are appropriate to the defined status in accordance with the recommendations of the OIE; and  (d) without prejudice to Articles 160, 162 and 166 of this Agreement, and unless the importing Party raises an explicit objection and requests supporting or additional information, consultations and/or verification, each Party shall take without undue delay the necessary legislative and administrative measures to allow trade on the basis of points (a), (b) and (c) of this paragraph.  2. As regards pests, the following shall apply:  (a) the Parties recognise for trade purposes the pest status in respect of pests specified in Annex IV-B to this Agreement as determined in Annex V Part B to this Agreement; and    (b) without prejudice to Articles 160, 162 and 166 of this Agreement, and unless the importing Party raises an explicit objection and requests supporting or additional information, consultations and/or verification, each Party shall take without undue delay the necessary legislative and administrative measures to allow trade on the basis of point (a) of this paragraph.  Recognition of regionalisation/zoning and pest free areas (PFAs)   3. The Parties recognise the concept of regionalisation and PFAs, as specified in the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) of 1997 and the International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPMs) of the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), which they agree to apply to trade between them.  4. The Parties agree that regionalisation decisions for animal and fish diseases listed in Annex IV-A to this Agreement and for pests listed in Annex IV-B to this Agreement shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of Annex V Part A and B to this Agreement.  5. As regards animal diseases, in accordance with the provisions of Article 160 of this Agreement, the exporting Party seeking recognition of its regionalisation decision by the importing Party shall notify its measures with full explanations and supporting data for its determinations and decisions. Without prejudice to Article 161 of this Agreement, and unless the importing Party raises an explicit objection and requests additional information, consultations and/or verification within 15 working days following receipt of the notification, the regionalisation decision so notified shall be deemed accepted.  The consultations referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall take place in accordance with Article 161(3) of this Agreement. The importing Party shall assess the additional information within 15 working days following receipt of the additional information. The verification referred to in the first sub-paragraph of this paragraph shall be carried out in accordance with Article 164 of this Agreement within 25 working days following receipt of the request for verification.  6. As regards pests, each Party shall ensure that trade in plants, plant products and other objects takes account, as appropriate, of the pest status in an area recognised as a PFA by the other Party. A Party seeking recognition of its PFA by the other Party shall notify its measures and, upon request, provide full explanation and supporting data for its establishment and maintenance, as guided by the FAO or IPPC, including ISPMs. Without prejudice to Article 166 of this Agreement, and unless a Party raises an explicit objection and requests additional information, consultations and/or verification within three months following the notification, the regionalisation decision for PFA so notified shall be deemed accepted.  The consultations referred to in the first sub-paragraph of this paragraph shall take place in accordance with Article 161(3) of this Agreement. The importing Party shall assess the additional information within three months following receipt of the additional information. The verification referred to in the first sub-paragraph of this paragraph shall be carried out in accordance with Article 164 of this Agreement within 12 months following receipt of the request for verification, taking into account the biology of the pest and the crop concerned.  7. After finalisation of the procedures referred to in paragraphs 4 to 6 of this Article, and without prejudice to Article 166 of this Agreement, each Party shall take, without undue delay, the necessary legislative and administrative measures to allow trade on that basis.  Compartmentalisation  8. The Parties commit to engaging in further discussions with a view to implementing the principle of compartmentalisation.   ARTICLE 159  Recognition of equivalence  1. Equivalence may be recognised in relation to:  (a) an individual measure;  (b) a group of measures; or  (c) a system applicable to a sector, sub-sector, commodities or a group of commodities.  2. With regard to recognition of equivalence, the Parties shall follow the process set out in paragraph 3. That process shall include an objective demonstration of equivalence by the exporting Party and an objective assessment of the request by the importing Party. That assessment may include inspections or verifications.  3. Upon request of the exporting Party concerning recognition of equivalence as set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Parties shall without delay and no later than three months following the receipt of such request by the importing Party, initiate the consultation process which includes the steps set out in Annex VII to this Agreement. In case of multiple requests from the exporting Party, the Parties, upon request of the importing Party, shall agree within the SPS Sub-Committee referred to in Article 167 of this Agreement on a time schedule during which they shall initiate and conduct the process referred to in this paragraph.   4. Unless otherwise agreed, the importing Party shall finalise the process for recognition of equivalence referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article within 12 months after the receipt of the request of the exporting Party, including a dossier demonstrating the equivalence. That time-limit may be extended with regard to seasonal crops when it is justifiable to delay the assessment to permit verification during a suitable period of growth of a crop.  5. The importing Party determines equivalence as regards plants, plant products and other objects in accordance with the relevant ISPMs.  6. The importing Party may withdraw or suspend equivalence on the basis of any amendment by one of the Parties of measures affecting equivalence, provided that the following procedure is followed:  (a) in accordance with the provisions of Article 160(2) of this Agreement, the exporting Party shall inform the importing Party of any proposal for amendment of its measures for which equivalence of measures is recognised and the likely effect of the proposed measures on the equivalence which has been recognised. Within one month following the receipt of that information, the importing Party shall inform the exporting Party whether or not equivalence would continue to be recognised on the basis of the proposed measures;  (b) in accordance with the provisions of Article 160(2) of this Agreement, the importing Party shall inform the exporting Party of any proposal for amendment of its measures on which recognition of equivalence has been based and the likely effect of the proposed measures on the equivalence which has been recognised. Should the importing Party not continue to recognise equivalence, the Parties may agree on the conditions to re-initiate the process referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article on the basis of the proposed measures.  7. The recognition, suspension or withdrawal of equivalence rests solely with the importing Party acting in accordance with its administrative and legislative framework. That Party shall provide to the exporting Party, in writing, a full explanation and supporting data used for the determinations and decisions covered by this Article. In case of non-recognition, suspension or withdrawal of equivalence, the importing Party shall indicate to the exporting Party the required conditions on the basis of which the process referred to in paragraph 3 may be reinitiated.  8. Without prejudice to Article 166 of this Agreement, the importing Party may not withdraw or suspend equivalence before the proposed new measures of either Party enter into force.   9. In case equivalence is formally recognised by the importing Party, on the basis of the consultation process as set out in Annex VII to this Agreement, the SPS Sub-Committee shall, in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 167(5) of this Agreement, endorse the recognition of equivalence in trade between the Parties. That endorsement decision may also provide for the reduction of physical checks at the frontiers, simplification of certificates and pre-listing procedures for the establishments, as applicable.  The status of the equivalence shall be listed in Annex X to this Agreement.   ARTICLE 160  Transparency and exchange of information  1. Without prejudice to Article 161 of this Agreement, the Parties shall cooperate to enhance mutual understanding of the other Party’s official control structure and mechanisms tasked with the application of the measures listed in Annex III to this Agreement and of the effectiveness of such a structure and mechanism. That can be achieved, amongst others, through reports of international audits when they are made public by the Parties. The Parties can exchange information on the results of such audits or other information, as appropriate.  2. In the framework of recognition of equivalence as referred to in Article 159 of this Agreement, the Parties shall keep each other informed of legislative and procedural changes adopted in the concerned areas.  3. The necessary level of cooperation should be reached in order to facilitate transmission of legislative documents upon request of one of the Parties.  To that effect, each Party shall notify, without delay, the other Party of its contact points, including any changes to those contact points.   ARTICLE 161  Notification, consultation and facilitation of communication  1. Each Party shall notify the other Party in writing within two working days of any serious or significant human, animal or plant health risk, including any food control emergencies or situations where there is a clearly identified risk of serious health effects associated with the consumption of animal or plant products, in particular:  (a) any measures affecting the regionalisation decisions referred to in Article 158 of this Agreement;   (b) the presence or evolution of any animal disease listed in Annex IV-A to this Agreement or of the regulated pests listed in Annex IV-B to this Agreement;  (c) findings of epidemiological importance or important associated risks with respect to animal diseases and pests which are not listed in Annexes IV-A and IV-B to this Agreement or which are new animal diseases or pests; and  (d) any additional measures beyond the basic requirements to their respective measures taken by the Parties to control or eradicate animal diseases or pests or protect public or plant health and any changes in prophylactic policies, including vaccination policies.  2. Notifications shall be made in writing to the contact points referred to in Article 160(3) of this Agreement.  Notification in writing means notification by mail, fax or e-mail. Notifications shall only be sent between the contact points referred to in Article 160(3) of this Agreement.  3. Where a Party has serious concerns regarding a risk to human, animal or plant health, consultations regarding the situation shall, upon request of that Party, take place as soon as possible and, in any case, within 15 working days of that request. In such situations, each Party shall endeavour to provide all the information necessary to avoid a disruption in trade, and to reach a mutually acceptable solution consistent with the protection of human, animal or plant health.  4. Upon request of a Party, consultations regarding animal welfare shall take place as soon as possible and, in any case, within 20 working days from the date of notification. In such situations, each Party shall endeavour to provide all the requested information.  5. Upon request of a Party, consultations as referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article shall be held by video or audio conference. The requesting Party shall ensure the preparation of the minutes of the consultation, which shall be formally approved by the Parties. For the purposes of that approval, the provisions of Article 160(3) of this Agreement shall apply.  6. A mutually applied rapid alert system and early warning mechanism for any veterinary and phytosanitary emergencies will start at a later stage after the Parties have decided on the arrangements for the functioning of such mechanisms.     ARTICLE 162  Trade conditions  1. General import conditions:  (a) The Parties agree to subject imports of any commodity covered by Annexes III-A and III-C(2) and (3) to this Agreement to general import conditions. Without prejudice to the decisions taken in accordance with Article 158 of this Agreement, the import conditions of the importing Party shall be applicable to the total territory of the exporting Party. Upon entry into force of this Agreement and in accordance with the provisions of Article 160 of this Agreement, the importing Party shall inform the exporting Party of its sanitary and/or phytosanitary import requirements for commodities referred to in Annexes III-A and III-C to this Agreement. That information shall include, as appropriate, the models for the official certificates or declarations or commercial documents, as prescribed by the importing Party.  (b) (i) Any amendment or proposed amendment of the conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a) of this Article shall comply with the relevant notification procedures of the SPS Agreement whether or not they refer to measures covered by the SPS Agreement;  (ii) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 166 of this Agreement, the importing Party shall take into account the transport time between the Parties to establish the date of entry into force of the amended conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a) of this Article; and  (iii) If the importing Party fails to comply with those notification requirements, it shall continue to accept the certificate or the attestation guaranteeing the previously applicable conditions until 30 days after the amended import conditions enter into force.  2. Import conditions after recognition of equivalence:  (a) Within a reasonable period of time following the date of adoption of the decision on recognition of equivalence, the Parties shall take the necessary legislative and administrative measures to implement the recognition of equivalence in order to allow, on that basis, trade between them of the commodities referred to in Annexes III-A and III-C(2) and (3) to this Agreement. For those commodities, the model for the official certificate or official document required by the importing Party may, then, be replaced by a certificate drawn up as provided for in Annex IX Part B to this Agreement.  (b) For commodities in sectors or sub-sectors for which not all measures are recognised as equivalent, trade shall continue on the basis of compliance with the conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a) of this Article. Upon request of the exporting Party, the provisions of paragraph 5 of this Article shall apply.  3. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the commodities referred to in Annexes III-A and III-C(2) to this Agreement shall not be subject to a specific import authorisation.  4. For conditions affecting trade of the commodities referred to in paragraph 1(a) of this Article, upon request of the exporting Party, the Parties shall enter into consultations within the SPS Sub-Committee in accordance with the provisions of Article 167 of this Agreement, in order to agree on alternative or additional import conditions of the importing Party. Such alternative or additional import conditions may, when appropriate, be based on measures of the exporting Party recognised as equivalent by the importing Party. If agreed, the importing Party shall within 90 days take the necessary legislative and/or administrative measures to allow import on the basis of the agreed import conditions.  5. List of establishments, conditional approval:  (a) For the import of animal products referred to in Part 2 of Annex III-A to this Agreement, upon request of the exporting Party accompanied by the appropriate guarantees, the importing Party shall, subject to and in accordance with its domestic legislation, provisionally approve the processing establishments referred to in paragraph 2 of Annex VI to this Agreement which are situated in the territory of the exporting Party, without prior inspection of individual establishments. Such approval shall be consistent with the conditions and provisions set out in Annex VI to this Agreement. Except when additional information is requested, the importing Party shall take the necessary legislative and/or administrative measures to allow import on that basis within one month following the date of receipt of the request and the relevant guarantees by the importing Party.  The initial list of establishments shall be approved in accordance with the provisions of Annex VI to this Agreement.  (b) For the import of animal products referred to in paragraph 2(a) of this Article, the exporting Party shall inform the importing Party of its list of establishments meeting the importing Party's requirements.  6. Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall provide the explanation and the supporting data for the determinations and decisions covered by this Article.   ARTICLE 163  Certification procedure  1. For the purposes of certification procedures and issuing of certificates and official documents, the Parties agree on the principles set out in Annex IX to this Agreement.  2. The SPS Sub-Committee referred to in Article 167 of this Agreement may agree on the rules to be followed in the case of electronic certification, withdrawal or replacement of certificates.   3. The Parties shall agree on common models of certificates, where appropriate.   ARTICLE 164  Verification  1. In order to maintain confidence in the effective implementation of the provisions of this Chapter each Party has the right:  (a) to carry out verification of all or part of the inspection and certification system of the other Party’s authorities, and/or of other measures, where applicable, in accordance with the relevant international standards, guidelines and recommendations of Codex Alimentarius, OIE and IPPC; and  (b) to receive information from the other Party about its control system and be informed of the results of the controls carried out under that system.  2. Either Party may share the results of the verifications referred to in paragraph 1(a) with third parties and make the results publicly available as may be required by provisions applicable to either Party. Confidentiality provisions applicable to either Party shall be respected in such sharing and/or publication of results, where appropriate.  3. If the importing Party decides to carry out a verification visit to the exporting Party, the importing Party shall notify the exporting Party of that verification visit at least three months before the verification visit is to be carried out, except in emergency cases or if the Parties agree otherwise. Any modification to that visit shall be agreed by the Parties.  4. The costs incurred in undertaking a verification of all or part of the other Party's competent authorities’ inspection and certification systems, or other measures, where applicable, shall be borne by the Party carrying out the verification or the inspection.  5. The draft written communication of verifications shall be forwarded to the exporting Party within three months after the end of verification. The exporting Party shall have 45 working days to comment on the draft written communication. Comments made by the exporting Party shall be attached to and, where appropriate, included in the final outcome. However, where a significant human, animal or plant health risk has been identified during the verification, the exporting Party shall be informed as quickly as possible and in any case within 10 working days following the end of the verification.  6. For clarity the results of a verification may contribute to the procedures referred to in Articles 159 and 165 of this Agreement conducted by the Parties or one of the Parties.   ARTICLE 165  Import checks and inspection fees  1. The Parties agree that import checks by the importing Party of consignments from the exporting Party shall respect the principles set out in Annex VIII Part A to this Agreement. The results of those checks may contribute to the verification process referred to in Article 164 of this Agreement.  2. The frequencies of physical import checks applied by each Party are set out in Annex VIII Part B to this Agreement. A Party may amend those frequencies, within its competence and in accordance with its internal legislation, as a result of progress made in accordance with Articles 159 and 162 of this Agreement, or as a result of verifications, consultations or other measures provided for in this Agreement. The SPS Sub-Committee referred to Article 167 of this Agreement shall accordingly modify Annex VIII Part B to this Agreement by decision.  3. Inspection fees may only cover the costs incurred by the competent authority for performing import checks. The fee shall be calculated on the same basis as the fees charged for the inspection of similar domestic products.  4. The importing Party shall upon request of the exporting Party inform the exporting Party of any amendment, including the reasons for such an amendment, concerning the measures affecting import checks and inspection fees, and of any significant changes in the administrative conduct for such checks.  5. The Parties may agree on the conditions to approve, as from a date to be determined by the SPS Sub-Committee referred to in Article 167 of this Agreement, each other’s controls as referred to in Article 164(1)(b) of this Agreement with a view to adapting and reciprocally reducing, where applicable, the frequency of physical import checks for the commodities referred to in Article 162(2)(a) of this Agreement.  From that date onwards, the Parties may reciprocally approve each other’s controls for certain commodities and consequently reduce or replace the import checks for those commodities.     ARTICLE 166  Safeguard measures  1. Should the exporting Party take within its territory measures to control any cause likely to constitute a serious hazard or risk to human, animal or plant health, the exporting Party, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 2, shall take equivalent measures to prevent the introduction of the hazard or risk into the territory of the importing Party.  2. On grounds of serious human, animal or plant health, the importing Party may take provisional measures necessary for the protection of human, animal or plant health. For consignments en route between the Parties, the importing Party shall consider the most suitable and proportionate solution in order to avoid unnecessary disruptions to trade.  3. The Party adopting measures under paragraph 2 of this Article shall inform the other Party no later than one working day following the date of the adoption of the measures. Upon request of either Party, and in accordance with the provisions of Article 161(3) of this Agreement, the Parties shall hold consultations regarding the situation within 15 working days of the notification. The Parties shall take due account of any information provided through such consultations and shall endeavour to avoid unnecessary disruption to trade, taking into account, where applicable, the outcome of the consultations provided for in Article 161(3) of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 167  Sanitary and Phytosanitary Sub-Committee  1. The SPS Sub-Committee is hereby established. It shall meet within three months, after the entry into force of this Agreement, upon request of either Party, or at least once every year. Subject to agreement by the Parties, a meeting of the SPS Sub-Committee may be held by video or audio-conference. The SPS Sub-Committee may also address issues out of session, by correspondence.  2. The SPS Sub-Committee shall have the following functions:  (a) to consider any matter relating to this Chapter;  (b) to monitor the implementation of this Chapter and examine all matters which may arise in relation to its implementation;  (c) to review Annexes III to X to this Agreement, notably in the light of progress made under the consultations and procedures provided for under this Chapter;  (d) to modify, by means of a decision, Annexes III to X to this Agreement in the light of the review provided for in point (c) of this paragraph, or as otherwise provided in this Chapter; and  (e) to give opinions and make recommendations to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in trade configuration, in accordance with Article 375 of this Agreement in the light of the review provided for in point (c) of this paragraph.  3. The Parties agree to establish technical working groups, when appropriate, consisting of expert-level representatives of the Parties, which shall identify and address technical and scientific issues arising from the application of this Chapter. When additional expertise is required, the Parties may establish ad hoc groups, including scientific and expert groups. Membership of such ad hoc groups need not be restricted to representatives of the Parties.  4. The SPS Sub-Committee shall regularly inform, by means of a report, the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, on its activities and the decisions taken within its competence.  5. The SPS Sub-Committee shall adopt its working procedures at its first meeting.  6. Any decision, recommendation, report or other action by the SPS Sub-Committee or any group established by the SPS Sub-Committee shall be adopted by consensus between the Parties.   CHAPTER 5  CUSTOMS AND TRADE FACILITATION   ARTICLE 168  Objectives  1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of customs and trade facilitation in the evolving bilateral trade environment. The Parties agree to reinforce cooperation in this area with a view to ensuring that the relevant legislation and procedures, as well as the administrative capacity of the relevant administrations, fulfil the objectives of effective control and support facilitation of legitimate trade, as a matter of principle.  2. The Parties recognise that utmost importance shall be given to legitimate public policy objectives, including trade facilitation, security and prevention of fraud, and a balanced approach to them.   ARTICLE 169  Legislation and procedures  1. The Parties agree that their respective trade and customs legislation, as a matter of principle, shall be stable and comprehensive, and that the provisions and the procedures shall be proportionate, transparent, predictable, non-discriminatory, impartial and applied uniformly and effectively and shall inter alia:  (a) protect and facilitate legitimate trade through effective enforcement of, and compliance with, legislative requirements;  (b) avoid unnecessary or discriminatory burdens on economic operators, prevent fraud and provide further facilitation for economic operators having a high level of compliance;  (c) apply a Single Administrative Document (SAD) for the purposes of customs declarations;  (d) take measures which lead to greater efficiency, transparency and simplification of customs procedures and practices at the border;  (e) apply modern customs techniques, including risk assessment, post-clearance controls and company audit methods, in order to simplify and facilitate the entry and the release of goods;   (f) aim at reducing costs and increasing predictability for economic operators, including small and medium-sized enterprises;  (g) without prejudice to the application of objective risk-assessment criteria, ensure the non-discriminatory administration of requirements and procedures applicable to imports, exports and goods in transit;  (h) apply the international instruments applicable in the field of customs and trade, including those developed by the World Customs Organisation (WCO) (the Framework of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade), the WTO (the Agreement on Customs Valuation), the Istanbul Convention on Temporary Admission of 1990, the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System of 1983, the UN TIR Convention of 1975 and the 1982 International Convention on the Harmonisation of Frontier Controls of Goods;  (i) take the necessary measures to reflect and implement the provisions of the Revised Kyoto Convention on the Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs Procedures of 1973;  (j) provide for advance binding rulings on tariff classification and rules of origin. The Parties ensure that a ruling may be revoked or annulled only after notification to the affected operator and without retroactive effect, unless the rulings have been made on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information;  (k) introduce and apply simplified procedures for authorised traders according to objective and non-discriminatory criteria;  (l) set rules that ensure that any penalties imposed for the breaches of customs regulations or procedural requirements be proportionate and non-discriminatory and that their application does not result in unwarranted and unjustified delays; and  (m) apply transparent, non-discriminatory and proportionate rules in respect of the licensing of customs brokers.  2. In order to improve working methods, as well as to ensure non-discrimination, transparency, efficiency, integrity and accountability of operations, the Parties shall:  (a) take further steps towards the reduction, the simplification and the standardisation of data and documentation required by customs and other authorities;  (b) simplify requirements and formalities, wherever possible, with respect to the rapid release and clearance of goods;   (c) provide effective, prompt and non-discriminatory procedures guaranteeing the right of appeal against customs and other authorities’ administrative actions, rulings and decisions affecting the goods submitted to customs. Such procedures for appeal shall be easily accessible, including to small or medium-sized enterprises, and any costs shall be reasonable and commensurate with the costs incurred by the authorities to ensure the right of appeal;  (d) take steps to ensure that where a disputed administrative action, ruling or decision is the subject of an appeal, goods should normally be released and duty payments may be left pending, subject to any safeguard measures judged necessary. Where required, the release of the goods should be subject to the provision of a guarantee, such as a surety or a deposit; and  (e) ensure that the highest standards of integrity be maintained, in particular at the border, through the application of measures reflecting the principles of the relevant international conventions and instruments in this field, in particular the WCO Revised Arusha Declaration of 2003.  3. The Parties will not apply:  (a) any requirements for the mandatory use of customs brokers; and  (b) any requirements for the mandatory use of pre-shipment or destination inspections.  4. For the purposes of this Agreement, the transit rules and definitions set out in the WTO provisions, in particular Article V of GATT 1994, and related provisions, including any clarifications and amendments resulting from the Doha Round negotiations on trade facilitation, shall apply. Those provisions also apply when the transit of goods begins or ends in the territory of a Party (inland transit).  The Parties shall pursue the progressive interconnectivity of their respective customs transit systems, with a view to the future accession of the Republic of Moldova to the Convention on a common transit procedure of 1987.  The Parties shall ensure cooperation and coordination between all authorities concerned in their territories in order to facilitate traffic in transit. Parties shall also promote cooperation between the authorities and the private sector in relation to transit.     ARTICLE 170  Relations with the business community  The Parties agree:  (a) to ensure that their respective legislation and procedures are transparent and publicly available, as far as possible through electronic means, and contain a justification for their adoption. There should be a reasonable time period between the publication of new or amended provisions and their entry into force;  (b) on the need for timely and regular consultations with trade representatives on legislative proposals and procedures related to customs and trade issues. To that end, appropriate and regular consultation mechanisms between the administration and the business community shall be established by each Party;  (c) to make publicly available, as far as possible through electronic means, relevant notices of an administrative nature, including authorities’ requirements and entry or exit procedures, hours of operation and operating procedures for customs offices at ports and border crossing points, and points of contact for information enquiries;  (d) to foster cooperation between operators and relevant administrations using non-arbitrary and publicly accessible procedures such as Memoranda of Understanding, based, in particular, on those promulgated by the WCO; and  (e) to ensure that their respective customs and customs-related requirements and procedures continue to meet the legitimate needs of the trading community, follow best practices, and remain the least trade-restrictive possible.   ARTICLE 171  Fees and charges  1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall prohibit administrative fees having an equivalent effect to import or export duties and charges.  2. With regard to all fees and charges of whatever character imposed by the customs authorities of each Party, including fees and charges for tasks undertaken on behalf of the said authorities, upon or in connection with import or export and without prejudice to the relevant Articles in Chapter 1 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, the Parties agree that:  (a) fees and charges may only be imposed for services provided at the request of the declarant outside normal working conditions, hours of operation and in places other than those referred to in the customs regulations, as well as for any formality related to such services and required for undertaking such import or export;  (b) fees and charges shall not exceed the cost of the service provided;  (c) fees and charges shall not be calculated on an ad valorem basis;  (d) the information on the fees and charges shall be published via an officially designated medium and, where feasible and possible, on an official website. That information shall include the reason for the fee or charge for the service provided, the responsible authority, the fees and charges that will be applied, and when and how payment is to be made; and  (e) new or amended fees and charges shall not be imposed until information on them is published and made readily available.   ARTICLE 172  Customs valuation  1. The provisions of the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of GATT 1994 contained in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement, including any subsequent amendments, shall govern the customs valuation of goods in the trade between the Parties. Those provisions are hereby incorporated into this Agreement and made part thereof. Minimum customs values shall not be used.  2. The Parties shall cooperate with a view to reaching a common approach to issues relating to customs valuation.   ARTICLE 173  Customs cooperation  The Parties shall strengthen cooperation in the area of customs to ensure implementation of the objectives of this Chapter in order to further trade facilitation, while ensuring effective control, security and prevention of fraud.   In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter the Parties shall, inter alia:  (a) exchange information concerning customs legislation and procedures;  (b) develop joint initiatives relating to import, export and transit procedures, as well as work towards ensuring that an effective service is provided to the business community;  (c) cooperate on the automation of customs and other trade procedures;  (d) exchange, where appropriate, information and data subject to respect of the confidentiality of data and standards and regulations on protection of personal data;  (e) cooperate in preventing and combating illicit cross-border traffic in goods, including in tobacco products;  (f) exchange information or enter into consultations with a view to establishing, where possible, common positions in international organisations in the field of customs such as the WTO, the WCO, the UN, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the UNECE;  (g) cooperate in the planning and delivery of technical assistance, notably to facilitate customs and trade facilitation reforms in line with the relevant provisions of this Agreement;  (h) exchange best practices in customs operations, in particular on intellectual property rights enforcement, especially in relation to counterfeit products;  (i) promote coordination between all border authorities of the Parties to facilitate the border crossing process and enhance control, taking into account joint border controls, where feasible and appropriate; and  (j) establish, where relevant and appropriate, mutual recognition of trade partnership programmes and customs controls, including equivalent trade facilitation measures.   ARTICLE 174  Mutual administrative assistance in customs matters  Without prejudice to other forms of cooperation envisaged in this Agreement, in particular in Article 173 of this Agreement, the Parties shall provide each other with mutual administrative assistance in customs matters in accordance with the provisions of Protocol II on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters to this Agreement.     ARTICLE 175  Technical assistance and capacity building  The Parties shall cooperate with a view to providing technical assistance and capacity building for the implementation of trade facilitation and customs reforms.   ARTICLE 176  Customs Sub-Committee  1. The Customs Sub-Committee is hereby established. It shall report to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement.  2. The function of the Sub-Committee shall include regular consultations and monitoring of the implementation and the administration of this Chapter, including the matters of customs cooperation, cross-border customs cooperation and management, technical assistance, rules of origin, trade facilitation, as well as mutual administrative assistance in customs matters.  3. The Customs Sub-Committee shall inter alia:  (a) see to the proper functioning of this Chapter and of Protocols I and II to this Agreement;  (b) adopt practical arrangements, measures and decisions to implement this Chapter and Protocols I and II to this Agreement, including on exchange of information and data, mutual recognition of customs controls and trade partnership programmes, and mutually agreed benefits;  (c) exchange views on any points of common interest, including future measures and the resources needed for their implementation and application;  (d) make recommendations where appropriate; and  (e) adopt its internal rules of procedure. CHAPTER 6 ESTABLISHMENT, TRADE IN SERVICES AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 177 Objective, scope and coverage  1. The Parties, reaffirming their respective commitments under the WTO Agreement, hereby lay down the necessary arrangements for the progressive reciprocal liberalisation of establishment and trade in services and for cooperation on electronic commerce.  2. Government procurement is covered in Chapter 8 (Public Procurement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose any obligation with respect to government procurement.  3. Subsidies are covered in Chapter 10 (Competition) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to subsidies granted by the Parties.  4. In accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, each Party retains the right to regulate and to introduce new regulations to meet legitimate policy objectives  5. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the employment market of a Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.  6. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry of natural persons into, or their temporary stay in, its territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of, and to ensure the orderly movement of natural persons across its borders, provided that those measures are not applied in such a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to any Party under the terms of a specific commitment in this Chapter and Annexes XI to this Agreement.(1) (1) The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of certain countries and not for those of others shall not be regarded as nullifying or impairing benefits under a specific commitment. ARTICLE 178  Definitions  For the purposes of this Chapter:  1. ‘measure’ means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;  2. ‘measures adopted or maintained by a Party’ means measures taken by:  (a) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and  (b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local governments or authorities;  3. ‘natural person of a Party’ means a national of the UK or a national of the Republic of Moldova according to respective legislation;  4. ‘juridical person’ means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or association;  5. ‘juridical person of the UK’ or ‘juridical person of the Republic of Moldova’ means a juridical person as defined in point 4 set up in accordance with the law of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova, respectively, and having its registered office, central administration, or principal place of business in the territory to which, and to the extent and under the conditions which, the EU-Moldova Association Agreement applied immediately before it ceased to apply to the UK in regards to the UK and the territories for whose international relations it is responsible, or in the territory of the Republic of Moldova, respectively.  Should that juridical person have only its registered office or central administration in the territory to which, and to the extent and under the conditions which, the EU-Moldova Association Agreement applied immediately before it ceased to apply to the UK in regards to the UK and the territories for whose international relations it is responsible(1), or in the territory of the Republic of Moldova, respectively, it shall not be considered as a juridical person of the UK or a juridical person of the Republic of Moldova respectively, unless its operations possess a real and continuous link with the economy of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova, respectively. (1) For greater certainty, that territory shall include the exclusive economic zone and continental shelf, as provided in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).    Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, shipping companies established outside the UK or the Republic of Moldova and controlled by nationals of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova, respectively, shall also be beneficiaries of the provisions of this Agreement if their vessels are registered in accordance with their respective legislation in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova and fly the flag of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova;  6. ‘subsidiary’ of a juridical person of a Party means a legal person which is effectively controlled by another juridical person of that Party(1); (1) A juridical person is controlled by another juridical person if the latter has the power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise to legally direct its actions.  7. ‘branch’ of a juridical person means a place of business not having legal personality which has the appearance of permanency, such as the extension of a parent body, has a management structure and is materially equipped to negotiate business with third parties so that the latter, although knowing that there will, if necessary, be a legal link with the parent body, the head office of which is abroad, do not have to deal directly with such parent body but may transact business at the place of business constituting the extension;  8. ‘establishment’ means: (a) as regards juridical persons of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova, the right to take up and pursue economic activities by means of setting up, including the acquisition of, a juridical person and/or to create a branch or a representative office in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova respectively; (b) as regards natural persons, the right of natural persons of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova to take up and pursue economic activities as self-employed persons and to set up undertakings, in particular companies, which they effectively control;    9. ‘economic activities’ shall include activities of an industrial, commercial and professional character and activities of craftsmen and do not include activities performed in the exercise of governmental authority;  10. ‘operations’ means the pursuit of economic activities;  11. ‘services’ includes any service in any sector except services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;  12. ‘services and other activities performed in the exercise of governmental authority’ means services or activities which are performed neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more economic operators;    13. ‘cross-border supply of services’ means the supply of a service: (a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party (Mode 1); or (b) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other Party (Mode 2);    14. ‘service supplier’ of a Party means any natural or juridical person of a Party that seeks to supply or supplies a service;  15. ‘entrepreneur’ means any natural or juridical person of a Party that seeks to perform or performs an economic activity through setting up an establishment.   SECTION 2 ESTABLISHMENT ARTICLE 179 Scope  This Section applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Parties affecting establishment in all economic activities with the exception of:  (a) mining, manufacturing and processing(1) of nuclear materials; (1) For greater certainty, processing of nuclear materials includes all the activities contained in UN ISIC Rev.3.1 code 2330. (2) Without prejudice to the scope of activities which may be considered as cabotage under the relevant domestic legislation, national maritime cabotage under this chapter covers transportation of passengers or goods between a port or point located in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova and another port or point located in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova, including on its continental shelf, as provided in the UNCLOS, and traffic originating and terminating in the same port or point located in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova. (3) The conditions of mutual market access in air transport shall be dealt with by an agreement or arrangement governing air services between Moldova and the United Kingdom.  (b) production of, or trade in, arms, munitions and war materiel;  (c) audiovisual services;  (d) national maritime cabotage(2); and  (e) domestic and international air transport services(3), whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and services directly related to the exercise of traffic rights, other than: (i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is withdrawn from service; (ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services; (iii) computer reservation system (CRS) services; (iv) ground-handling services; (v) airport operation services.          ARTICLE 180  National treatment and most-favoured-nation treatment  1. Subject to reservations listed in Annex XI-E to this Agreement, the Republic of Moldova shall grant, upon entry into force of this Agreement:  (a) as regards the establishment of subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of juridical persons of the UK, treatment no less favourable than that accorded by the Republic of Moldova to its own juridical persons, their branches and representative offices, or to subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of any third country’s juridical persons, whichever is better;  (b) as regards the operation of subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of juridical persons of the UK in the Republic of Moldova, once established, treatment no less favourable than that accorded by the Republic of Moldova to its own juridical persons, their branches and representative offices, or to subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of any third country’s juridical persons, whichever is better.(1) (1) This obligation does not extend to the investment protection provisions not covered by this Chapter, including provisions relating to investor-state dispute settlement procedures, as found in other agreements. (2) This obligation does not extend to the investment protection provisions not covered by this Chapter, including provisions relating to investor-state dispute settlement procedures, as found in other agreements.  2. Subject to reservations listed in Annex XI-A to this Agreement, the UK shall grant, upon entry into force of this Agreement: (a) as regards the establishment of subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of juridical persons of the Republic of Moldova, treatment no less favourable than that accorded by the UK to its own juridical persons, their branches and representative offices, or to subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of any third country’s juridical persons, whichever is better;   (b) as regards the operation of subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of juridical persons of the Republic of Moldova in the UK, once established, treatment no less favourable than that accorded by the UK to its ownjuridical persons, their branches and representative offices, or to subsidiaries, branches and representative offices of any third country’s juridical persons, whichever is better.(2)   3. Subject to reservations listed in Annexes XI-A and XI-E to this Agreement, the Parties shall not adopt any new regulations or measures which introduce discrimination as regards the establishment of juridical persons of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova on their territory or in respect of their operation, once established, by comparison with their own juridical persons. ARTICLE 181 Review 1. With a view to progressively liberalising the establishment conditions, the Parties shall regularly review the establishment legal framework1 and the establishment environment, consistent with their commitments in international agreements. (1) This includes this Chapter and Annexes XI-A and XI-E to this Agreement 2. In the context of the review referred to in paragraph 1, the Parties shall assess any obstacles to establishment that have been encountered. With a view to deepening the provisions of this Chapter, the Parties shall find appropriate ways to address such obstacles, which could include further negotiations, including with respect to investment protection and to investor-to-state dispute settlement procedures. ARTICLE 182 Other agreements Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit the rights of entrepreneurs of the Parties to benefit from any more favourable treatment provided for in any existing or future international agreement relating to investment to which the UK and the Republic of Moldova are parties. ARTICLE 183 1. The provisions of Article 180 of this Agreement do not preclude the application by a Party of particular rules concerning the establishment and operation in its territory of branches and representative offices of juridical persons of another Party not incorporated in the territory of the first Party, which are justified by legal or technical differences between such branches and representative offices as compared to branches and representative offices of juridical persons incorporated in its territory or, as regards financial services, for prudential reasons. 2. The difference in treatment shall not go beyond what is strictly necessary as a result of such legal or technical differences or, as regards financial services, for prudential reasons.  SECTION 3 CROSS-BORDER SUPPLY OF SERVICES ARTICLE 184  Scope  This Section applies to measures of the Parties affecting the cross-border supply of all services sectors with the exception of:  (a) audiovisual services;  (b) national maritime cabotage(1); and (1) Without prejudice to the scope of activities which may be considered as cabotage under the relevant domestic legislation, national maritime cabotage under this Chapter covers transportation of passengers or goods between a port or point located in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova and another port or point located in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova, including on its continental shelf, as provided in the UNCLOS, and traffic originating and terminating in the same port or point located in the UK or in the Republic of Moldova. (2) The conditions of mutual market access in air transport shall be dealt with by an agreement or arrangement governing air services between Moldova and the United Kingdom.  (c) domestic and international air transport services(2), whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and services directly related to the exercise of traffic rights other than:  (i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;  (ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services;  (iii) CRS services;  (iv) ground-handling services;  (v) airport operation services.   ARTICLE 185  Market access  1. With respect to market access through the cross-border supply of services, each Party shall accord services and service suppliers of the other Party a treatment not less favourable than that provided for in the specific commitments contained in Annexes XI-B and XI-F to this Agreement.  2. In sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a Party shall not maintain or adopt, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in Annexes XI-B and XI-F to this Agreement, are defined as:  (a) limitations on the number of services suppliers whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs test;  (b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;  (c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity of service output expressed in the terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test.   ARTICLE 186  National treatment  1. In the sectors where market access commitments are inscribed in Annexes XI-B and XI-F to this Agreement, and subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall grant to services and service suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all measures affecting the cross-border supply of services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own like services and services suppliers.  2. A Party may meet the requirement provided for in paragraph 1 by according to services and service suppliers of the other Party either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to that which it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.  3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service suppliers of the Party compared to like services or service suppliers of the other Party.  4. Specific commitments entered into under this Article shall not be construed to require any Party to compensate for inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign character of the relevant services or services suppliers. ARTICLE 187  Lists of commitments  1. The sectors liberalised by each of the Parties pursuant to this Section and, by means of reservations, the market access and national treatment limitations applicable to services and services suppliers of the other Party in those sectors are set out in lists of commitments included in Annexes XI-B and XI-F to this Agreement.  2. Without prejudice to the Parties’ rights and obligations as they exist or may arise under the European Convention on Transfrontier Television and the European Convention on Cinematographic Co-production, lists of commitments in Annexes XI-B and XI-F to this Agreement do not include commitments on audiovisual services.   ARTICLE 188  Review  With a view to the progressive liberalisation of the cross-border supply of services between the Parties, the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, shall regularly review the list of commitments referred to in Article 187 of this Agreement. This review shall take into account, inter alia, Article 222 of this Agreement, and its impact on the elimination of remaining obstacles to cross-border supply of services between the Parties.     SECTION 4  TEMPORARY PRESENCE OF NATURAL PERSONS FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES   ARTICLE 189  Scope and definitions  1. This Section applies to measures of the Parties concerning the entry and temporary stay in their territories of key personnel, graduate trainees and business sellers, contractual service suppliers and independent professionals, without prejudice to Article 177(5) of this Agreement.  2. For the purposes of this Section:  (a) ‘key personnel’ means natural persons employed within a juridical person of one Party other than a non-profit organisation and who are responsible for the setting up or the proper control, administration and operation of an establishment. ‘Key personnel’ comprises ‘business visitors’ for establishment purposes and ‘intra-corporate transferees’: (i) ‘business visitors’ for establishment purposes means natural persons working in a senior position who are responsible for setting up an establishment. They do not offer or provide services or engage in any economic activity other than that required for establishment purposes. They do not receive remuneration from a source located within the host Party; (ii) ‘intra-corporate transferees’ means natural persons who have been employed by a juridical person or have been partners in it for at least one year and who are temporarily transferred to an establishment that may be a subsidiary, branch or head company of the enterprise/juridical person in the territory of the other Party. The natural person concerned shall belong to one of the following categories: (1) managers: persons working in a senior position within a juridical person, who primarily direct the management of the establishment, receiving general supervision or direction principally from the board of directors or from stockholders of the business or their equivalent, including at least:     — directing the establishment or a department or sub-division thereof;   — supervising and controlling the work of other supervisory, professional or managerial employees; and  — having the authority personally to recruit and dismiss or recommend recruiting, dismissing or other personnel actions; (2) specialists: persons working within a juridical person who possess uncommon knowledge essential to the establishment’s production, research equipment, techniques, processes, procedures or management. In assessing such knowledge, account will be taken not only of knowledge specific to the establishment, but also of whether the person has a high level of qualification referring to a type of work or trade requiring specific technical knowledge, including membership of an accredited profession;   (b) ‘graduate trainees’ means natural persons who have been employed by a juridical person of one Party or its branch for at least one year, possess a university degree and are temporarily transferred to an establishment of the juridical person in the territory of the other Party for career development purposes or to obtain training in business techniques or methods(1); (1) The recipient establishment may be required to submit a training programme covering the duration of the stay for prior approval, demonstrating that the purpose of the stay is for training. (2) The category of business sellers is only recognised for services sellers. (3) The service contract referred to under points (d) and (e) shall comply with the requirements of the laws, and regulations and requirements of the Party where the contract is executed.  (c) ‘business sellers’(2) means natural persons who are representatives of a services or goods supplier of one Party seeking entry and temporary stay in the territory of the other Party for the purpose of negotiating the sale of services or goods, or entering into agreements to sell services or goods for that supplier. They do not engage in making direct sales to the general public and do not receive remuneration from a source located within the host Party, nor are they commission agents;  (d) ‘contractual services suppliers’ means natural persons employed by a juridical person of one Party which itself is not an agency for placement and supply services of personnel nor acting through such an agency, has no establishment in the territory of the other Party and has concluded a bona fide contract to supply services with a final consumer in the latter Party, requiring the presence on a temporary basis of its employees in that Party, in order to fulfil the contract to provide services(3);   (e) ‘independent professionals’ means natural persons engaged in the supply of a service and established as self-employed in the territory of a Party who have no establishment in the territory of the other Party and who have concluded a bona fide contract (other than through an agency for placement and supply services of personnel) to supply services with a final consumer in the latter Party, requiring their presence on a temporary basis in that Party in order to fulfil the contract to provide services(1); (1) The service contract referred to under points (d) and (e) shall comply with the requirements of the laws, and regulations and requirements of the Party where the contract is executed.   (f) ‘qualifications’ means diplomas, certificates and other evidence (of formal qualification) issued by an authority designated pursuant to legislative, regulatory or administrative provisions and certifying successful completion of professional training.   ARTICLE 190  Key personnel and graduate trainees  1. For every sector committed in accordance with Section 2 (Establishment) of this Chapter and subject to any reservations listed in Annexes XI-A and XI-E or in Annexes XI-C and XI-G to this Agreement, each Party shall allow entrepreneurs of the other Party to employ in their establishment natural persons of that other Party provided that such employees are key personnel or graduate trainees as defined in Article 189 of this Agreement. The temporary entry and temporary stay of key personnel and graduate trainees shall be for a period of up to three years for intra-corporate transferees, 90 days in any 12 month period for business visitors for establishment purposes, and one year for graduate trainees.  2. For every sector committed in accordance with Section 2 (Establishment) of this Chapter, the measures which a Party shall not maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in Annexes XI-C and XI-G to this Agreement, are defined as limitations on the total number of natural persons that an entrepreneur may employ as key personnel and graduate trainees in a specific sector, in the form of numerical quotas or of a requirement of an economic needs test, and as discriminatory limitations.     ARTICLE 191  Business sellers  For every sector committed in accordance with Section 2 (Establishment) or Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) of this Chapter and subject to any reservations listed in Annexes XI-A and XI-E, and XI-B and XI-F to this Agreement, each Party shall allow the entry and temporary stay of business sellers for a period of up to 90 days in any 12 -month period.   ARTICLE 192  Contractual service suppliers  1. The Parties reaffirm their respective obligations arising from their commitments under the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) as regards the entry and temporary stay of contractual services suppliers.  In accordance with Annexes XI-D and XI-H to this Agreement, each Party shall allow the supply of services into their territory by contractual services suppliers of the other Party, subject to the conditions specified in paragraph 2 of this Article.  2. The commitments undertaken by the Parties are subject to the following conditions:  (a) the natural persons must be engaged in the supply of a service on a temporary basis as employees of a juridical person, which has obtained a service contract not exceeding 12 months;  (b) the natural persons entering the other Party should be offering such services as employees of the juridical person supplying the services for at least the year immediately preceding the date of submission of an application for entry into the other Party. In addition, the natural persons shall possess, at the date of submission of an application for entry into the other Party, at least three years professional experience(1) in the sector of activity which is the subject of the contract; (1) Obtained after having reached the age of majority (2) Where the degree or qualification has not been obtained in the Party where the service is supplied, that Party may evaluate whether this is equivalent to a university degree required in its territory.  (c) the natural persons entering the other Party shall possess: (i) a university degree or a qualification demonstrating knowledge of an equivalent level(2); and (ii) professional qualifications where this is required to exercise an activity pursuant to the laws, regulations or legal requirements of the Party where the service is supplied;     (d) the natural person shall not receive remuneration for the provision of services in the territory of the other Party other than the remuneration paid by the juridical person employing the natural person;  (e) the entry and temporary stay of natural persons within the Party concerned shall be for a cumulative period of not more than six months in any 12 month period or for the duration of the contract, whichever is less;  (f) access accorded under the provisions of this Article relates only to the service activity which is the subject of the contract and does not confer entitlement to exercise the professional title of the Party where the service is provided; and  (g) the number of persons covered by the service contract shall not be larger than necessary to fulfil the contract, as it may be requested by the laws, regulations or other legal requirements of the Party where the service is supplied.   ARTICLE 193  Independent professionals  1. In accordance with Annexes XI-D and XI-H to this Agreement, the Parties shall allow the supply of services into their territory by independent professionals of the other Party, subject to the conditions specified in paragraph 2 of this Article.  2. The commitments undertaken by the Parties are subject to the following conditions:  (a) the natural persons must be engaged in the supply of a service on a temporary basis as self-employed persons established in the other Party and must have obtained a service contract for a period not exceeding 12 months;  (b) the natural persons entering the other Party must possess, at the date of submission of an application for entry into the other Party, at least six years professional experience in the sector of activity which is the subject of the contract;  (c) the natural persons entering the other Party must possess: (i) a university degree or a qualification demonstrating knowledge of an equivalent level(1); and   (1) Where the degree or qualification has not been obtained in the Party where the service is supplied, that Party may evaluate whether this is equivalent to a university degree required in its territory. (ii) professional qualifications where this is required to exercise an activity pursuant to the law, regulations or other legal requirements of the Party where the service is supplied;  (d) the entry and temporary stay of natural persons within the Party concerned shall be for a cumulative period of not more than six months in any 12 month period or for the duration of the contract, whichever is less; and  (e) access accorded under the provisions of this Article relates only to the service activity which is the subject of the contract and does not confer entitlement to exercise the professional title of the Party where the service is provided.   SECTION 5  REGULATORY FRAMEWORK   SUB-SECTION 1  DOMESTIC REGULATION   ARTICLE 194  Scope and Definitions  1. The following disciplines apply to measures by the Parties relating to licencing requirements and procedures, qualification requirements and procedures that affect:  (a) cross-border supply of services;  (b) establishment in their territory of juridical and natural persons defined in Article 178(8) of this Agreement;  (c) temporary stay in their territory of categories of natural persons as defined in Article 189(2)(a) to (e) of this Agreement.  2. In the case of cross-border supply of services, those disciplines shall only apply to sectors for which the Party has undertaken specific commitments and to the extent that those specific commitments apply. In the case of establishment, those disciplines shall not apply to sectors to the extent that a reservation is listed in accordance with Annexes XI-A and XI-E to this Agreement. In the case of temporary stay of natural persons, those disciplines shall not apply to sectors to the extent that a reservation is listed in accordance with Annexes XI-C and XI-D and XI-G and XI-H to this Agreement.  3. Those disciplines do not apply to measures to the extent that they constitute limitations subject to scheduling.  4. For the purposes of this Section:  (a) ‘licencing requirements’ means substantive requirements, other than qualification requirements, with which a natural or a juridical person is required to comply in order to obtain, amend or renew authorisation to carry out the activities as defined in paragraph 1(a) to (c);   (b) ‘licencing procedures’ means administrative or procedural rules that a natural or a juridical person, seeking authorisation to carry out the activities as defined in paragraph 1(a) to (c), including the amendment or renewal of a licence, is required to adhere to in order to demonstrate compliance with licencing requirements;  (c) ‘qualification requirements’ means substantive requirements relating to the competence of a natural person to supply a service, and which are required to be demonstrated for the purpose of obtaining authorisation to supply a service;  (d) ‘qualification procedures’ means administrative or procedural rules that a natural person must adhere to in order to demonstrate compliance with qualification requirements, for the purpose of obtaining authorisation to supply a service; and  (e) ‘competent authority’ means any central, regional or local government or authority or non-governmental body in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local governments or authorities, which takes a decision concerning the authorisation to supply a service, including through establishment or concerning the authorisation to establish in an economic activity other than services.   ARTICLE 195  Conditions for licencing and qualification  1. Each Party shall ensure that measures relating to licencing requirements and procedures, qualification requirements and procedures are based on criteria which preclude the competent authorities from exercising their power of assessment in an arbitrary manner.  2. The criteria referred to in paragraph 1 shall be:  (a) proportionate to a public policy objective;  (b) clear and unambiguous;  (c) objective;  (d) pre-established;  (e) made public in advance; and  (f) transparent and accessible.   3. An authorisation or a licence shall be granted as soon as it is established, in the light of an appropriate examination, that the conditions for obtaining an authorisation or licence have been met.  4. Each Party shall maintain or institute judicial, arbitral or administrative tribunals or procedures which provide, at the request of an affected entrepreneur or service supplier, for a prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate remedies for, administrative decisions affecting establishment, cross-border supply of services or temporary presence of natural persons for business purposes. Where such procedures are not independent of the agency entrusted with the administrative decision concerned, each Party shall ensure that the procedures in fact provide for an objective and impartial review.  5. Where the number of licences available for a given activity is limited because of the scarcity of available natural resources or technical capacity, each Party shall apply a selection procedure to potential candidates which provides full guarantees of impartiality and transparency, including, in particular, adequate publicity about the launch, conduct and completion of the procedure.  6. Subject to the provisions of this Article, in establishing the rules for the selection procedure, each Party may take into account public policy objectives, including considerations of health, safety, the protection of the environment and the preservation of cultural heritage.   ARTICLE 196  Licencing and qualification procedures  1. Licencing and qualification procedures and formalities shall be clear, made public in advance and be such as to provide the applicants with a guarantee that their application will be dealt with objectively and impartially.  2. Licencing and qualification procedures and formalities shall be as simple as possible and shall not unduly complicate or delay the provision of the service. Any licencing fees(1) which the applicants may incur from their application should be reasonable and proportionate to the cost of the authorisation procedures in question. (1) Licencing fees do not include payments for auction, tendering or other non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal service provision.  3. Each party shall ensure that the decisions of and the procedures used by, the competent authority in the licencing or authorisation process are impartial with respect to all applicants. The competent authority should reach its decision in an independent manner and not be accountable to any supplier of the services for which the licence or authorisation is required.   4. Where specific time periods for applications exist, an applicant shall be allowed a reasonable period for the submission of an application. The competent authority shall initiate the processing of an application without undue delay. Where possible, applications should be accepted in electronic format under the same conditions of authenticity as paper submissions.  5. Each Party shall ensure that the processing of an application, including reaching a final decision, is completed within a reasonable timeframe from the submission of a complete application. Each Party shall endeavour to establish the normal timeframe for processing of an application.  6. The competent authority shall, within a reasonable period of time after receipt of an application which it considers incomplete, inform the applicant, to the extent feasible, identify the additional information required to complete the application, and provide the opportunity to correct deficiencies.  7. Authenticated copies should be accepted, where possible, in place of original documents.  8. If an application is rejected by the competent authority, the applicant shall be informed in writing and without undue delay. In principle, the applicant shall, upon request, also be informed of the reasons for rejection of the application and of the timeframe for an appeal against the decision.  9. Each Party shall ensure that a licence or an authorisation, once granted, enters into effect without undue delay in accordance with the terms and conditions specified therein.     SUB-SECTION 2  PROVISIONS OF GENERAL APPLICATION   ARTICLE 197  Mutual recognition  1. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from requiring that natural persons possess the necessary qualifications and/or professional experience specified in the territory where the service is supplied, for the sector of activity concerned.  2. Each Party shall encourage the relevant professional bodies to provide recommendations on mutual recognition to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, for the purpose of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, by entrepreneurs and service suppliers of the criteria applied by each Party for the authorisation, licensing, operation and certification of entrepreneurs and service suppliers and, in particular, professional services.  3. On receipt of a recommendation referred to in paragraph 2, the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration shall, within a reasonable time, review that recommendation with a view to determining whether it is consistent with this Agreement and, on the basis of the information in the recommendation, assess in particular the extent to which the standards and criteria applied by each Party for the authorisation, licences, operation and certification of services providers and entrepreneurs are converging.  4. Where those requirements are satisfied, the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration shall establish the necessary steps to negotiate. Thereafter, the Parties shall engage into negotiations, through their competent authorities, of a Mutual Recognition Agreement.  5. Any Mutual Recognition Agreement referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions of the WTO Agreement and, in particular, with Article VII of GATS.     ARTICLE 198  Transparency and disclosure of confidential information  1. Each Party shall respond promptly to all requests by the other Party for specific information on any of its measures of general application or international agreements which pertain to or affect this Agreement. Each Party shall also establish one or more enquiry points to provide specific information to entrepreneurs and services suppliers of the other Party, upon request, on all such matters. The Parties shall notify each other their enquiry points within three months after the entry into force of this Agreement. Enquiry points need not be depositories of laws and regulations.  2. Nothing in this Agreement shall require any Party to provide confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.   SUB-SECTION 3  COMPUTER SERVICES   ARTICLE 199  Understanding on computer services  1. To the extent that trade in computer services is liberalised in accordance with Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter, the Parties shall comply with the provisions of this Article.  2. CPC(1) 84, the UN code used for describing computer and related services, covers the basic functions used to provide all computer and related services: (1) CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in the Statistical Office of the UN, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991.  (a) computer programmes defined as the sets of instructions required to make computers work and communicate (including their development and implementation);  (b) data processing and storage; and  (c) related services, such as consultancy and training services for staff of clients.  Technological developments have led to the increased offering of those services as a bundle or package of related services that can include some or all of those basic functions. For example, services such as web or domain hosting, data mining services and grid computing each consist of a combination of basic computer services functions.  3. Computer and related services, regardless of whether they are delivered via a network, including the internet, include all services that provide:  (a) consulting, strategy, analysis, planning, specification, design, development, installation, implementation, integration, testing, debugging, updating, support, technical assistance, or management of or for computers or computer systems;  (b) computer programmes, defined as the sets of instructions required to make computers work and communicate (in and of themselves), and consulting, strategy, analysis, planning, specification, design, development, installation, implementation, integration, testing, debugging, updating, adaptation, maintenance, support, technical assistance, management or use of or for computer programmes;  (c) data processing, data storage, data hosting or database services;  (d) maintenance and repair services for office machinery and equipment, including computers; or  (e) training services for staff of clients, related to computer programmes, computers or computer systems, and not elsewhere classified.  4. Computer and related services enable the provision of other services (e.g. banking) by both electronic and other means. However, there is an important distinction between the enabling service (e.g. web-hosting or application hosting) and the content or core service that is being delivered electronically (e.g. banking). In such cases, the content or core service is not covered by CPC 84.     SUB-SECTION 4  POSTAL AND COURIER SERVICES   ARTICLE 200  Scope and definitions   1. This Sub-Section sets out the principles of the regulatory framework for all postal and courier service liberalised in accordance with Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter.  2. For the purposes of this Sub-Section and of Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter:  (a) a ‘licence’ means an authorisation, granted to an individual supplier by a regulatory authority, which is required before supplying a given service;  (b) ‘universal service’ means the permanent provision of a postal service of specified quality at all points in the territory of a Party at affordable prices for all users.   ARTICLE 201  Prevention of anti-competitive practices in the postal and courier sector  Appropriate measures shall be maintained or introduced for the purpose of preventing suppliers who, alone or together, have the ability to affect materially the terms of participation (having regard to price and supply) in the relevant market for postal and courier services as a result of use of their position in the market, from engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices.   ARTICLE 202  Universal service  Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligation it wishes to maintain. Such obligations will not be regarded as anti-competitive per se, provided they are administered in a transparent, non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner and are not more burdensome than necessary for the kind of universal service defined by the Party.  ARTICLE 203  Licences  1. A licence may only be required for services which are within the scope of the universal service.  2. Where a licence is required, the following shall be made publicly available:  (a) all the licensing criteria and the period of time normally required to reach a decision concerning an application for a licence; and  (b) the terms and conditions of licences.  3. The reasons for the denial of a licence shall be made known to the applicant upon request. An appeal procedure through an independent body will be established by each Party. Such a procedure will be transparent, non-discriminatory, and based on objective criteria.   ARTICLE 204  Independence of the regulatory body  The regulatory body shall be legally separate from, and not accountable to, any supplier of postal and courier services. The decisions of and the procedures used by the regulatory body shall be impartial with respect to all market participants.     SUB-SECTION 5  ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND SERVICES   ARTICLE 205  Scope and definitions  1. This Sub-Section sets out the principles of the regulatory framework for all electronic communication services liberalised pursuant to Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services), and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter.  2. For the purposes of this Sub-Section and Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services), and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter:  (a) ‘electronic communication services’ means all services which consist wholly or mainly in the conveyance of signals on electronic communication networks, including telecommunication services and transmission services in networks used for broadcasting. Those services exclude services providing, or exercising editorial control over, content transmitted using electronic communication networks and services;  (b) ‘public communication network’ means an electronic communication network used wholly or mainly for the provision of publicly available electronic communication services;  (c) ‘electronic communication network’ means transmission systems and, where applicable, switching or routing equipment and other resources which permit the conveyance of signals by wire, by radio or by optical or other electromagnetic means, including satellite networks, fixed (circuit- and packet-switched, including internet) and mobile terrestrial networks, electricity cable systems, to the extent that they are used for the purpose of transmitting signals, networks used for radio and television broadcasting, and cable television networks, irrespective of the type of information conveyed;  (d) a ‘regulatory authority’ in the electronic communication sector means the body or bodies charged with the regulation of electronic communication referred to in this Chapter;  (e) a services supplier shall be deemed to have ‘significant market power’ if, either individually or jointly with others, it enjoys a position equivalent to dominance, that is, a position of economic strength affording it the power to behave to an appreciable extent independently of competitors, customers and ultimately consumers;  (f) ‘interconnection’ means the physical and logical linking of public communication networks used by the same or a different supplier in order to allow the users of one services supplier to communicate with users of the same or another services supplier, or to access services provided by another services supplier. Services may be provided by the Parties involved or other parties who have access to the network. Interconnection is a specific type of access implemented between public network operators;  (g) ‘universal service’ means the set of services of specified quality that is made available to all users in the territory of a Party regardless of their geographical location and at an affordable price. Its scope and implementation are decided by each Party;  (h) ‘access’ means the making available of facilities and/or services to another services supplier under defined conditions, on either an exclusive or non-exclusive basis, for the purpose of providing electronic communication services. It covers, inter alia, access to network elements and associated facilities, which may involve the connection of equipment, by fixed or non-fixed means (this includes, in particular, access to the local loop and to facilities and services necessary to provide services over the local loop); access to physical infrastructure including buildings, ducts, and masts; access to relevant software systems including operational support systems; access to numbering translation or systems offering equivalent functionality; access to fixed and mobile networks, in particular for roaming; access to conditional access systems for digital televisions services; and access to virtual network services;  (i) ‘end-user’ means a user not providing public communication networks or publicly available electronic communication services;  (j) ‘local loop’ means the physical circuit connecting the network termination point at the subscriber’s premises to the main distribution frame or equivalent facility in the fixed public communication network.   ARTICLE 206  Regulatory authority  1. Each Party shall ensure that regulatory authorities for electronic communication services shall be legally distinct and functionally independent from any supplier of electronic communication services. If a Party retains ownership or control of a supplier providing electronic communication networks or services, such Party shall ensure the effective structural separation of the regulatory function from activities associated with ownership or control.   2. Each Party shall ensure that the regulatory authority shall be sufficiently empowered to regulate the sector. The tasks to be undertaken by a regulatory authority shall be made public in an easily accessible and clear form, in particular where those tasks are assigned to more than one body.  3. Each Party shall ensure that the decisions of, and the procedures used by the regulatory authorities are impartial with respect to all market participants and transparent.  4. The regulatory authority shall have the power to carry out an analysis of relevant product and service markets susceptible to an ex ante regulation. Where the regulatory authority is required to determine under Article 208 of this Agreement whether to impose, maintain, amend or withdraw obligations it shall determine on the basis of a market analysis whether the relevant market is effectively competitive.  5. Where the regulatory authority determines that a relevant market is not effectively competitive, it shall identify and designate services suppliers with significant market power on that market and shall impose, maintain or amend specific regulatory obligations referred to in Article 208 of this Agreement, as appropriate. Where the regulatory authority concludes that the market is effectively competitive it shall not impose or maintain any of the regulatory obligations referred to in Article 208 of this Agreement.  6. Each Party shall ensure that a services supplier affected by the decision of a regulatory authority shall have a right to appeal against that decision to an appeal body that is independent of the parties involved in the decision. Each Party shall ensure that the merits of the case are duly taken into account. Pending the outcome of any such appeal, the decision of the regulatory authority shall stand, unless the appeal body decides otherwise. Where the appeal body is not judicial in character, written reasons for its decision shall always be given and its decisions shall also be subject to review by an impartial and independent judicial authority. Decisions taken by appeal bodies shall be effectively enforced.  7. Each Party shall ensure that where the regulatory authorities intend to take measures related to any of the provisions of this Sub-Section and which have a significant impact to the relevant market, they give the interested parties the opportunity to comment on the draft measure within a reasonable period of time. Regulatory authorities shall publish their consultation procedures. The results of the consultation procedure shall be made publicly available except in the case of confidential information.   8. Each Party shall ensure that suppliers providing electronic communication networks and services provide all the information, including financial information, necessary for regulatory authorities to ensure conformity with the provisions of this Sub-Section or decisions made in accordance with this Sub-Section. Those suppliers shall provide that information promptly, on request and in accordance with the timelines and level of detail required by the regulatory authority. The information requested by the regulatory authority shall be proportionate to the performance of that task. The regulatory authority shall give the reasons justifying its request for information.   ARTICLE 207  Authorisation to provide electronic communication services  1. Each Party shall ensure that the provision of services shall, as much as possible, be authorised following mere notification.  2. Each Party shall ensure that a licence can be required to address issues of attributions of numbers and frequencies. The terms and conditions for such licences shall be made publicly available.  3. Each Party shall ensure that where a licence is required:  (a) all the licensing criteria and a reasonable period of time normally required to reach a decision concerning an application for a licence shall be made publicly available;  (b) the reasons for the denial of a licence shall be made known in writing to the applicant upon request;  (c) the applicant shall be able to seek recourse before an appeal body in case a licence is unduly denied; and  (d) licence fees(1) required by any Party for granting a licence shall not exceed the administrative costs normally incurred in the management, control and enforcement of the applicable licences. Licence fees for the use of radio spectrum and numbering resources are not subject to the requirements of this paragraph. (1) Licence fees do not include payments for auction, tendering or other non-discriminatory means of awarding concessions, or mandated contributions to universal service provision.     ARTICLE 208  Access and interconnection  1. Each Party shall ensure that any services suppliers authorised to provide electronic communication services shall have the right and obligation to negotiate access and interconnection with suppliers of publicly available electronic communication networks and services. Access and interconnection should, in principle, be agreed on the basis of commercial negotiation between the services suppliers concerned.  2. Each Party shall ensure that services suppliers that acquire information from another supplier during the process of negotiating interconnection arrangements use that information solely for the purpose for which it was supplied and respect at all times the confidentiality of information transmitted or stored.  3. Each Party shall ensure that upon the finding in accordance with Article 206 of this Agreement that a relevant market is not effectively competitive, the regulatory authority shall have the power to impose on the supplier designated as having significant market power one or more of the following obligations in relation to interconnection and/or access:  (a) obligation on non-discrimination to ensure that the operator applies equivalent conditions in equivalent circumstances to other suppliers providing equivalent services, and provides services and information to others under the same conditions and of the same quality as it provides for its own services or those of its subsidiaries or partners;  (b) obligation of a vertically integrated company to make transparent its wholesale prices and its internal transfer prices, where there is a requirement for non-discrimination or for prevention of unfair cross-subsidy. The regulatory authority may specify the format and accounting methodology to be used;  (c) obligations to meet reasonable requests for access to, and use of, specific network elements and associated facilities, including unbundled access to the local loop, inter alia, in situations where the regulatory authority considers that denial of access or unreasonable terms and conditions having a similar effect would hinder the emergence of a sustainable competitive market at the retail level or would not be in the end user’s interest.  Regulatory authorities may attach conditions covering fairness, reasonableness and timeliness to the obligations included under this point;  (d) to provide specified services on a wholesale basis for resale by third parties; to grant open access to technical interfaces, protocols or other key technologies that are indispensable for the interoperability of services or virtual network services; to provide co-location or other forms of facility sharing, including duct, building or mast sharing; to provide specified services needed to ensure interoperability of end-to-end services to users, including facilities for intelligent network services; to provide access to operational support systems or similar software systems necessary to ensure fair competition in the provision of services; and to interconnect networks or network facilities.  Regulatory authorities may attach conditions covering fairness, reasonableness and timeliness to the obligations included under this point;  (e) obligations relating to cost recovery and price controls, including obligations for cost orientation of prices and obligations concerning cost accounting systems, for the provision of specific types of interconnection and/or access, in situations where a market analysis indicates that a lack of effective competition means that the operator concerned might sustain prices at an excessively high level, or apply a price squeeze, to the detriment of end-users.  Regulatory authorities shall take into account the investment made by the operator and allow him a reasonable rate of return on adequate capital employed, taking into account the risks involved;  (f) to publish the specific obligations imposed on services suppliers by the regulatory authority identifying the specific product/service and geographical markets. Up-to-date information, provided that it is not confidential and it does not comprise business secrets is made publicly available in a manner that guarantees all interested parties easy access to that information;  (g) obligations for transparency requiring operators to make public specified information; in particular, where an operator has obligations of non-discrimination, the regulatory authority may require that operator to publish a reference offer, which shall be sufficiently unbundled to ensure that services suppliers are not required to pay for facilities which are not necessary for the service requested, giving a description of the relevant offerings broken down into components according to market needs, and the associated terms and conditions, including prices.  4. Each Party shall ensure that a service supplier requesting interconnection with a supplier designated as having significant market power shall have recourse, either at any time or after a reasonable period of time which has been made publicly known, to an independent domestic body, which may be a regulatory body as referred to in Article 205(2)(d) of this Agreement to resolve disputes regarding terms and conditions for interconnection and/or access.     ARTICLE 209  Scarce resources  1. Each Party shall ensure that any procedures for the allocation and use of scarce resources, including frequencies, numbers and rights of way, shall be carried out in an objective, proportionate, timely, transparent and non-discriminatory manner. The current state of allocated frequency bands shall be made publicly available, but detailed identification of frequencies allocated for specific government uses is not required.  2. Each Party shall ensure the effective management of radio frequencies for electronic communication services in their territory with a view to ensuring effective and efficient use of the spectrum. Where demand for specific frequencies exceeds their availability, appropriate and transparent procedures shall be followed for the assignment of those frequencies in order to optimise their use and facilitate the development of competition.  3. Each Party shall ensure that the assignment of national numbering resources and the management of the national numbering plans are entrusted to the regulatory authority.  4. Where public or local authorities retain ownership or control of suppliers operating public communication networks and/or services, effective structural separation needs to be ensured between the function responsible for granting the rights of way from activities associated with ownership or control.   ARTICLE 210  Universal service  1. Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligations it wishes to maintain.  2. Such obligations will not be regarded as anti-competitive per se, provided they are administered in a transparent, objective and non-discriminatory way. The administration of such obligations shall also be neutral with respect to competition and shall not be more burdensome than necessary for the kind of universal service defined by the Party.   3. Each Party shall ensure that all suppliers are eligible to ensure universal service and no services supplier is excluded a priori. The designation shall be made through an efficient, transparent, objective and non-discriminatory mechanism. Where necessary, each Party shall assess whether the provision of universal service represents an unfair burden on organisation(s) designated to provide universal service. Where justified on the basis of such calculation, and taking into account the market benefit, if any, which accrues to an organisation that offers universal service, regulatory authorities shall determine whether a mechanism is required to compensate the services supplier(s) concerned or to share the net cost of universal service obligations.   ARTICLE 211  Cross-border provision of electronic communication services  Neither Party may require a service supplier of the other Party to set up an establishment, to establish any form of presence, or to be resident in its territory as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.   ARTICLE 212  Confidentiality of information  Each Party shall ensure the confidentiality of electronic communications and related traffic data by means of a public communication network and publicly available electronic communication services without restricting trade in services.   ARTICLE 213  Disputes between services suppliers  1. Each Party shall ensure that in the event of a dispute arising between suppliers of electronic communication networks or services in connection with rights and obligations referred to in this Chapter, the regulatory authority concerned shall, at the request of either party, issue a binding decision to resolve the dispute in the shortest possible timeframe and in any case within four months.  2. The decision of the regulatory authority shall be made available to the public, having regard to the requirements of business confidentiality. The service suppliers concerned shall be given a full statement of the reasons on which it is based.  3. When such a dispute concerns the cross-border provision of services, the regulatory authorities concerned shall coordinate their efforts in order to bring about a resolution of the dispute.  SUB-SECTION 6  FINANCIAL SERVICES   ARTICLE 214  Scope and definition  1. This section sets out the principles of the regulatory framework for all financial services liberalised pursuant to Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter.  2. For the purposes of this Sub-Section and of Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter:  (a) ‘financial service’ means any service of a financial nature offered by a financial service supplier of a Party. Financial services comprise the following activities: (i) insurance and insurance-related services: (1) direct insurance (including co-insurance): (a) life; (b) non-life; (2) reinsurance and retrocession; (3) insurance inter-mediation, such as brokerage and agency; and (4) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment and claim settlement services; (ii) banking and other financial services (excluding insurance): (1) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public; (2) lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring and financing of commercial transaction; (3) financial leasing; (4) all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and debit cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts; (5) guarantees and commitments; (6) trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following:                (a) money market instruments (including cheques, bills, certificates of deposits);  (b) foreign exchange;  (c) derivative products including, but not limited to, futures and options;  (d) exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as swaps and forward rate agreements;  (e) transferable securities;  (f) other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion; (7) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of services related to such issues; (8) money broking; (9) asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial, depository and trust services; (10) settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments; (11) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software; (12) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities listed in points (1) to (11), including credit reference and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy;        (b) ‘financial service supplier’ means any natural or juridical person of a Party that seeks to provide or provides financial services. The term ‘financial service supplier’ does not include a public entity;  (c) ‘public entity’ means: (i) a government, a central bank or a monetary and financial authority, of a Party, or an entity owned or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in carrying out governmental functions or activities for governmental purposes, not including an entity principally engaged in supplying financial services on commercial terms; or (ii) a private entity, performing functions normally performed by a central bank or monetary and financial authority, when exercising those functions;    (d) ‘new financial service’ means a service of a financial nature, including services related to existing and new products or the manner in which a product is delivered, that is not supplied by any financial service supplier in the territory of a Party but which is supplied in the territory of the other Party.   ARTICLE 215  Prudential carve-out  1. Each Party may adopt or maintain measures for prudential reasons, such as:  (a) the protection of investors, depositors, policy-holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial service supplier; and  (b) ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party’s financial system.  2. Those measures shall not be more burdensome than necessary to achieve their aim.  3. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to disclose information relating to the affairs and accounts of individual consumers or any confidential or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.   ARTICLE 216  Effective and transparent regulation  1. Each Party shall make its best endeavours to provide in advance to all interested persons any measure of general application that the Party proposes to adopt in order to allow an opportunity for such persons to comment on the measure. Such measure shall be provided:  (a) by means of an official publication; or  (b) in other written or electronic form.  2. Each Party shall make available to interested persons its requirements for completing applications relating to the supply of financial services.  On the request of an applicant, the concerned Party shall inform the applicant of the status of its application. If the concerned Party requires additional information from the applicant, it shall notify the applicant without undue delay.  3. Each Party shall make its best endeavours to ensure that internationally agreed standards for regulation and supervision in the financial services sector and for the fight against tax evasion and avoidance are implemented and applied in its territory. Such internationally agreed standards are, inter alia, the ‘Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision’ of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors’ ‘Insurance Core Principles’, the International Organisation of Securities Commissions’ Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation, the ‘Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters’ of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the G20’s ‘Statement on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes’ and the Financial Action Task Force’s ‘Forty Recommendations’ on money laundering and ‘Nine Special Recommendations’ on terrorist financing.  The Parties also take note of the ‘Ten Key Principles for Information Exchange’, promulgated by the G7 Finance Ministers, and will take all steps necessary to try to apply them in their bilateral contacts.     ARTICLE 217  New financial services  Each Party shall permit a financial service supplier of the other Party to provide any new financial service of a type similar to those services that the Party would permit its own financial service suppliers to provide under its domestic law in like circumstances. A Party may determine the juridical form through which the service may be provided and may require authorisation for the provision of the service. Where such authorisation is required, a decision shall be made within a reasonable time and the authorisation may only be refused for prudential reasons.   ARTICLE 218  Data processing  Each Party shall permit a financial service supplier of the other Party to transfer information in electronic or other form, into and out of its territory, for data processing where such processing is required in the ordinary course of business of such financial service supplier.   ARTICLE 219  Specific exceptions  1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party, including its public entities, from exclusively conducting or providing in its territory activities or services forming part of a public retirement plan or statutory system of social security, except when those activities may be carried out, as provided by the Party's domestic regulation, by financial service suppliers in competition with public entities or private institutions.  2. Nothing in this Agreement applies to activities conducted by a central bank or monetary authority or by any other public entity in pursuit of monetary or exchange rate policies.  3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party, including its public entities, from exclusively conducting or providing in its territory activities or services for the account, or with the guarantee, or using the financial resources, of the Party or its public entities.     ARTICLE 220  Self-regulatory organisations  When a Party requires membership or participation in, or access to, any self-regulatory body, securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or any other organisation or association, in order for financial service suppliers of the other Party to supply financial services on an equal basis with financial service suppliers of the Party, or when the Party provides such entities, directly or indirectly, with privileges or advantages in supplying financial services, the Party shall ensure observance of the obligations of Article 180(1) and Article 186 of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 221  Clearing and payment systems  Under the terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each Party shall grant to financial service suppliers of the other Party established in its territory access to payment and clearing systems operated by public entities, and to official funding and refinancing facilities available in the normal course of ordinary business. This Article does not confer access to the Party’s lender of last resort facilities.   ARTICLE 222  International standards  Each Party recognises the importance of alignment of existing and future legislation with international best practice standards listed under Article 216(3) of this Agreement.     SUB-SECTION 7 TRANSPORT SERVICES Article 223 Scope This Section sets out the principles regarding the liberalisation of international transport services pursuant to Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) and Section 4 (Temporary Presence of Natural Persons for Business Purposes) of this Chapter. ARTICLE 224 International maritime transport  1. For the purposes of this Sub-Section and Section 2 (Establishment), Section 3 (Cross-border supply of services) and Section 4 (Temporary presence of natural persons for business purposes) of this Chapter:  (a) ‘international maritime transport’ includes door -to -door and multi-modal transport operations, which is the carriage of goods using more than one mode of transport, involving a sea-leg, under a single transport document, and to that effect the right to directly contract with providers of other modes of transport;  (b) ‘maritime cargo handling services’ means activities exercised by stevedore companies, including terminal operators, but not including the direct activities of dockers, when that workforce is organised independently of the stevedoring or terminal operator companies. The activities covered include the organisation and supervision of:  (i) the loading/discharging of cargo to/from a ship; (ii) the lashing/unlashing of cargo; and (iii) the reception/delivery and safekeeping of cargoes before shipment or after discharge;    (c) ‘customs clearance services’ (alternatively ‘customs house brokers' services’) means activities consisting in carrying out on behalf of another Party customs formalities concerning import, export or through transport of cargoes, whether that service is the main activity of the service provider or a usual complement of its main activity;  (d) ‘container station and depot services’ means activities consisting in storing containers, whether in port areas or inland, with a view to their stuffing/stripping, repairing and making them available for shipments;  (e) ‘maritime agency services’ means activities consisting in representing, within a given geographic area, as an agent the business interests of one or more shipping lines or shipping companies, for the following purposes: (i) marketing and sales of maritime transport and related services, from quotation to invoicing, and issuance of bills of lading on behalf of the companies, acquisition and resale of the necessary related services, preparation of documentation, and provision of business information; (ii) acting on behalf of the companies organising the call of the ship or taking over cargoes when required;    (f) ‘freight forwarding services’ means the activity consisting of organising and monitoring shipment operations on behalf of shippers, through the acquisition of transport and related services, preparation of documentation and provision of business information;  (g) ‘feeder services’ means the pre- and onward transportation of international cargoes by sea, notably containerised, between ports located in a Party.  2. As regards international maritime transport, each Party agrees to ensure effective application of the principle of unrestricted access to cargoes on a commercial basis, the freedom to provide international maritime services, as well as national treatment in the framework of the provision of such services.  In view of the existing levels of liberalisation between the Parties in international maritime transport:  (a) each Party shall apply effectively the principle of unrestricted access to the international maritime markets and trades on a commercial and non-discriminatory basis;  (b) each Party shall grant to ships flying the flag of the other Party, or operated by service suppliers of the other Party, treatment no less favourable than that accorded to its own ships or those of any third country, whichever is the better, with regard to, inter alia, access to ports, the use of infrastructure and services of ports, and the use of maritime auxiliary services, as well as related fees and charges, customs facilities and the assignment of berths and facilities for loading and unloading.   3. In applying those principles, the Parties shall:  (a) not introduce cargo-sharing arrangements in future agreements with third countries concerning maritime transport services, including dry and liquid bulk and liner trade, and terminate, within a reasonable period of time, such cargo-sharing arrangements in case they exist in previous agreements; and  (b) upon the entry into force of this Agreement, abolish and abstain from introducing any unilateral measures and administrative, technical and other obstacles which could constitute a disguised restriction or have discriminatory effects on the free supply of services in international maritime transport.  4. Each Party shall permit international maritime transport service suppliers of the other Party to have an establishment in its territory under conditions of establishment and operation no less favourable than those accorded to its own service suppliers or those of any third country, whichever are the better.  5. Each Party shall make available to maritime transport service suppliers of the other Party on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions the following services at the port: pilotage, towing and tug assistance, provisioning, fuelling and watering, garbage collecting and ballast waste disposal, port captain’s services, navigation aids, shore-based operational services essential to ship operations, including communications, water and electrical supplies, emergency repair facilities, anchorage, berth and berthing services.  6. Each Party shall permit the movement of equipment such as empty containers, not being carried as cargo against payment, between ports of the UK or between ports of the Republic of Moldova.  7. Each Party, subject to the authorisation of the competent authority, shall permit international maritime transport service suppliers of the other Party to provide feeder services between their national ports.   ARTICLE 225  Air transport  The progressive liberalisation of air transport between the Parties adapted to their reciprocal commercial needs and the conditions of mutual market access shall be dealt with by an agreement or arrangement governing air services between the Republic of Moldova and the United Kingdom.     SECTION 6  ELECTRONIC COMMERCE   SUB-SECTION 1  GENERAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 226  Objective and principles  1. The Parties, recognising that electronic commerce increases trade opportunities in many sectors, agree to promote the development of electronic commerce between them, in particular by cooperating on the issues raised by electronic commerce under the provisions of this Chapter.  2. The Parties agree that the development of electronic commerce must be fully compatible with the highest international standards of data protection, in order to ensure the confidence of users of electronic commerce.  3. The Parties agree that electronic transmissions shall be considered as the provision of services, within the meaning of Section 3 (Cross-border Supply of Services) of this Chapter, which cannot be subject to customs duties.   ARTICLE 227  Cooperation in electronic commerce  1. The Parties shall maintain a dialogue on regulatory issues raised by electronic commerce, which will address, inter alia, the following issues:  (a) the recognition of certificates of electronic signatures issued to the public and the facilitation of cross-border certification services;  (b) the liability of intermediary service providers with respect to the transmission or storage of information;  (c) the treatment of unsolicited electronic commercial communications;  (d) the protection of consumers in the ambit of electronic commerce; and  (e) any other issue relevant for the development of electronic commerce.   2. Such cooperation can take the form of exchange of information on the Parties’ respective legislation on those issues as well as on the implementation of such legislation.     SUB-SECTION 2  LIABILITY OF INTERMEDIARY SERVICE PROVIDERS   ARTICLE 228  Use of intermediaries’ services  1. The Parties recognise that the services of intermediaries can be used by third parties for infringing activities and shall provide the measures set out in this Sub-Section in respect of intermediary service providers.  2. For the purposes of Article 229 of this Agreement, ‘service provider’ means a provider of transmission, routing, or connections for digital online communication between or among points specified by the user, of material of the user’s choice without modifying its content. For the purposes of Articles 230 and 231 of this Agreement, ‘service provider’ means a provider or operator of facilities for online services or network access.   ARTICLE 229  Liability of intermediary service providers: ‘mere conduit’  1. Where an information society service is provided that consists of the transmission in a communication network of information provided by a recipient of the service, or the provision of access to a communication network, each Party shall ensure that the service provider is not liable for the information transmitted, on condition that the provider:  (a) does not initiate the transmission;  (b) does not select the receiver of the transmission; and  (c) does not select or modify the information contained in the transmission.  2. The acts of transmission and of provision of access referred to in paragraph 1 include the automatic, intermediate and transient storage of the information transmitted in so far as it takes place for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission in the communication network, and provided that the information is not stored for any period longer than is reasonably necessary for the transmission.  3. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or administrative authority, in accordance with the Parties’ legal systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or prevent an infringement.   ARTICLE 230  Liability of intermediary service providers: ‘caching’  1. Where an information society service is provided that consists of the transmission in a communication network of information provided by a recipient of the service, each Party shall ensure that the service provider is not liable for the automatic, intermediate and temporary storage of that information, performed for the sole purpose of making more efficient the onward transmission of the information to other recipients of the service upon their request, on condition that:  (a) the provider does not modify the information;  (b) the provider complies with conditions on access to the information;  (c) the provider complies with rules regarding the updating of the information, specified in a manner widely recognised and used by industry;  (d) the provider does not interfere with the lawful use of technology, widely recognised and used by industry, to obtain data on the use of the information; and  (e) the provider acts expeditiously to remove or to disable access to the information it has stored upon obtaining actual knowledge of the fact that the information at the initial source of the transmission has been removed from the network, or access to it has been disabled, or that a court or an administrative authority has ordered such removal or disablement.  2. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or administrative authority, in accordance with the Parties’ legal systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or prevent an infringement.   ARTICLE 231  Liability of intermediary service providers: ‘hosting’  1. Where an information society service is provided that consists of the storage of information provided by a recipient of the service, each Party shall ensure that the service provider is not liable for the information stored at the request of a recipient of the service, on condition that:  (a) the provider does not have actual knowledge of illegal activity or information and, as regards claims for damages, is not aware of facts or circumstances from which the illegal activity or information is apparent; or  (b) the provider, upon obtaining such knowledge or awareness, acts expeditiously to remove or to disable access to the information.  2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply when the recipient of the service is acting under the authority or the control of the provider.  3. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or administrative authority, in accordance with the Parties’ legal systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or prevent an infringement, nor does it affect the possibility for the Parties of establishing procedures governing the removal or disabling of access to information.   ARTICLE 232  No general obligation to monitor  1. The Parties shall not impose a general obligation on providers, when  providing  the  services  covered  by Articles 229, 230 and 231 of this Agreement, to monitor the information which they transmit or store, nor shall they impose a general obligation to actively seek facts or circumstances indicating illegal activity.  2. A Party may establish obligations for information society service providers to promptly inform the competent public authorities of alleged illegal activities undertaken or information provided by recipients of their service or obligations to communicate to the competent authorities, at their request, information enabling the identification of recipients of their service with whom they have storage agreements.     SECTION 7  EXCEPTIONS   ARTICLE 233  General exceptions  1. Without prejudice to general exceptions set in Article 379 of this Agreement, the provisions of this Chapter and of Annexes XI-A and XI-E, XI-B and XI-F, XI-C and XI-G, XI-D and XI-H to this Agreement are subject to the exceptions provided for in this Article.  2. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on establishment or cross-border supply of services, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by any Party of measures:  (a) necessary to protect public security or public morals or to maintain public order;  (b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;  (c) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are applied in conjunction with restrictions on domestic entrepreneurs or on the domestic supply or consumption of services;  (d) necessary for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value;  (e) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, including those relating to: (i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or dealing with the effects of a default on contracts; (ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality of individual records and accounts; (iii) safety;      (f) inconsistent with Articles 180(1) and 186 of this Agreement, provided that the difference in treatment is aimed at ensuring the effective or equitable imposition or collection of direct taxes in respect of economic activities, entrepreneurs or services suppliers of the other Party(1). (1) Measures that are aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective imposition or collection of direct taxes include measures taken by a Party under its taxation system which: (a) apply to non-resident entrepreneurs and services suppliers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation of non-residents is (b) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the Party's territory; (c) apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes, including compliance measures; (d) apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of another Party in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources in the Party's territory; (e) distinguish entrepreneurs and service suppliers subject to tax on worldwide taxable items from other entrepreneurs and service (f) determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of resident persons or branches, or between related persons or branches of the same person, in order to safeguard the Party's tax base. determined with respect to taxable items sourced or located in the Party's territory; suppliers, in recognition of the difference in the nature of the tax base between them; or Tax terms or concepts referred to in point (f) of this paragraph and in this footnote are determined according to tax definitions and concepts, or equivalent or similar definitions and concepts, under the domestic law of the Party taking the measure.   3. The provisions of this Chapter and of Annexes XI-A and XI-E, XI-B and XI-F, XI-C and XI-G, XI-D and XI-H to this Agreement shall not apply to the Parties' respective social security systems or to activities in the territory of each Party which are connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of official authority. (a)  treatment granted under measures providing for recognition of qualifications, licences, or prudential measures in accordance with Article VII of GATS or its Annex on Financial Services;    ARTICLE 234  Recognition and Taxation measures  The most-favoured-nation treatment granted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:   (b)  the tax treatment granted under any international agreement or arrangement relating wholly or mainly to taxation.      ARTICLE 235  Security exceptions  Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:  (a) require any Party to furnish any information, the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;  (b) prevent any Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests: (i) connected with the production of, or trade, in arms, munitions or war materiel; (ii) relating to economic activities carried out directly or indirectly for the purpose of provisioning a military establishment; (iii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; or (iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or      (c) prevent any Party from taking any action in pursuance of obligations it has accepted for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.   CHAPTER 7  CURRENT PAYMENTS AND MOVEMENT OF CAPITAL   ARTICLE 236  Current payments  The Parties undertake to authorise, in freely convertible currency, in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, any payments and transfers on the current account of balance of payments between the Parties.   ARTICLE 237  Capital movements  1. With regard to transactions on the capital and financial account of balance of payments, from 1st September 2014, the Parties shall ensure the free movement of capital relating to direct investments, including the acquisition of real estate, made in accordance with the laws of the host country, investments made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6 (Establishment, Trade in Services and Electronic Commerce) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, and the liquidation or repatriation of invested capital and of any profit stemming therefrom.  2. With regard to transactions on the capital and financial account of balance of payments other than the transactions listed in paragraph 1, from 1st September 2014, each Party shall ensure, without prejudice to other provisions of this Agreement,  (a) the free movement of capital relating to credits for commercial transactions or for the provision of services in which a resident of one of the Parties is participating; and  (b) the free movement of capital relating to portfolio investments, financial loans and credits by the investors of the other Party.     ARTICLE 238  Safeguard measures  Where, in exceptional circumstances, payments or movements of capital cause, or threaten to cause, serious difficulties for the operation of exchange rate policy or monetary policy, including serious balance of payments difficulties, in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova, the Parties concerned may take safeguard measures for a period not exceeding six months if such measures are strictly necessary. The Party adopting the safeguard measure shall inform the other Party forthwith of the adoption of any safeguard measure and, as soon as possible, of a time schedule for its removal.   ARTICLE 239  Facilitation and evolution provisions  The Parties shall consult with a view to facilitating the movement of capital between the Parties in order to promote the objectives of this Agreement. CHAPTER 8  PUBLIC PROCUREMENT   ARTICLE 240  Objectives  1. The Parties recognise the contribution of transparent, non-discriminatory, competitive and open tendering to sustainable economic development and set as their objective the effective, reciprocal and gradual opening of their respective procurement markets.  2. This Chapter envisages mutual access to public procurement markets on the basis of the principle of national treatment at national, regional and local level for public contracts and concessions in the public sector as well as in the utilities sector.   ARTICLE 241  Scope  1. This Chapter applies to works, supplies and services public contracts, as well as works, supplies and service contracts in the utilities sectors and works and services concessions.  2. This Chapter applies to any contracting authority and any contracting entity which meets the definitions of the UK or the Republic of Moldova public procurement domestic law (hereinafter referred to as the ‘contracting entities’). It also covers bodies governed by public law and public undertakings in the field of utilities, such as state-owned enterprises carrying out the relevant activities, and private undertakings operating on the basis of special and exclusive rights in the field of utilities.  3. This Chapter applies to contracts above value thresholds set out in Annex XII-A to this Agreement.  4. The calculation of the estimated value of a public contract shall be based on the total amount payable, net of taxes on value added. When applying those thresholds, the Republic of Moldova will calculate and convert contract values into its national currency, using the conversion rate of its National Bank.   5. Value thresholds shall be revised regularly every two years, beginning in the first even year following the entry into force of this Agreement, based on the average daily value of the euro, expressed in Special Drawing Rights, over the 24 month period terminating on the last day of August preceding the revision, with effect from January 1. The value of the thresholds thus revised shall, where necessary, be rounded down to nearest thousand euro. The revision of the thresholds shall be adopted by decision of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 242  Institutional background  1. Each Party shall establish or maintain an appropriate institutional framework and mechanisms necessary for the proper functioning of the public procurement system and the implementation of the provisions of this Chapter.  2. The Republic of Moldova shall designate in particular:  (a) an executive body responsible for economic policy at central government level tasked with guaranteeing a coherent policy in all areas related to public procurement. Such a body shall facilitate and coordinate the implementation of this Chapter;  (b) an impartial and independent body tasked with the review of decisions taken by contracting authorities or entities during the award of contracts. In that context, ‘independent’ means that that body shall be a public authority which is separate from all contracting entities and economic operators. There shall be a possibility to subject the decisions taken by that body to judicial review.  3. Each Party shall ensure that decisions taken by the authorities responsible for the review of complaints by economic operators concerning infringements of domestic law shall be effectively enforced.   ARTICLE 243  Basic standards regulating the award of contracts  1. The Parties shall comply with a set of basic standards for the award of all contracts as stipulated in paragraphs 2 to 15. Those basic standards derive directly from the rules and principles of public procurement, including the principles of non-discrimination, equal treatment, transparency and proportionality.     Publication  2. Each Party shall ensure that all intended procurements are published in an appropriate medium in a manner that is sufficient to:  (a) enable the market to be opened up to competition; and  (b) allow any interested economic operator to have appropriate access to information regarding the intended procurement prior to the award of the contract and to express its interest in obtaining the contract.  3. The publication shall be appropriate to the economic interest of the contract to economic operators.  4. The publication shall contain at least the essential details of the contract to be awarded, the criteria for qualitative selection, the award method, the contract award criteria and any other additional information that the economic operators reasonably need to decide on whether to express their interest in obtaining the contract.   Award of contracts  5. All contracts shall be awarded through transparent and impartial award procedures that prevent corrupt practices. That impartiality shall be ensured in particular through the non-discriminatory description of the subject matter of the contract, equal access for all economic operators, appropriate time-limits and a transparent and objective approach.  6. When describing the characteristics of the required work, supply or service, the contracting entities shall use general descriptions of performance and functions and international or national standards.  7. The description of the characteristics required of a work, supply or service shall not refer to a specific make or source, or a particular process, or to trademarks, patents, types or a specific origin or production unless such a reference is justified by the subject matter of the contract and accompanied by the words ‘or equivalent’. Preference shall be given to the use of general descriptions of performance or functions.  8. Contracting entities shall not impose conditions resulting in direct or indirect discrimination against the economic operators of the other Party, such as the requirement that economic operators interested in the contract are required to be established in the same country, region or territory as the contracting entity.  Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, in cases where it is justified by the specific circumstances of the contract, the successful applicant may be required to establish certain business infrastructure at the place of performance.  9. The time-limits for expression of interest and for submission of offers shall be sufficiently long to allow economic operators from the other Party to make a meaningful assessment of the tender and prepare their offer.  10. All participants are required to know the applicable rules, selection criteria and award criteria in advance. Those rules must apply equally to all participants.  11. Contracting entities may invite a limited number of applicants to submit an offer, provided that:  (a) it is done in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner; and  (b) the selection is based only on objective factors such as the experience of the applicants in the sector concerned, the size and infrastructure of their businesses or their technical and professional abilities.  In inviting a limited number of applicants to submit an offer, account shall be taken of the need to ensure adequate competition.  12. Contracting entities may use negotiated procedures only in exceptional and defined cases when the use of such a procedure effectively does not distort competition.  13. Contracting entities may use qualification systems only under the condition that the list of qualified operators is compiled by means of a sufficiently advertised, transparent and open procedure. Contracts falling within the scope of such a system shall be awarded also on a non-discriminatory basis.  14. Each Party shall ensure that contracts are awarded in a transparent manner to the applicant who has submitted the economically most advantageous offer or the offer with the lowest price, based on the tender criteria and the procedural rules established and communicated in advance. The final decisions shall be communicated to all applicants without undue delay. Upon request of an unsuccessful applicant, reasons must be provided in sufficient detail to allow the review of such a decision.   Judicial protection  15. Each Party shall ensure that any person having or having had an interest in obtaining a particular contract and who has been, or risks being, harmed by an alleged infringement is entitled to effective, impartial judicial protection against any decision of the contracting entity related to the award of that contract. The decisions taken in the course and at the end of such review procedure shall be made public in a manner that is sufficient to inform all interested economic operators.   ARTICLE 244  Market access  1. The Parties agree that the effective and reciprocal opening of their respective markets shall be attained gradually and simultaneously.   2. In so far as a Party has, according to Annex XII-B to this Agreement, opened its procurement market to the other Party:  (a) the UK shall grant access to contract award procedures to companies of the Republic of Moldova, whether established or not in the UK, pursuant to national public procurement rules under treatment no less favourable than that accorded to UK companies;  (b) the Republic of Moldova shall grant access to contract award procedures for UK companies, whether established or not in the Republic of Moldova, pursuant to national procurement rules under treatment no less favourable than that accorded to companies of the Republic of Moldova.  3. The Parties will examine the possibility to grant mutual market access with regard to procurements below the value thresholds set out in Annex XII-A to this Agreement.   ARTICLE 245  Information  1. Each Party shall ensure that contracting entities and economic operators are appropriately informed about public procurement procedures, including through the publication of all relevant legislation and administrative rulings.  2. Each Party shall ensure the effective dissemination of information on tendering opportunities.     ARTICLE 246  Cooperation  1. The Parties shall enhance their cooperation through exchanges of experience and information relating to their best practices and regulatory frameworks.  2. The UK shall facilitate the implementation of this Chapter, including through technical assistance where appropriate. In line with the provisions in Articles 5 and 6 of this Agreement, specific decisions on financial assistance shall be taken through the relevant UK funding mechanisms and instruments.  3. An indicative list of issues for cooperation is included in Annex XII-C to this Agreement.    CHAPTER 9  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS   SECTION 1  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PRINCIPLES   ARTICLE 247  Objectives  The objectives of this Chapter are to:  (a) facilitate the production and commercialisation of innovative and creative products between the Parties; and  (b) achieve an adequate and effective level of protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights.   ARTICLE 248  Nature and scope of obligations  1. The Parties shall ensure the adequate and effective implementation of the international agreements dealing with intellectual property to which they are parties, including the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the TRIPS Agreement). The provisions of this Chapter shall complement and further specify the rights and obligations between the Parties under the TRIPS Agreement and other international agreements in the field of intellectual property.  2. For the purposes of this Agreement, the expression ‘intellectual property’ refers at least to all categories of intellectual property covered by Articles 250 to 287 of this Agreement.  3. Protection of intellectual property includes protection against unfair competition as referred to in Article 10bis of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of 1967 (the Paris Convention).   ARTICLE 249  Exhaustion  The Parties shall be free to establish their own regime for exhaustion of intellectual property rights, subject to the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement.     SECTION 2  STANDARDS CONCERNING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS   SUB-SECTION 1  COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS   ARTICLE 250  Protection granted  The Parties shall comply with the rights and obligations set out in the following international agreements:  (a) the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (the Berne Convention);  (b) the International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations of 1961;  (c) the TRIPS Agreement;  (d) the WIPO Copyright Treaty; and  (e) the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty.   ARTICLE 251  Authors  Each Party shall provide for authors the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit:  (a) the direct or indirect, temporary or permanent, reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or in part, of their works;  (b) any form of distribution to the public by sale or otherwise of the original of their works or of copies thereof; and  (c) any communication to the public of their works, by wire or wireless means, including the making available to the public of their works in such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them.   ARTICLE 252  Performers  Each Party shall provide for performers the exclusive right to:  (a) authorise or prohibit the fixation(1) of their performances; (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, ‘fixation’ means the embodiment of sounds or images, or of the representations thereof, from which they can be perceived, reproduced or communicated through a device.  (b) authorise or prohibit the direct or indirect, temporary or permanent, reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or in part, of fixations of their performances;  (c) make available to the public, by sale or otherwise, fixations of their performances;  (d) authorise or prohibit the making available to the public, by wire or wireless means, in such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them, of fixations of their performances;  (e) authorise or prohibit the broadcasting by wireless means and the communication to the public of their performances, except where the performance is itself already a broadcast performance or is made from a fixation.   ARTICLE 253  Producers of phonograms  Each Party shall provide for phonogram producers the exclusive right to:  (a) authorise or prohibit the direct or indirect, temporary or permanent, reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole or in part, of their phonograms;  (b) make available to the public, by sale or otherwise, their phonograms, including copies thereof; and  (c) authorise or prohibit the making available of their phonograms to the public, by wire or wireless means, in such a way that members of the public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them.     ARTICLE 254  Broadcasting organisations  Each Party shall provide for broadcasting organisations the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit:  (a) the fixation of their broadcasts;  (b) the reproduction of fixations of their broadcasts;  (c) the making available to the public, by wire or wireless means, of fixations of their broadcasts; and  (d) the rebroadcasting of their broadcasts by wireless means, as well as the communication to the public of their broadcasts if such communication is made in places accessible to the public against payment of an entrance fee.   ARTICLE 255  Broadcasting and communication to the public  1. Each Party shall provide a right in order to ensure that a single equitable remuneration is paid by the user, if a phonogram published for commercial purposes, or a reproduction of such phonogram, is used for broadcasting by wireless means or for any communication to the public, and to ensure that that remuneration is shared between the relevant performers and phonogram producers.  2. Each Party may, in the absence of agreement between the performers and phonogram producers, lay down the conditions as to the sharing of that remuneration between them.   ARTICLE 256  Term of protection  1. The rights of an author of a literary or artistic work within the meaning of Article 2 of the Berne Convention shall run for no less than the life of the author and for 70 years after his/her death, irrespective of the date when the work is lawfully made available to the public.  2. The term of protection of a musical composition with words shall expire 70 years after the death of the last of the following persons to survive, whether or not those persons are designated as co-authors: the author of the lyrics and the composer of the musical composition, provided that both contributions were specifically created for the respective musical composition with words.  3. The rights of performers shall expire no less than 50 years after the date of the performance. However;  (a) if a fixation of the performance, other than in a phonogram, is lawfully published or lawfully communicated to the public within that period, the rights shall expire 50 years from the date of the first such publication or the first such communication to the public, whichever is the earlier;  (b) if a fixation of the performance in a phonogram is lawfully published or lawfully communicated to the public within that period, the rights shall expire 70 years from the date of the first such publication or the first such communication to the public, whichever is the earlier.  4. The rights of producers of phonograms shall expire no less than 50 years after the fixation is made. However;  (a) if a phonogram has been lawfully published within that period, the said rights shall expire no less than 70 years from the date of the first lawful publication. If no lawful publication has taken place within the period mentioned in the first sentence, and if the phonogram has been lawfully communicated to the public within that period, the said rights shall expire not less than 70 years from the date of the first lawful communication to the public;  (b) if 50 years after a phonogram is lawfully published or communicated to the public, the phonogram producer does not offer copies of the phonogram for sale in sufficient quantity, or does not make it available to the public, the performer may terminate the contract by which he/she has transferred or assigned his/her rights in the fixation of his/her performance to a phonogram producer.  5. The rights of broadcasting organisations shall expire no less than 50 years after the first transmission of a broadcast, whether that broadcast is transmitted by wire or wireless means, including by cable or satellite.  6. The terms laid down in this Article shall be calculated from the first of January of the year following the event which gives rise to them.   ARTICLE 257  Protection of technological measures  1. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection against the circumvention of any effective technological measures, which the person concerned carries out in the knowledge, or with reasonable grounds to know, that he/she is pursuing that objective.   2. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection against the manufacture, import, distribution, sale, rental, advertisement for sale or rental, or possession for commercial purposes of devices, products or components, or the provision of services which:  (a) are promoted, advertised or marketed for the purpose of circumvention of any effective technological measures;  (b) have only a limited commercially significant purpose or use other than to circumvent any effective technological measures; or  (c) are primarily designed, produced, adapted or performed for the purpose of enabling or facilitating the circumvention of any effective technological measures.  3. For the purposes of this Agreement, the expression ‘technological measures’ means any technology, device or component that, in the normal course of its operation, is designed to prevent or restrict acts, in respect of works or other protected subject matter, which are not authorised by the right holder of any copyright or related right as provided for by domestic law. Technological measures shall be deemed ‘effective’ where the use of a work or other protected subject matter is controlled by the right holders through the application of an access control or protection process, such as encryption, scrambling or other transformation of the work or other subject matter or a copy control mechanism, which achieves the protection objective.   ARTICLE 258  Protection of rights-management information  1. Each Party shall provide adequate legal protection against any person performing without authority any of the following acts:  (a) the removal or alteration of any electronic rights-management information;  (b) the distribution, importation for distribution, broadcasting, communication or making available to the public of works or other subject matter protected under this Agreement from which electronic rights-management information has been removed or altered without authority,  if that person knows, or has reasonable grounds to know, that by so doing he/she is inducing, enabling, facilitating or concealing an infringement of any copyright or any related rights as provided by domestic law.   2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression ‘rights-management information’ means any information provided by right holders which identifies the work or other subject matter that is the object of protection under this Chapter, the author or any other right holder, or information about the terms and conditions of use of the work or other subject matter, and any numbers or codes that represent such information. Paragraph 1 shall apply when any of those items of information is associated with a copy of, or appears in connection with the communication to the public of, a work or other subject matter that is the object of protection under this Chapter.   ARTICLE 259  Exceptions and limitations  1. In accordance with the conventions and international agreements to which they are parties, each Party may provide for limitations or exceptions to the rights set out in Articles 251 to 256 of this Agreement only in certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the protected subject matter and which do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the right holders.  2. Each Party shall provide that temporary acts of reproduction referred to in Articles 252 to 255 of this Agreement, which are transient or incidental, which are an integral and essential part of a technological process and the sole purpose of which is to enable:  (a) a transmission in a network between third parties by an intermediary; or  (b) a lawful use of a work or other protected subject matter to be made, and which have no independent economic significance,  shall be exempted from the reproduction right provided for in Articles 252 to 255 of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 260  Artists’ resale right in works of art  1. Each Party shall provide, for the benefit of the author of an original work of art, a resale right, to be defined as an inalienable right which cannot be waived, even in advance, to receive a royalty based on the sale price obtained for any resale of the work, subsequent to the first transfer of the work by the author.  2. The right referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply to all acts of resale involving as sellers, buyers or intermediaries art market professionals, such as salesrooms, art galleries and, in general, any dealers in works of art.  3. Each Party may provide that the right referred to in paragraph 1 shall not apply to acts of resale where the seller has acquired the work directly from the author less than three years before that resale and where the resale price does not exceed a certain minimum amount.  4. The royalty shall be payable by the seller. Each Party may provide that one of the natural or legal persons referred to in paragraph 2, other than the seller, shall alone be liable or shall share liability with the seller for payment of the royalty.  5. The protection provided may be claimed to the extent permitted by the Party where that protection is claimed. The procedure for collection and the amounts shall be matters for determination by domestic law.   ARTICLE 261  Cooperation on collective management of rights  The Parties shall endeavour to promote dialogue and cooperation between their respective collective management societies for the purpose of promoting the availability of works and other protected subject matter and the transfer of royalties for the use of such works or other protected subject matter.     SUB-SECTION 2  TRADEMARKS   ARTICLE 262  International agreements  The Parties shall comply with the Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks, the Trademark Law Treaty, the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks and the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks.   ARTICLE 263  Registration procedure  1. Each Party shall provide for a system for the registration of trademarks in which each final negative decision taken by the relevant trademark administration shall be communicated to the applicant in writing and shall be duly reasoned.  2. Each Party shall provide for the possibility to oppose applications to register trademarks. Such opposition proceedings shall be adversarial.  3. The Parties shall provide a publicly available electronic database of applications and registrations of trademarks.   ARTICLE 264  Well-known trademarks  For the purpose of giving effect to Article 6bis of the Paris Convention and Article 16(2) and (3) of the TRIPS Agreement on the protection of well-known trademarks, the Parties shall apply the Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the Protection of Well-Known Marks adopted by the Assembly of the Paris Union for the Protection of Industrial Property and the General Assembly of the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) at the Thirty-Fourth Series of Meetings of the Assemblies of the Member States of WIPO (September 1999). ARTICLE 265  Exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark  Each Party shall provide for limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as the fair use of descriptive terms, the protection of geographical indications as provided for in Article 273 of this Agreement, or other limited exceptions that take account of the legitimate interests of the owner of the trademark and of third parties.  SUB-SECTION 3  GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS   ARTICLE 266  Scope  1. This Sub-Section applies to the recognition and protection of geographical indications which are originating in the territories of the Parties.  2. In order for a geographical indication of a Party to be protected by the other Party, it shall cover products within the scope of the legislation of that Party referred to in Article 267 of this Agreement.  3. ‘Geographical indication’ means an indication as defined in Article 22(1) of the TRIPS Agreement, which also includes ‘designations of origin’.   ARTICLE 267  Established geographical indications  1. Having examined the legislation of the Republic of Moldova on the protection of geographical indications listed in Part A of Annex XIII-A of this Agreement, the UK concludes that that legislation meets the elements laid down in Part C of Annex XIII-A to this Agreement.  2. Having examined the legislation of the UK on the protection of geographical indications listed in Part B of Annex XIII-A to this Agreement, the Republic of Moldova concludes that that legislation meets the elements laid down in Part C of Annex XIII-A to this Agreement.  3. The Republic of Moldova shall protect the geographical indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs of the UK listed in Annex XIII-C to this Agreement and the geographical indications for wines, aromatised wines and spirit drinks of the UK listed in Annex XIII-D to this Agreement, which have been registered by the UK under the legislation referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, according to the level of protection laid down in this Sub-Section.  4. The UK shall protect the geographical indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs of the Republic of Moldova listed in Annex XIII-C to this Agreement and the geographical indications for wines, aromatised wines and spirit drinks of the Republic of Moldova listed in Annex XIII-D to this Agreement, which have been registered by the Republic of Moldova under the legislation referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, according to the level of protection laid down in this Sub-Section.   ARTICLE 268  Addition of new geographical indications  1. The Parties agree on the possibility to add new geographical indications to be protected in Annexes XIII-C and XIII-D to this Agreement in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 276(3) of this Agreement after having completed an objection procedure in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex XIII-B to this Agreement and after having examined the geographical indications to the satisfaction of both Parties.   2. A Party shall not be required to protect as a geographical indication a name that conflicts with the name of a plant variety, including a wine grape variety, or an animal breed and as a result is likely to mislead the consumer as to the true origin of the product.   ARTICLE 269  Scope of protection of geographical indications  1. The geographical indications listed in Annexes XIII-C and XIII-D to this Agreement, as well as those added pursuant to Article 268 of this Agreement, shall be protected against:  (a) any direct or indirect commercial use of a protected name: (i) for comparable products not compliant with the product specification of the protected name; or (ii) in so far as such use exploits the reputation of a geographical indication;    (b) any misuse, imitation or evocation(1), even if the true origin of the product is indicated or if the protected name is translated, transcribed, transliterated or accompanied by an expression such as ‘style’, ‘type’, ‘method’, ‘as produced in’, ‘imitation’, ‘flavour’, ‘like’ or similar; (1) The term ‘evocation’ means, in particular, the use in any way for products falling under heading 20.09 of the HS, although only in so far as those products are referred to as wines falling under heading 22.04, aromatised wines falling under heading 22.05 and spirit drinks falling under heading 22.08 of that system.  (c) any other false or misleading indication as to the provenance, origin, nature or essential qualities of the product, on the inner or outer packaging, advertising material or documents relating to the product concerned, and the packing of the product in a container liable to convey a false impression as to its origin; and  (d) any other practice liable to mislead the consumer as to the true origin of the product.  2. If geographical indications are wholly or partially homonymous, protection shall be granted to each indication provided that it has been used in good faith and with due regard for local and traditional usage and the actual risk of confusion. Without prejudice to Article 23 of the TRIPS Agreement, the Parties shall mutually decide the practical conditions of use under which the homonymous geographical indications will be differentiated from each other, taking into account the need to ensure equitable treatment of the producers concerned and that consumers are not misled. A homonymous name which misleads the consumer into believing that products come from another territory shall not be registered even if the name is accurate as far as the actual territory, region or place of origin of the product in question is concerned.  3. Where a Party, in the context of negotiations with a third country, proposes to protect a geographical indication of that third country, and the name is homonymous with a geographical indication of the other Party, the latter shall be consulted and given the opportunity to comment before the name is protected.  4. Nothing in this Sub-Section shall oblige a Party to protect a geographical indication of the other Party which is not or ceases to be protected in its country of origin. The Parties shall notify each other if a geographical indication ceases to be protected in its country of origin.  5. The provisions of this Sub-Section shall in no way prejudice the right of any person to use, in the course of trade, that person’s name or the name of that person’s predecessor in business, except where that name is used in such a manner as to mislead consumers.   ARTICLE 270  Right of use of geographical indications  1. A name protected under this Sub-Section may be used by any operator marketing, producing, processing or preparing agricultural products, foodstuffs, wines, aromatised wines or spirit drinks conforming to the corresponding product specification.  2. Once a geographical indication is protected under this Sub-Section, the use of such protected name shall not be subject to any registration of users or further charges. ARTICLE 271  Enforcement of protection  The Parties shall enforce the protection provided for in Articles 267 to 270 of this Agreement by appropriate administrative actions or legal proceedings, as appropriate, including at the customs border (export and import), in order to prevent and stop any unlawful use of the protected geographical indications. They shall also enforce such protection at the request of an interested party.   ARTICLE 272  Implementation of complementary actions  Without prejudice to the Republic of Moldova’s previous commitments to grant protection for the UK geographical indications derived from international agreements on the protection of geographical indications and the enforcement thereof, and in accordance with Article 271 of this Agreement, the Republic of Moldova shall put in place all complementary actions necessary to stop any unlawful use of the protected geographical indications, in particular the measures at the customs border.   ARTICLE 273  Relationship with trademarks  1. The Parties shall refuse to register or shall invalidate, ex officio or at the request of any interested party in accordance with the legislation of each Party, a trademark that corresponds to any of the situations referred to in Article 269(1) of this Agreement in relation to a protected geographical indication for like products, provided an application to register the trademark is submitted after the date of application for protection of the geographical indication in the territory concerned.  2. For geographical indications referred to in Article 267 of this Agreement, the date of application for protection shall be 1 April 2013, except for those geographical indications which are listed in Annexes XIII-C and XIII-D and accompanied by an asterisk (*) for which the date of application for protection shall be the date of the transmission of a request to the other Party to protect such geographical indication pursuant to the Moldova-EU Association Agreement.  3. For geographical indications referred to in Article 268 of this Agreement, the date of application for protection shall be the date of the transmission of a request to the other Party to protect a geographical indication.   4. For geographical indications referred to in Article 268 of this Agreement, the Parties shall have no obligation to protect a geographical indication where, in the light of a reputed or well-known trademark, protection is liable to mislead consumers as to the true identity of the product.  5. Without prejudice to paragraph 4 of this Article, the Parties shall protect geographical indications also where a prior trademark exists. A prior trademark shall mean a trademark, the use of which corresponds to one of the situations referred to in Article 269(1) of this Agreement, which has been applied for, registered or established by use, if that possibility is provided for by the legislation concerned, in the territory of one of the Parties before the date on which the application for protection of the geographical indication is submitted by the other Party under this Sub-Section. Such trademark may continue to be used and renewed notwithstanding the protection of the geographical indication, provided that no grounds for the trademark’s invalidity or revocation exist in the legislation on trademarks of the Parties.   ARTICLE 274  General rules  1. This Sub-Section shall apply without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under the WTO Agreement.  2. Notwithstanding Article 302 of this Agreement, the import, export and marketing of any product referred to in Articles 267 and 268 of this Agreement shall be conducted in compliance with the laws and regulations applying in the territory of the importing Party.  3. Any matter arising from technical specifications of registered names shall be dealt with in the Geographical Indications Sub-Committee established pursuant to Article 276 of this Agreement.  4. Geographical indications protected under this Sub-Section may only be cancelled by the Party in which the product originates.  5. A product specification referred to in this Sub-Section shall be that approved, including any amendments also approved, by the authorities of the Party in the territory of which the product originates.     ARTICLE 275  Cooperation and transparency  1. The Parties shall, either directly or through the Geographical Indications Sub-Committee established pursuant to Article 276 of this Agreement, maintain contact on all matters relating to the implementation and the functioning of this Sub-Section. In particular, a Party may request from the other Party information relating to product specifications and their modification, and contact points for control provisions.  2. Each Party may make publicly available the product specifications or a summary thereof and contact points for control provisions corresponding to geographical indications of the other Party protected pursuant to this Article.   ARTICLE 276  Geographical Indications Sub-Committee  1. The Geographical Indications Sub-Committee is hereby established.  2. The Geographical Indications Sub-Committee shall consist of representatives of the Parties with the purpose of monitoring the development of this Sub-Section and of intensifying their cooperation and dialogue on geographical indications. It shall report to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement.  3. The Geographical Indications Sub-Committee adopts its decisions by consensus. It shall determine its own rules of procedure. It shall meet at least once a year and at the request of either of the Parties, alternatively in the UK and in the Republic of Moldova, at a time and place and in a manner (which may include videoconference) mutually determined by the Parties, but no later than 90 days after the request.  4. The Geographical Indications Sub-Committee shall also see to the proper functioning of this Sub-Section and may consider any matter related to its implementation and operation. In particular, it shall be responsible for:  (a) amending Part A and Part B of Annex XIII-A to this Agreement as regards the references to the law applicable in the Parties;  (b) amending Annexes XIII-C and XIII-D to this Agreement as regards geographical indications;  (c) exchanging information on legislative and policy developments on geographical indications and any other matter of mutual interest in the area of geographical indications;  (d) exchanging information on geographical indications for the purpose of considering their protection in accordance with this Sub-Section; and  (e) monitoring the latest developments regarding the enforcement of the protection of the geographical indications listed in Annexes XIII-C and XIII-D to this Agreement.     SUB-SECTION 4  DESIGNS   ARTICLE 277  International agreements  The Parties shall comply with the Geneva Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Industrial Designs of 1999.   ARTICLE 278  Protection of registered designs  1. Each Party shall provide for the protection of independently created designs that are new and original(1). That protection shall be provided by registration, which shall confer an exclusive right upon the holders of a registered design in accordance with the provisions of this Article. (1) For the purposes of this Article, a Party may consider that a design having individual character is original.  2. A design applied to or incorporated in a product which constitutes a component part of a complex product shall only be considered to be new and original:  (a) if the component part, once it has been incorporated into the complex product, remains visible during normal use of the product; and  (b) to the extent that those visible features of the component part fulfil in themselves the requirements as to novelty and originality.  3. The expression ‘normal use’ in paragraph 2(a) shall mean use by the end user, excluding maintenance, servicing or repair work.  4. The holder of a registered design shall have the right to prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent from, at a minimum, making, offering for sale, selling, importing, exporting, stocking or using a product bearing or embodying the protected design when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes, unduly prejudice the normal exploitation of the design, or are not compatible with fair trade practices.  5. The duration of protection available shall amount to 25 years from the date of filing of the application for registration. Each Party may provide that the right holder may have the term of protection renewed for one or more periods of five years each, up to the maximum term of protection established according to domestic law.   ARTICLE 279  Protection conferred to unregistered designs  1. Each Party shall provide the legal means to prevent the use of unregistered designs, only if the contested use results from copying the unregistered appearance of the product. For the purposes of this Article, the term ‘use’ includes the offering for sale, putting on the market, import or export of the product.  2. The duration of protection available for unregistered designs shall amount to at least three years from the date on which the design was made available to the public in one of the Parties.(1) (1) For the purpose of this Article, and for the avoidance of doubt, in the United Kingdom an ‘unregistered design’ is one which is protected by Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 of 12 December 2001 on Community designs, as last amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1891/2006 of 18 December 2006 and converted into United Kingdom law.   ARTICLE 280  Exceptions and exclusions  1. Each Party may provide limited exceptions to the protection of designs, provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of protected designs and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected design, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.  2. Design protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or functional considerations. In particular, a design right shall not subsist in features of appearance of a product which are required to be reproduced in their exact form and dimensions in order to permit the product in which the design is incorporated or to which it is applied to be mechanically connected to or placed in, around or against another product so that either product may perform its function.   ARTICLE 281  Relationship to copyright  A design shall also be eligible for protection under the copyright law of a Party as from the date on which the design was created or fixed in any form. The extent to which, and the conditions under which, such a protection is conferred, including the level of originality required, shall be determined by each Party.     SUB-SECTION 5  PATENTS   ARTICLE 282  International agreements  The Parties shall adhere to the provisions of the WIPO Patent Cooperation Treaty and shall make all reasonable efforts to comply with the WIPO Patent Law Treaty.   ARTICLE 283  Patents and public health  1. The Parties recognise the importance of the Declaration of the Ministerial Conference of the WTO on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, adopted on 14 November 2001. In interpreting and implementing the rights and obligations under this Chapter, the Parties shall ensure consistency with that Declaration.  2. The Parties shall respect the Decision of the WTO General Council of 30 August 2003 on paragraph 6 of the declaration referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and shall contribute to its implementation.  ARTICLE 284  Supplementary protection certificate  1. The Parties recognise that medicinal and plant protection products protected by a patent may be subject to an administrative authorisation procedure before being put on their market. They recognise that the period that elapses between the filing of the application for a patent and the first authorisation to place the product on their respective market, as defined for that purpose by domestic law, may shorten the period of effective protection under the patent.  2. Each Party shall provide for a further period of protection for a medicinal or plant protection product which is protected by a patent and which has been subject to an administrative authorisation procedure, that period being equal to the period referred to in the second sentence of paragraph 1, reduced by a period of five years.  3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, the duration of the further period of protection may not exceed five years.  4. In the case of medicinal products for which paediatric studies have been carried out, and provided that results of those studies are reflected in the product information, the Parties shall provide for a further six-month extension of the period of protection referred to in paragraph 2.   ARTICLE 285  Protection of data submitted to obtain an authorisation to put a medicinal product on the market  1. Each Party shall implement a comprehensive system to guarantee the confidentiality, non-disclosure and non-reliance of data submitted for the purpose of obtaining an authorisation to put a medicinal product on the market.(1) (1) For the purposes of this Article, ‘medicinal products’ means: (i) any substance or combination of substances presented for treating or preventing disease in human beings; or (ii) any substance or combination of substances which may be administered to human beings with a view to making a medical diagnosis or to restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions in human beings. Medicinal products include, for example, chemical medicinal products, biological medicinal products (e.g. vaccines, (anti)toxins) including medicinal products derived from human blood or human plasma, advanced therapy medicinal products (e.g. gene therapy medicinal products and cell therapy medicinal products), herbal medicinal products, and radiopharmaceuticals.   2. Each Party shall ensure that any required information that is submitted to obtain an authorisation to put a medicinal product on the market remains undisclosed to third parties and benefits from protection against unfair commercial use.  To that end:  (a) during a period of at least five years, starting from the date of the grant of a marketing authorisation in the Party concerned, no person or entity, whether public or private, other than the person or entity who submitted such undisclosed data, shall be allowed to rely directly or indirectly on such data, without the explicit consent of the person or entity who submitted that data, in support of an application for the authorisation to put a medicinal product on the market;  (b) during a period of at least seven years, starting from the date of the grant of a marketing authorisation in the Party concerned, a marketing authorisation for any subsequent application shall not be granted, unless the subsequent applicant submits his/her own data, or data used with authorisation of the holder of the first authorisation, meeting the same requirements as in the case of the first authorisation. Products registered without submission of such data shall be removed from the market until the requirements are met.  3. The seven-year period referred to in paragraph 2(b) shall be extended to a maximum of eight years if, during the first five years after obtaining the initial authorisation, the holder obtains an authorisation for one or more new therapeutic indications considered to be of significant clinical benefit in comparison with existing therapies.  4. The provisions of this Article shall not have retroactive effect. They shall not affect the marketing of medicinal products authorised before 1 September 2014(1). (1) This reflects the start date of the transitional period for the Parties to progressively establish a free trade area, as provided for in Article 120 of this Agreement.     ARTICLE 286  Data protection on plant protection products  1. Each Party shall determine safety and efficacy requirements before authorising the placing on the market of plant protection products.  2. Each Party shall assign a temporary data protection right to the owner of a test or study report submitted for the first time to obtain a marketing authorisation for a plant protection product.  During the period of validity of the data protection right, the test or study report shall not be used for the benefit of any other person aiming to obtain a marketing authorisation for a plant protection product, except when the explicit consent of the owner is provided.   3. The test or study report shall fulfil the following conditions:  (a) that it is necessary for the authorisation or for an amendment of an authorisation in order to allow the use on other crops; and  (b) that it is certified as compliant with the principles of good laboratory practice or of good experimental practice.  4. The period of data protection shall be at least 10 years from the first authorisation in the Party concerned. In case of low-risk plant protection products, the period may be extended to 13 years.  5. The periods referred to in paragraph 4 shall be extended by three months for each extension of authorisation for minor uses(1) if the applications for such authorisations are made by the holder of the authorisation at the latest five years after the date of the first authorisation. The total period of data protection may in no case exceed 13 years. For low-risk plant protection products the total period of data protection may in no case exceed 15 years. (1) For the purposes of this Article, the expression ‘minor use’ means use of a plant protection product in a Party on plants or plant products which are not widely grown in that Party or which are widely grown to meet an exceptional plant protection need.  6. A test or study report shall also be protected if it was necessary for the renewal or review of an authorisation. In those cases, the period for data protection shall be 30 months.   ARTICLE 287  Plant varieties  The Parties shall protect plant varieties rights, in accordance with the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants including the optional exception to the breeder’s right as referred to in Article 15(2) of the said Convention, and shall cooperate to promote and enforce those rights.   SECTION 3  ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS   ARTICLE 288  General obligations  1. The Parties reaffirm their commitments under the TRIPS Agreement, in particular Part III thereof, and shall provide for the complementary measures, procedures and remedies set forth in this Section necessary to ensure the enforcement of intellectual property rights(1). (1) For the purposes of this Sub-Section, the notion of ‘intellectual property rights’ includes at least the following rights: copyright; rights related to copyright; sui generis right of a database maker; rights of the creator of the topographies of a semi-conductor product; trade- mark rights; design rights; patent rights, including rights derived from supplementary protection certificates; geographical indications; utility model rights; plant variety rights; and trade names in so far as these are protected as exclusive rights by domestic law.  2. Those complementary measures, procedures and remedies shall be fair and equitable, and shall not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time-limits or unwarranted delays.  3. Those complementary measures and remedies shall also be effective, proportionate and dissuasive and shall be applied in such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards against their abuse.   ARTICLE 289  Entitled applicants  Each Party shall recognise as persons entitled to seek application of the measures, procedures and remedies referred to in this Section and in Part III of the TRIPS Agreement:  (a) the holders of intellectual property rights in accordance with the provisions of the applicable law;  (b) all other persons authorised to use those rights, in particular licensees, in so far as permitted by and in accordance with the provisions of the applicable law;   (c) intellectual property collective rights management bodies which are regularly recognised as having a right to represent holders of intellectual property rights, in so far as permitted by and in accordance with the provisions of the applicable law; and  (d) professional defence bodies which are regularly recognised as having a right to represent holders of intellectual property rights, in so far as permitted by and in accordance with the provisions of the applicable law.     SUB-SECTION 1  CIVIL ENFORCEMENT   ARTICLE 290  Measures for preserving evidence  1. Each Party shall ensure that, even before the commencement of proceedings on the merits of the case, the competent judicial authorities may, on application by a party who has presented reasonably available evidence to support his/her claims that his/her intellectual property right has been infringed or is about to be infringed, order prompt and effective provisional measures to preserve relevant evidence in respect of the alleged infringement, subject to the protection of confidential information.  2. Such measures may include the detailed description, with or without the taking of samples, or the physical seizure of the alleged infringing goods, and, in appropriate cases, the materials and implements used in the production and/or distribution of those goods and the documents relating thereto. Those measures shall be taken, if necessary, without the other party being heard, in particular where any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right holder or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.   ARTICLE 291  Right of information  1. Each Party shall ensure that, in the context of proceedings concerning an infringement of an intellectual property right and in response to a justified and proportionate request of the claimant, the competent judicial authorities may order that information on the origin and distribution networks of the goods or services which infringe an intellectual property right be provided by the infringer and/or any other person who:  (a) was found in possession of the infringing goods on a commercial scale;  (b) was found to be using the infringing services on a commercial scale;  (c) was found to be providing on a commercial scale services used in infringing activities; or  (d) was indicated by the person referred to in sub-paragraph(a), (b) or (c) as being involved in the production, manufacture or distribution of the goods or the provision of the services.   2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall, as appropriate, comprise:  (a) the names and addresses of the producers, manufacturers, distributors, suppliers and other previous holders of the goods or services, as well as the intended wholesalers and retailers;  (b) information on the quantities produced, manufactured, delivered, received or ordered, as well as the price obtained for the goods or services in question.  3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply without prejudice to other statutory provisions which:  (a) grant the right holder rights to receive fuller information;  (b) govern the use in civil or criminal proceedings of the information communicated pursuant to this Article;  (c) govern responsibility for misuse of the right of information;  (d) afford an opportunity for refusing to provide information which would force the person referred to in paragraph 1 to admit to his/her own participation or that of his/her close relatives in an infringement of an intellectual property right; or  (e) govern the protection of confidentiality of information sources or the processing of personal data.   ARTICLE 292  Provisional and precautionary measures  1. Each Party shall ensure that the judicial authorities may, at the request of the applicant, issue against the alleged infringer an interlocutory injunction intended to prevent any imminent infringement of an intellectual property right, or to forbid, on a provisional basis and subject, where appropriate, to a recurring penalty payment where provided for by domestic law, the continuation of the alleged infringements of that right, or to make such continuation subject to the lodging of guarantees intended to ensure the compensation of the right holder. An interlocutory injunction may also be issued, under the same conditions, against an intermediary whose services are being used by a third party to infringe an intellectual property right.  2. An interlocutory injunction may also be issued to order the seizure or delivery of goods suspected of infringing an intellectual property right, so as to prevent their entry into or movement within the channels of commerce.   3. In the case of an alleged infringement committed on a commercial scale, the Parties shall ensure that, if the applicant demonstrates circumstances likely to endanger the recovery of damages, the judicial authorities may order the precautionary seizure of the movable and immovable property of the alleged infringer, including the blocking of his/her bank accounts and other assets. To that end, the competent authorities may order the communication of bank, financial or commercial documents, or appropriate access to the relevant information.   ARTICLE 293  Corrective measures  1. Each Party shall ensure that the competent judicial authorities may order, at the request of the applicant and without prejudice to any damages due to the right holder by reason of the infringement, and without compensation of any sort, at least the definitive removal from the channels of commerce, or the destruction, of goods that they have found to be infringing an intellectual property right. If appropriate, the competent judicial authorities may also order the destruction of materials and implements predominantly used in the creation or manufacture of those goods.  2. The Parties’ judicial authorities shall have the power to order that those measures shall be carried out at the expense of the infringer, unless particular reasons are invoked for not doing so.   ARTICLE 294  Injunctions  Each Party shall ensure that, where a judicial decision has been taken, finding an infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities may issue against the infringer, as well as against an intermediary whose services are used by a third party to infringe an intellectual property right, an injunction aimed at prohibiting the continuation of the infringement.     ARTICLE 295  Alternative measures  The Parties may provide that, in appropriate cases and at the request of the person liable to be subject to the measures provided for in Article 293 and/or Article 294 of this Agreement, the competent judicial authorities may order pecuniary compensation to be paid to the injured party instead of applying the measures provided for in those two Articles if that person acted unintentionally and without negligence, if execution of the measures in question would cause him/her disproportionate harm and if pecuniary compensation to the injured party appears reasonably satisfactory.   ARTICLE 296  Damages  1. Each Party shall ensure that the judicial authorities, on application of the injured party, order the infringer who knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engaged in an infringing activity, to pay the right holder damages appropriate to the actual prejudice suffered by him/her as a result of the infringement. When the judicial authorities set the amount of damages:  (a) they shall take into account all appropriate aspects, such as the negative economic consequences, including lost profits, which the injured party has suffered, any unfair profits made by the infringer and, in appropriate cases, elements other than economic factors, such as the moral prejudice caused to the right holder by the infringement; or  (b) as an alternative to sub-paragraph(a), they may, in appropriate cases, set the amount of damages as a lump sum on the basis of elements such as, at least, the amount of royalties or fees which would have been due if the infringer had requested authorisation to use the intellectual property right in question.  2. Where the infringer did not knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engage in the infringing activity, the Parties may lay down that the judicial authorities may order in favour of the injured party the recovery of profits or the payment of damages which may be pre-established.   ARTICLE 297  Legal costs  Each Party shall ensure that reasonable and proportionate legal costs and other expenses incurred by the successful party shall, as a general rule, be borne by the unsuccessful party, unless equity does not allow this.  ARTICLE 298  Publication of judicial decisions  Each Party shall ensure that, in legal proceedings instituted for infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities may order, at the request of the applicant and at the expense of the infringer, appropriate measures for the dissemination of the information concerning the decision, including displaying the decision and publishing it in full or in part.   ARTICLE 299  Presumption of authorship or ownership  For the purposes of applying the measures, procedures and remedies provided for in this Section:  (a) for the author of a literary or artistic work, in the absence of proof to the contrary, to be regarded as such, and consequently to be entitled to institute infringement proceedings, it shall be sufficient for his/her name to appear on the work in the usual manner;  (b) sub-paragraph (a) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the holders of rights related to copyright with regard to their protected subject matter.     SUB-SECTION 2  OTHER PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 300  Border measures  1. Each Party shall, unless otherwise provided for in this Sub-Section, adopt procedures to enable a right holder, who has valid grounds for suspecting that the importation, exportation, re-exportation, entry or exit of the customs territory, placement under a suspensive procedure or placement under a free zone or a free warehouse of goods infringing an intellectual property right(1) may take place, to lodge an application in writing with the competent authorities, whether administrative or judicial, for the suspension by the customs authorities of the release or detention of such goods. (1) For the purposes of this Article, ‘goods infringing an intellectual property right’ means: (a) ‘counterfeit goods’, namely: (i) goods, including packaging, bearing without authorisation a trademark identical to the trademark duly registered in respect of the same type of goods, or which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark, and which thereby infringes the trademark holder’s rights; (ii) any trademark symbol such as a logo, label, sticker, brochure, instructions for use or guarantee document, even if presented separately, on the same conditions as the goods referred to in point (i); (iii) packaging materials bearing the trademark of counterfeit goods, presented separately, on the same conditions as the goods (b) ‘pirated goods’, namely goods which are or contain copies made without the consent of the right holder or of a person duly authorised by the holder in the country of production, and which are made directly or indirectly from an article, where the making of that copy would have constituted an infringement of a copyright or related right or design right under the law of the country of importation, regardless of whether it is registered in domestic law; (c) goods which, according to the law of the Party in which the application for customs action is made, infringe a patent, a plant variety right, or a geographical indication. referred to in point (i);   2. Each Party shall provide that when the customs authorities, in the course of their actions and before an application has been lodged by a right holder or granted, have sufficient grounds for suspecting that goods infringe an intellectual property right, they may suspend the release of the goods or detain them in order to enable the right holder to submit an application for action in accordance with paragraph 1.  3. Any rights or obligations concerning the importer which are established in domestic law for the implementation of this Article and of Section 4 of Part III of the TRIPS Agreement shall be also applicable to the exporter or to the holder of the goods.   4. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities require a right holder who requests the procedures described in paragraph 1 to provide adequate evidence to satisfy the competent authorities that, under the law of the Party providing the procedures, there is a prima facie infringement of the right holder’s intellectual property right, and to supply sufficient information that may reasonably be expected to be within the right holder’s knowledge to make the suspect goods reasonably recognisable by the competent authorities. The requirement to provide sufficient information shall not unreasonably deter recourse to the procedures described in paragraph 1.  5. With a view to establishing whether an intellectual property right has been infringed, the customs office shall inform the right holder, at his/her request and if known, of the names and addresses of the consignee, the consignor or the holder of the goods and the origin and provenance of goods suspected of infringing an intellectual property right.  The customs office shall also give the applicant the opportunity to inspect goods whose release has been suspended or which have been detained. When examining goods, the customs office may take samples and hand them over or send them to the right holder, at his/her request, strictly for the purposes of analysis and to facilitate the subsequent procedure.  6. The customs authorities shall be active in targeting and identifying shipments containing goods suspected of infringing an intellectual property right on the basis of risk analysis techniques. They shall set up systems for close cooperation with right holders, including effective mechanisms to collect information for the risk analysis.  7. The Parties agree to cooperate with a view to eliminating international trade in goods infringing intellectual property rights. In particular, for that purpose, they shall, where appropriate, exchange information and arrange for cooperation between their competent authorities with regard to trade in goods infringing intellectual property rights.  8. For goods in transit through the territory of a Party destined for the territory of the other Party, the former Party shall provide information to the latter Party to enable effective enforcement against shipments of goods suspected of infringing an intellectual property right.  9. Without prejudice to other forms of cooperation, Protocol II on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters will be applicable with regard to paragraphs 7 and 8 of this Article with respect to breaches of customs legislation related to intellectual property rights.  10. The Customs Sub-Committee referred to in Article 176 of this Agreement shall act as the responsible Committee to ensure the proper functioning and implementation of this Article.   ARTICLE 301  Codes of conduct  The Parties shall encourage:  (a) the development by trade or professional associations or organisations of codes of conduct aimed at contributing towards the enforcement of intellectual property rights; and  (b) the submission to the competent authorities of the Parties of draft codes of conduct and of any evaluations of the application of those codes of conduct.   ARTICLE 302  Cooperation  1. The Parties agree to cooperate with a view to supporting implementation of the commitments and obligations undertaken under this Chapter.  2. Subject to the provisions of Articles 5 and 6 of this Agreement, areas of cooperation include, but are not limited to, the following activities:  (a) exchange of information on the legal framework concerning intellectual property rights and relevant rules of protection and enforcement; exchange of experience on legislative progress in those areas;  (b) exchange of experience and information on enforcement of intellectual property rights;  (c) exchange of experience on central and sub-central enforcement by customs, police, administrative and judiciary bodies; coordination to prevent exports of counterfeit goods, including with other countries;  (d) capacity-building; exchange and training of personnel;  (e) promotion and dissemination of information on intellectual property rights in, inter alia, business circles and civil society; public awareness of consumers and right holders;  (f) enhancement of institutional cooperation, for example between intellectual property offices;   (g) active promotion of awareness and education of the general public on policies concerning intellectual property rights; formulation of effective strategies to identify key audiences, and the creation of communication programmes to increase consumer and media awareness on the impact of intellectual property violations, including the risk to health and safety and the connection to organised crime.   CHAPTER 10  COMPETITION   SECTION 1  ANTITRUST AND MERGERS   ARTICLE 303  Definitions  For the purposes of this Section:  (1) ‘competition authority’ means for the UK, the Competition and Markets Authority, and for the Republic of Moldova, the Competition Council;  (2) ‘competition laws’ means:  (a) for the UK, the Competition Act 1998 (c. 41), and Part 3 (excluding any provisions of that Part insofar as they relate to interventions in mergers on public interest grounds) of the Enterprise Act 2002 (c.40);   (b) for the Republic of Moldova, Competition Law No 183 of 11 July 2012 and its implementing regulations or amendments; and  (c) any changes that the instruments referred to in points (a) and (b) may undergo after the entry into force of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 304  Principles  The Parties recognise the importance of free and undistorted competition in their trade relations. The Parties acknowledge that anti-competitive business practices have the potential to distort the proper functioning of markets and undermine the benefits of trade liberalisation.   ARTICLE 305  Implementation  1. Each Party shall maintain in its respective territory comprehensive competition laws which effectively address anti-competitive agreements, concerted practices and anti-competitive unilateral conduct of undertakings with dominant market power and provide effective control of concentrations.  2. Each Party shall maintain an operationally independent authority with adequate human and financial resources in order to effectively enforce the competition laws referred to in Article 303(2).  3. The Parties recognise the importance of applying their respective competition laws in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner, respecting the principles of procedural fairness and rights of defence of the undertakings concerned.   ARTICLE 306  State monopolies, public undertakings and undertakings entrusted with special or exclusive rights  1. Nothing in this Chapter prevents a Party from designating or maintaining state monopolies or public undertakings or entrusting undertakings with special or exclusive rights according to their respective laws.  2. With regard to state monopolies of a commercial character, public undertakings and undertakings entrusted with special or exclusive rights, each Party shall ensure that such undertakings are subject to the competition laws referred to in Article 303(2), in so far as the application of those laws does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular tasks of public interest assigned to the undertakings in question.   ARTICLE 307  Cooperation and exchange of information  1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation and coordination between their respective competition authorities to enhance effective competition law enforcement, and to fulfil the objectives of this Agreement through the promotion of competition and the curtailment of anti-competitive business conduct or anti-competitive transactions.   2. To that end, each competition authority may inform the other competition authority of its willingness to cooperate with respect to the enforcement activity of any of the Parties. Neither Party shall be prevented from taking autonomous decisions on the matters subject to the cooperation.  3. With a view to facilitating the effective enforcement of their respective competition laws, the competition authorities may exchange non-confidential information. All exchange of information shall be subject to the standards of confidentiality applicable in each Party. Whenever the Parties exchange information under this Article, they shall take into account the limitations imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy in their respective jurisdictions.   ARTICLE 308  Dispute settlement  The provisions on the dispute settlement mechanism in Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement shall not apply to this Section.     SECTION 2  STATE AID   ARTICLE 309  General principles and scope  1. State aid granted by the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova, or through the resources of one of the Parties, in any form whatsoever, which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods and services and which affects trade between the Parties, shall be incompatible with this Agreement.  2. This Chapter shall not apply to state aid related to fisheries, products covered by Annex 1 to the Agreement on Agriculture or other aids covered by the Agreement on Agriculture.   ARTICLE 310  Transparency  1. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid. To that end, each Party shall report every two years to the other Party. That report is deemed to have been provided if the relevant information is made available by the Parties or on their behalf on a publicly accessible website.  2. Whenever a Party considers its trade relations to be affected by an individual case of state aid granted by the other Party, the Party concerned may request the other Party to provide information on the individual case of state aid.   ARTICLE 311  Confidentiality  When exchanging information under this Chapter, the Parties shall take into account the limitations imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy.     ARTICLE 312  Review clause  The Parties shall keep under constant review the matters to which reference is made in this Chapter. Each Party may refer such matters to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement. The Parties agree to review progress in implementing this Chapter every two years after the entry into force of this Agreement, unless both Parties agree otherwise.   CHAPTER 11  TRADE-RELATED ENERGY   ARTICLE 313  Definitions  For the purposes of this Chapter:  (1) ‘energy goods’ means crude oil (HS code 27.09), natural gas (HS code 27.11) and electrical energy (HS code 27.16);  (2) ‘fixed infrastructure’ means any transmission or distribution network, liquefied natural gas facility or storage facility, as defined in Directive 2003/55/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2003 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas and in Directive 2003/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2003 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity;  (3) ‘transport’ means transmission and distribution, as defined in Directive 2003/54/EC and Directive 2003/55/EC, and the carriage or conveyance of oil through pipelines;  (4) ‘unauthorised taking’ means any activity consisting of the unlawful taking of energy goods from fixed infrastructure.   ARTICLE 314  Domestic regulated prices  1. In accordance with the Protocol concerning the Accession of the Republic of Moldova to the Energy Community, the price for the supply of gas and electricity for non-household customers in Moldova shall be determined solely by supply and demand.  2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, a Party may impose in the general economic interest an obligation on undertakings which relates to the price of supply of natural gas and electricity (hereinafter referred to as ‘regulated price’). In case non-household customers are not able to agree with a supplier on a price for electricity or natural gas that is lower than or equal to the regulated price for natural gas or electricity, non-household customers shall have the right to enter into a contract for the supply of electricity or natural gas with a supplier against the regulated price applicable. In any case, the non-household customers shall be free to negotiate and sign a contract with any alternative supplier.  3. The Party imposing an obligation in accordance with paragraph 2 shall ensure that the obligation is clearly defined, transparent, proportionate, non-discriminatory, verifiable and of limited duration. When imposing any such obligation, the Party shall also guarantee equality of access for other undertakings to consumers.  4. Where the price at which natural gas and electricity are sold on the domestic market is regulated by a Party, that Party shall ensure that the methodology underlying the calculation of the regulated price is published prior to the entry into force of the regulated price.   ARTICLE 315  Prohibition of dual pricing  1. Without prejudice to the possibility of imposing regulated prices consistently with paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 314 of this Agreement, a Party, or a regulatory authority of a Party, shall not adopt or maintain a measure resulting in a higher price for exports of energy goods to the other Party than the price charged for such goods when intended for domestic consumption.  2. The exporting Party shall upon request of the other Party provide evidence that a different price for the same energy goods sold on the domestic market and for export does not result from a measure prohibited by paragraph 1.   ARTICLE 316  Transit  The Parties shall take any necessary measures to facilitate transit, consistent with the principle of freedom of transit, and in accordance with Articles V.1, V.2, V.4 and V.5 of GATT 1994 and Articles 7.1 and 7.3 of the Energy Charter Treaty, which are incorporated into this Agreement and made part thereof.   ARTICLE 317  Transport  As regards transport of electricity and gas, in particular third party access to fixed infrastructure, the Parties shall adapt their legislation, as referred to in the Energy Community Treaty, in order to ensure that the tariffs, which shall be published prior to their entry into force, the capacity allocation procedures and all other conditions are objective, reasonable and transparent and that they do not discriminate on the basis of origin, ownership or destination of the electricity or gas.    ARTICLE 318  Unauthorised taking of goods in transit  Each Party shall take all necessary measures to prohibit and address any unauthorised taking of energy goods in transit through its territory by any entity subject to that Party’s control or jurisdiction.   ARTICLE 319  Uninterrupted transit  1. A Party shall not interfere with the transit of energy goods through its territory, except where such interference is specifically provided for in a contract or other agreement governing such transit.  2. In the event of a dispute over any matter involving the Parties or one or more entities subject to the control or jurisdiction of one of the Parties, a Party through the territory of which energy goods transit shall not, prior to the conclusion of a dispute resolution procedure under the relevant contract or agreement or of an emergency procedure under Annex XIV to this Agreement or under Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, interrupt or reduce such transit, or permit any entity subject to its control or jurisdiction, including a state trading enterprise, to interrupt or reduce such transit, except under the circumstances provided in paragraph 1 of this Article.  3. A Party shall not be held liable for an interruption or reduction of transit pursuant to this Article where that Party is unable to supply or to transit energy goods as a result of actions attributable to a third country or an entity under the control or jurisdiction of a third country.   ARTICLE 320  Transit obligation for operators  Each Party shall ensure that fixed infrastructure operators take any necessary measures to:  (a) minimise the risk of accidental interruption or reduction of transit; and  (b) expeditiously restore the normal operation of such transit, which has been accidentally interrupted or reduced.   ARTICLE 321  Regulatory authority for electricity and natural gas  1. A regulatory authority in the field of natural gas and electricity shall be legally distinct and functionally independent from any other public or private entity, and shall be sufficiently empowered to ensure effective competition and the efficient functioning of the market.  2. The decisions of a regulatory authority and the procedures used by it shall be impartial with respect to all market participants.  3. An operator affected by a decision of a regulatory authority shall have the right to appeal against that decision to an appeal body that is independent of the parties involved. Where the appeal body is not judicial in character, written reasons for its decision shall always be given and its decisions shall also be subject to review by an impartial and independent judicial authority. Decisions taken by appeal bodies shall be effectively enforced.  CHAPTER 12  TRANSPARENCY   ARTICLE 322  Definitions  For the purposes of this Chapter:  (1) ‘measures of general application’ includes laws, regulations, judicial decisions, procedures and administrative rulings of general application and any other general or abstract act, interpretation or other requirement that may have an impact on any matter covered by Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. It does not include a ruling that applies to a particular person;  (2) ‘interested person’ means any natural or legal person that may be subject to any rights or obligations under measures of general application, within the meaning of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 323  Objective and scope  Recognising the impact which the regulatory environment may have on trade and investment between the Parties, the Parties shall provide a predictable regulatory environment for economic operators and efficient procedures, taking due account of the requirements of legal certainty and proportionality.   ARTICLE 324  Publication  1. Each Party shall ensure that measures of general application:  (a) are promptly and readily available via an officially designated medium and, where feasible, electronic means, in such a manner as to enable any person to become acquainted with them;  (b) provide an explanation of the objective of, and the rationale for, such measures; and  (c) allow for sufficient time between publication and entry into force of such measure except in duly justified cases.  2. Each Party shall:  (a) endeavour to publish at an appropriate early stage any proposal to adopt or to amend any measure of general application, including an explanation of the objective of, and rationale for, the proposal;  (b) provide reasonable opportunities for interested persons to comment on such proposal, allowing, in particular, for sufficient time for such opportunities; and  (c) endeavour to take into account the comments received from interested persons with respect to such proposal.   ARTICLE 325  Enquiries and contact points  1. In order to facilitate the communication between the Parties on any matter covered by Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, each Party shall designate a contact point acting as a coordinator.  2. Each Party shall maintain or establish appropriate mechanisms for responding to enquiries from any person regarding any measure of general application which is proposed or in force, and its application. Enquiries may be addressed through the contact point established under paragraph 1 or through any other mechanism, as appropriate.  3. The Parties recognise that any response provided for in paragraph 2 may not be definitive or legally binding but for information purposes only, unless otherwise provided in their respective laws and regulations.  4. Upon request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide information and respond to questions pertaining to any measure of general application or any proposal to adopt or to amend any measure of general application that the requesting Party considers might affect the operation of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, regardless of whether the requesting Party has been previously notified of that measure.     ARTICLE 326  Administration of measures of general application  Each Party shall administer in an objective, impartial and reasonable manner all measures of general application. To that end, each Party, in applying such measures to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party in specific cases, shall:  (a) endeavour to provide interested persons, that are directly affected by a proceeding, with reasonable notice, in accordance with its procedures, when a proceeding is initiated, including a description of the nature of the proceeding, a statement of the legal authority under which the proceeding is initiated, and a general description of any issues in controversy;  (b) afford such interested persons a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their positions prior to any final administrative action, when the time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public interest permit; and  (c) ensure that its procedures are based on and carried out in accordance with its law.   ARTICLE 327  Review and appeal  1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial, arbitral or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purpose of the prompt review and, where warranted, the correction of administrative action relating to matters covered by Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. Such tribunals or procedures shall be impartial and independent of the office or authority entrusted with administrative enforcement, and those responsible for them shall not have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.  2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or procedures, the parties to the proceeding are provided with the right to:  (a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and  (b) a decision based on the evidence and the submissions of record or, where required by the Party’s law, the record compiled by the administrative authority.  3. Each Party shall ensure that, subject to appeal or further review as provided in its law, such decision shall be implemented by, and shall govern the practice of, the office or the competent authority with respect to the administrative action at issue. ARTICLE 328  Regulatory quality and performance and good administrative behaviour  1. The Parties agree to cooperate in promoting regulatory quality and performance, including through the exchange of information and best practices on their respective regulatory policies and regulatory impact assessments.  2. The Parties subscribe to the principles of good administrative behaviour, and agree to cooperate in promoting them, including through the exchange of information and best practices.   ARTICLE 329  Specific rules  The provisions of this Chapter shall apply without prejudice to any specific rules on transparency established in other Chapters of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.   CHAPTER 13  TRADE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT   ARTICLE 330  Context and objectives  1. The Parties recall the Agenda 21 of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development of 1992, the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work of 1998, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation on Sustainable Development of 2002, the Ministerial Declaration of the United Nations Economic and Social Council on Generating Full and Productive Employment and Decent Work for All of 2006, and the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalisation of 2008. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to promote the development of international trade, in such a way as to contribute to the objective of sustainable development, for the welfare of present and future generations, and to ensure that that objective is integrated and reflected at every level of their trade relationship.  2. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to pursue sustainable development and recognise that economic development, social development and environmental protection are its interdependent and mutually reinforcing pillars. They underline the benefit of considering trade-related labour(1) and environmental issues as part of a global approach to trade and sustainable development. (1) When ‘labour’ is referred to in this Chapter, it includes the issues relevant to the strategic objectives of the ILO, through which the Decent Work Agenda is expressed, as agreed on in the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalisation of 2008.   ARTICLE 331  Right to regulate and levels of protection  1. The Parties recognise the right of each Party to determine its sustainable development policies and priorities, to establish its own levels of domestic environmental and labour protection, and to adopt or modify accordingly its relevant law and policies, consistently with their commitment to the internationally recognised standards and agreements referred to in Articles 332 and 333 of this Agreement.  2. In that context, each Party shall strive to ensure that its law and policies provide for and encourage high levels of environmental and labour protection and shall strive to continue to improve those law and policies and the underlying levels of protection. ARTICLE 332  Multilateral labour standards and agreements  1. The Parties recognise full and productive employment and decent work for all as key elements for managing globalisation, and reaffirm their commitment to promote the development of international trade in a way that is conducive to full and productive employment and decent work for all. In that context, the Parties commit to consulting and cooperating, as appropriate, on trade-related labour issues of mutual interest.  2. In accordance with their obligations as members of the ILO and the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up of 1998, the Parties commit to respecting, promoting and realising in their law and practice and in their whole territory the internationally recognised core labour standards, as embodied in the fundamental ILO conventions, and in particular:  (a) the freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining;  (b) the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour;  (c) the effective abolition of child labour; and  (d) the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation.  3. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to effectively implement in their law and in practice the fundamental, the priority and other ILO conventions ratified by the UK and the Republic of Moldova, respectively.  4. The Parties will also consider the ratification of the remaining priority and other conventions that are classified as up-to-date by the ILO. In that context, the Parties shall regularly exchange information on their respective situation and advancement in the ratification process.  5. The Parties recognise that the violation of fundamental principles and rights at work cannot be invoked or otherwise used as a legitimate comparative advantage and that labour standards should not be used for protectionist trade purposes.     ARTICLE 333  Multilateral environmental governance and agreements  1. The Parties recognise the value of international environmental governance and agreements as a response of the international community to global or regional environmental problems, and stress the need to enhance the mutual supportiveness between trade and environmental policies. In that context, the Parties commit to consulting and cooperating, as appropriate, with respect to negotiations on trade-related environmental issues and with respect to other trade-related environmental matters of mutual interest.  2. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to effectively implement in their law and in practice the multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) to which they are party.  3. The Parties shall regularly exchange information on their respective situation and advancements as regards ratifications of MEAs or amendments to such agreements.  4. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to reaching the ultimate objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Kyoto Protocol. They commit to cooperating on the development of the future international climate change framework under the UNFCCC and its related agreements and decisions.  5. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties from adopting or maintaining measures to implement the MEAs to which they are party, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties or a disguised restriction on trade.   ARTICLE 334  Trade and investment promoting sustainable development  The Parties reconfirm their commitment to enhance the contribution of trade to the goal of sustainable development in its economic, social and environmental dimensions. Accordingly, the Parties:  (a) recognise the beneficial role that core labour standards and decent work can have on economic efficiency, innovation and productivity, and shall seek greater policy coherence between trade policies, on the one hand, and labour policies, on the other;  (b) shall strive to facilitate and promote trade and investment in environmental goods and services, including through addressing related non-tariff barriers;  (c) shall strive to facilitate the removal of obstacles to trade or investment concerning goods and services of particular relevance to climate change mitigation, such as sustainable renewable energy and energy efficient products and services, including through the adoption of policy frameworks conducive to the deployment of best available technologies and through the promotion of standards that respond to environmental and economic needs and minimise technical obstacles to trade;  (d) agree to promote trade in goods that contribute to enhanced social conditions and environmentally sound practices, including goods that are the subject of voluntary sustainability assurance schemes such as fair and ethical trade schemes, eco-labels, and certification schemes for natural resource-based products;  (e) agree to promote corporate social responsibility, including through the exchange of information and best practices.  In that regard, the Parties refer to the relevant internationally recognised principles and guidelines, such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, the United Nations Global Compact, and the ILO Tripartite Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy.   ARTICLE 335  Biological diversity  1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring the conservation and the sustainable use of biological diversity as a key element for the achievement of sustainable development, and reaffirm their commitment to conserve and sustainably use biological diversity, in accordance with the Convention on Biological Diversity and other relevant international instruments to which they are party.  2. To that end, the Parties commit to:  (a) promoting trade in natural resource-based products obtained through a sustainable use of biological resources and contributing to the conservation of biodiversity;  (b) exchanging information on actions on trade in natural resource-based products aimed at halting the loss of biological diversity and reducing pressures on biodiversity and, where relevant, cooperating to maximise the impact and to ensure the mutual supportiveness of their respective policies;  (c) promoting the listing of species under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) where the conservation status of those species is considered at risk; and  (d) cooperating at the regional and global levels with the aim of promoting the conservation and the sustainable use of biological diversity in natural or agricultural ecosystems, including endangered species, their habitat, specially protected natural areas and genetic diversity, the restoration of ecosystems, and the elimination or the reduction of negative environmental impacts resulting from the use of living and non-living natural resources or of ecosystems.   ARTICLE 336  Sustainable management of forests and trade in forest products  1. The Parties recognise the importance of ensuring the conservation and the sustainable management of forests and of forests' contribution to the Parties' economic, environmental and social objectives.  2. To that end, the Parties commit to:  (a) promoting trade in forest products derived from sustainably managed forests, harvested in accordance with the domestic legislation of the country of harvest. Actions, in this regard, may include the conclusion of a Forest Law Enforcement Governance and Trade Voluntary Partnership Agreement;  (b) exchanging information on measures to promote the consumption of timber and timber products from sustainably managed forests and, where relevant, cooperate in the development of such measures;  (c) adopting measures to promote the conservation of forest cover and to combat illegal logging and related trade, including with respect to third countries, as appropriate;  (d) exchanging information on actions for improving forest governance and, where relevant, cooperating to maximise the impact and ensure the mutual supportiveness of their respective policies aiming at excluding illegally harvested timber and timber products from trade flows;  (e) promoting the listing of timber species under CITES where the conservation status of that species is considered at risk; and  (f) cooperating at the regional and global level with the aim of promoting the conservation of forest cover and the sustainable management of all types of forests, with use of certification promoting responsible management of the forests.  ARTICLE 337  Trade in fish products  Taking into account the importance of ensuring responsible management of fish stocks in a sustainable manner as well as promoting good governance in trade, the Parties commit to:  (a) promoting best practices in fisheries management with a view to ensuring the conservation and the management of fish stocks in a sustainable manner, and based on the ecosystem approach;  (b) taking effective measures to monitor and control fishing activities;  (c) ensuring full compliance with applicable conservation and control measures, adopted by Regional Fisheries Management Organisations as well as cooperating with and within Regional Fisheries Management Organisations as widely as possible; and  (d) cooperating in the fight against illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and fishing related activities with comprehensive, effective and transparent measures. The Parties shall also implement policies and measures to exclude IUU products from trade flows and their markets.   ARTICLE 338  Upholding levels of protection  1. The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by lowering the levels of protection afforded in domestic environmental or labour law.  2. A Party shall not waive or derogate from, or offer to waive or derogate from, its environmental or labour law as an encouragement for trade or the establishment, the acquisition, the expansion or the retention of an investment of an investor in its territory.  3. A Party shall not, through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction, fail to effectively enforce its environmental and labour law, as an encouragement for trade or investment.     ARTICLE 339  Scientific information  When preparing and implementing measures aimed at protecting the environment or labour conditions that may affect trade or investment, the Parties shall take account of available scientific and technical information, and relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations if they exist, including the precautionary principle.   ARTICLE 340  Transparency  Each Party, in accordance with its domestic law and Chapter 12 (Transparency) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, shall ensure that any measure aimed at protecting the environment or labour conditions that may affect trade or investment is developed, introduced and implemented in a transparent manner, with due notice and public consultation, and with appropriate and timely communication to, and consultation of, non-state actors.   ARTICLE 341  Review of sustainability impacts  The Parties commit to reviewing, monitoring and assessing the impact of the implementation of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement on sustainable development through their respective participative processes and institutions, as well as those set up under this Agreement, for instance through trade-related sustainability impact assessments.   ARTICLE 342  Working together on trade and sustainable development  The Parties recognise the importance of working together on trade-related aspects of environmental and labour policies in order to achieve the objectives of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. They may cooperate in, inter alia, the following areas:  (a) labour or environmental aspects of trade and sustainable development in international fora, including in particular the WTO, the ILO, UNEP, and MEAs;   (b) methodologies and indicators for trade sustainability impact assessments;  (c) the impact of labour and environment regulations, norms and standards on trade and investment, as well as the impact of trade and investment rules on labour and environmental law, including on the development of labour and environmental regulations and policy;  (d) the positive and negative impacts of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement on sustainable development and ways to enhance, prevent or mitigate them, respectively, also taking into account the sustainability impact assessments carried out by either or both Parties;  (e) promoting the ratification and the effective implementation of fundamental, priority and other up-to-date ILO conventions and MEAs of relevance in a trade context;  (f) promoting private and public certification, traceability and labelling schemes, including eco-labelling;  (g) promoting corporate social responsibility, for instance through actions concerning awareness raising, adherence, implementation and follow-up of internationally recognised guidelines and principles;  (h) trade-related aspects of the ILO Decent Work Agenda, including on the interlink between trade and full and productive employment, labour market adjustment, core labour standards, labour statistics, human resources development and lifelong learning, social protection and social inclusion, social dialogue and gender equality;  (i) trade-related aspects of MEAs, including customs cooperation;  (j) trade-related aspects of the current and future international climate change regime, including means to promote low-carbon technologies and energy efficiency;  (k) trade-related measures to promote the conservation and the sustainable use of biological diversity;  (l) trade-related measures to tackle deforestation, including by addressing problems regarding illegal logging; and  (m) trade-related measures to promote sustainable fishing practices and trade in sustainably managed fish products.     ARTICLE 343  Institutional and overseeing mechanisms  1. Each Party shall designate an office within its administration that shall serve as the contact point with the other Party for the purposes of implementing this Chapter.  2. The Trade and Sustainable Development Sub-Committee is hereby established. It shall report on its activities to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement. It shall comprise senior officials from within the administrations of each Party.  3. The Trade and Sustainable Development Sub-Committee shall meet within the first year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and thereafter as necessary, to oversee the implementation of this Chapter, including cooperative activities undertaken under Article 342 of this Agreement. That Sub-Committee shall establish its own rules of procedure.  4. Each Party shall convene new, or consult existing, domestic advisory group(s) on sustainable development with the task of advising on issues relating to this Chapter. Such group(s) may submit views or recommendations on the implementation of this Chapter, including on its (their) own initiative.  5. The domestic advisory group(s) shall comprise independent representative organisations of civil society in a balanced representation of economic, social, and environmental stakeholders, including, among others, employers' and workers' organisations, non-governmental organisations, business groups, as well as other relevant stakeholders.   ARTICLE 344  Joint civil society dialogue forum  1. The Parties shall facilitate a joint forum with civil society organisations established in their territories, including members of their domestic advisory group(s) and the public at large, to conduct a dialogue on sustainable development aspects of this Agreement. The Parties shall promote a balanced representation of relevant interests, including independent representative organisations of employers, workers, environmental interests and business groups, as well as other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate.  2. The joint civil society dialogue forum shall be convened once a year unless otherwise agreed by the Parties. The Parties shall agree on the operation of the joint civil society dialogue forum no later than one year after the entry into force of this Agreement.  3. The Parties shall present an update on the implementation of this Chapter to the joint civil society dialogue forum. The views and the opinions of the joint civil society dialogue forum shall be submitted to the Parties and shall be made publicly available.   ARTICLE 345  Government consultations  1. For any matter arising under this Chapter the Parties shall only have recourse to the procedures established under this Article and Article  346 of this Agreement.  2. A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising under this Chapter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party. The request shall present the matter clearly, identifying the problem at issue and providing a brief summary of the claims under this Chapter. Consultations shall start promptly after a Party delivers a request for consultations.  3. The Parties shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter. The Parties shall take into account the activities of the ILO or relevant multilateral environmental organisations or bodies so as to promote greater cooperation and coherence between the work of the Parties and those organisations. Where relevant, the Parties may seek advice from those organisations or bodies, or any person or body they deem appropriate, in order to fully examine the matter.  4. If a Party considers that the matter needs further discussion, that Party may request that the Trade and Sustainable Development Sub-Committee be convened to consider the matter by delivering a written request to the contact point of the other Party. That Sub-Committee shall convene promptly and endeavour to agree on a resolution of the matter.  5. Where appropriate, that Sub-Committee may seek the advice of the domestic advisory group(s) of either Party or both Parties or other expert assistance.  6. Any resolution reached by the consulting Parties on the matter shall be made publicly available.   ARTICLE 346  Panel of Experts  1. Each Party may, 90 days after the delivery of a request for consultations under Article 345(2) of this Agreement, request that a Panel of Experts be convened to examine a matter that has not been satisfactorily addressed through government consultations.  2. The provisions of Sub-Section 1 and Sub-Section 3 of Section 3, and of Article 372 of Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, as well as the Rules of Procedure in Annex XVI to this Agreement and the Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators (‘Code of Conduct’) set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement, shall apply, except as otherwise provided in this Article.  3. At its first meeting after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Trade and Sustainable Development Sub-Committee shall establish a list of at least 15 individuals who are willing and able to serve as experts in Panel procedures. Each Party shall propose at least five individuals to serve as experts. The Parties shall also select at least five individuals who are not nationals of either Party who may serve as chairperson to the Panel of Experts. The Trade and Sustainable Development Sub-Committee shall ensure that the list is always maintained at that level.  4. The list referred to in paragraph 3 shall comprise individuals with specialised knowledge or expertise in law, labour or environmental issues addressed in this Chapter, or the resolution of disputes arising under international agreements. They shall be independent, serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government with regard to issues related to the matter at stake, or be affiliated with the government of any Party, and shall comply with the Code of Conduct set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement.  5. For matters arising under this Chapter, the Panel of Experts shall be composed of experts from the list referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, in accordance with Article 352 of this Agreement and rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure set out in Annex XVI to this Agreement.  6. The Panel of Experts may seek information and advice from either Party, the domestic advisory group(s) or any other source it deems appropriate. In matters related to the respect of multilateral agreements as set out in Articles 332 and 333 of this Agreement, the Panel of Experts should seek information and advice from the ILO or MEA bodies.  7. The Panel of Experts shall issue its report to the Parties, in accordance with the relevant procedures set out in Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. That report shall set out the findings of facts, the applicability of the relevant provisions and the basic rationale behind any findings and recommendations that it makes. The Parties shall make the report publicly available within 15 days of its issuance.   8. The Parties shall discuss appropriate measures to be implemented, taking into account the Panel of Experts' report and recommendations. The Party concerned shall inform its advisory group(s) and the other Party of its decisions on any action or measure to be implemented no later than three months after the public release of the report. The follow-up to the report and the recommendations of the Panel of Experts shall be monitored by the Trade and Sustainable Development Sub-Committee. The advisory bodies and the Joint Civil Society Dialogue Forum may submit observations to the Trade and Sustainable Development Sub-Committee in that regard.    CHAPTER 14 DISPUTE SETTLEMENT SECTION 1  OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE ARTICLE 347  Objective  The objective of this Chapter is to establish an effective and efficient mechanism for avoiding and settling any dispute between the Parties concerning the interpretation and application of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement with a view to arriving, where possible, at a mutually agreed solution. ARTICLE 348  Scope of application  This Chapter shall apply with respect to any dispute concerning the interpretation and application of the provisions of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, except as otherwise provided. SECTION 2  CONSULTATIONS AND MEDIATION   ARTICLE 349  Consultations  1. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve any dispute referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement by entering into consultations in good faith with the aim of reaching a mutually agreed solution.  2. A Party shall seek consultations by means of a written request to the other Party, copied to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, giving reasons for the request, including by identifying the measure at issue and the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement that it considers applicable.  3. Consultations shall be held within 30 days of the date of receipt of the request and take place, unless the Parties agree otherwise, in the territory of the Party to which the request is made. The consultations shall be deemed concluded within 30 days of the date of receipt of the request, unless both Parties agree to continue consultations. Consultations, in particular all information disclosed and positions taken by the Parties during the consultations, shall be confidential, and without prejudice to the rights of either Party in any further proceedings.  4. Consultations on matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods or seasonal goods or services, shall be held within 15 days of the date of receipt of the request by the requested Party, and shall be deemed concluded within those 15 days unless both Parties agree to continue consultations.  5. If the Party to which the request is made does not respond to the request for consultations within 10 days of the date of its receipt, or if consultations are not held within the timeframes laid down in paragraph 3 or in paragraph 4 of this Article, respectively, or if the Parties agree not to have consultations, or if consultations have been concluded and no mutually agreed solution has been reached, the Party that sought consultations may have recourse to Article 351 of this Agreement.  6. During the consultations each Party shall deliver sufficient factual information, so as to allow a complete examination of the manner in which the measure at issue could affect the operation and the application of this Agreement.   7. Where consultations concern the transport of energy goods through networks and one Party views the resolution of the dispute as urgent because of an interruption, in full or in part, of transport of natural gas, oil or electricity between the Parties, the consultations shall be held within three days of the date of submission of the request, and shall be deemed concluded three days after the date of submission of the request unless both Parties agree to continue consultations.   ARTICLE 350  Mediation  Any Party may request the other Party to enter into a mediation procedure with respect to any measure adversely affecting trade or investment between the Parties pursuant to Annex XV to this Agreement.   SECTION 3  DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES   SUB-SECTION 1  ARBITRATION PROCEDURE   ARTICLE 351  Initiation of the arbitration procedure  1. Where the Parties have failed to resolve the dispute by recourse to consultations as provided for in Article 349 of this Agreement, the Party that sought consultations may request the establishment of an arbitration panel in accordance with this Article.  2. The request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be made in writing to the other Party and the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement. The complaining Party shall identify in its request the measure at issue, and it shall explain how the measure is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement in a manner sufficient to present the legal basis for the complaint clearly.   ARTICLE 352  Establishment of the arbitration panel  1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.  2. Within 10 days of the date of receipt by the Party complained against of the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel, the Parties shall consult in order to reach an agreement on the composition of the arbitration panel.  3. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the composition of the arbitration panel within the time frame laid down in paragraph 2 of this Article, each Party may appoint an arbitrator from its sub-list established under Article 370 of this Agreement within five days from the expiry of the timeframe established in paragraph 2 of this Article. If any of the Parties fails to appoint an arbitrator, the arbitrator shall, upon request of the other Party, be selected by lot by the chair of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, or the chair's delegate, from the sub-list of that Party contained in the list established under Article 370 of this Agreement.   4. Unless the Parties reach an agreement concerning the chairperson of the arbitration panel within the timeframe established in paragraph 2 of this Article, the chair of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration or the chair's delegate shall, upon request of any of the Parties, select by lot the chairperson of the arbitration panel from the sub-list of chairpersons contained in the list established under Article 370 of this Agreement.  5. The chair of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration or the chair's delegate shall select the arbitrators within five days of the request by either Party referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4.  6. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the last of the three selected arbitrators accepts the appointment according to the Rules of Procedure in Annex XVI to this Agreement.  7. Should any of the lists provided for in Article 370 of this Agreement not be established or not contain sufficient names at the time a request is made pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article, the arbitrators shall be drawn by lot from the individuals who have been formally proposed by one or both of the Parties.  8. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, in respect of a dispute concerning Chapter 11 (Trade-related Energy) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement which a Party considers to be urgent because of an interruption, in full or in part, of any transport of natural gas, oil, or electricity or a threat thereof between the Parties, the second sentence of paragraph 3 and paragraph 4 shall apply without recourse to paragraph 2, and the period referred to in paragraph 5 shall be of two days.   ARTICLE 353  Preliminary ruling on urgency  If a Party so requests, the arbitration panel shall, within 10 days of its establishment, give a preliminary ruling on whether it deems the case to be urgent.     ARTICLE 354  Arbitration panel report  1. The arbitration panel shall notify an interim report to the Parties setting out the findings of fact, the applicability of relevant provisions and the basic rationale behind any findings and recommendations that it makes, not later than 90 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. Where it considers that that deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration panel plans to notify its interim report. Under no circumstances should the interim report be notified later than 120 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.  2. A Party may submit a written request to the arbitration panel to review precise aspects of the interim report within 14 days of its notification.  3. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or seasonal goods or services, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to notify its interim report within 45 days and, in any case, no later than 60 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. A Party may submit a written request to the arbitration panel to review precise aspects of the interim report, within 7 days of the notification of the interim report.  4. After considering any written comments by the Parties on the interim report, the arbitration panel may modify its report and make any further examination it considers appropriate. The findings of the final panel ruling shall include a sufficient discussion of the arguments made at the interim review stage, and shall answer clearly to the questions and observations of the Parties.  5. In respect of a dispute concerning Chapter 11 (Trade-related Energy) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement which a Party considers to be urgent because of an interruption, in full or in part, of any transport of natural gas, oil or electricity or a threat thereof between the Parties, the interim report shall be notified 20 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel, and any request pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article shall be made within five days of the notification of the written report. The arbitration panel may also decide to dispense with the interim report.     ARTICLE 355  Conciliation for urgent energy disputes  1. In respect of a dispute concerning Chapter 11 (Trade-related Energy) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement which a Party considers to be urgent because of an interruption, in full or in part, of any transport of natural gas, oil, or electricity or a threat thereof between the Parties, either Party may request the chairperson of the arbitration panel to act as a conciliator concerning any matter related to the dispute by making a request to the arbitration panel.  2. The conciliator shall seek an agreed resolution of the dispute or seek to agree a procedure to achieve such resolution. If within 15 days of his/her appointment he/she has failed to secure such agreement, he/she shall recommend a resolution to the dispute or a procedure to achieve such resolution and shall decide on the terms and conditions to be observed from a date which he/she shall specify until the dispute is resolved.  3. The Parties and the entities under their control or jurisdiction shall respect recommendations made under paragraph 2 and any terms and conditions which may be stipulated.  4. The conciliator shall respect the Code of Conduct set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement.   ARTICLE 356  Notification of the ruling of the arbitration panel  1. The arbitration panel shall notify its final ruling to the Parties and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, within 120 days from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. Where it considers that that deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the arbitration panel plans to notify its ruling. Under no circumstances should the ruling be notified later than 150 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.  2. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods or seasonal goods or services, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to notify its ruling within 60 days from the date of its establishment. Under no circumstances should the ruling be notified later than 75 days after the date of its establishment.   3. In respect of a dispute concerning Chapter 11 (Trade-related Energy) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement which a Party considers to be urgent because of an interruption, in full or in part, of any transport of natural gas, oil or electricity or a threat thereof between the Parties, the arbitration panel shall notify its ruling within 40 days from the date of its establishment.     SUB-SECTION 2  COMPLIANCE   ARTICLE 357  Compliance with the arbitration panel ruling  The Party complained against shall take any measure necessary to comply promptly and in good faith with the arbitration panel ruling.   ARTICLE 358  Reasonable period of time for compliance  1. If immediate compliance is not possible, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on the period of time to comply with the ruling. In such a case, the Party complained against shall, no later than 30 days after the receipt of the notification of the arbitration panel ruling to the Parties, notify the complaining Party and the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, of the time it will require for compliance (‘reasonable period of time’) and provide reasons for the proposed reasonable period of time.  2. If there is disagreement between the Parties on the reasonable period of time to comply with the arbitration panel ruling, the complaining Party shall, within 20 days of the receipt of the notification made under paragraph 1 by the Party complained against, request in writing the original arbitration panel to determine the length of the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the other Party and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration. The original arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Parties and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration within 20 days from the date of submission of the request.  3. The Party complained against shall inform the complaining Party in writing of its progress to comply with the arbitration panel ruling at least 30 days before the expiry of the reasonable period of time.  4. The reasonable period of time may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.     ARTICLE 359  Review of any measure taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling  1. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, before the end of the reasonable period of time of any measure that it has taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling.  2. In the event that there is disagreement between the Parties concerning the existence or the consistency of any measure taken to comply as notified in paragraph 1 with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement, the complaining Party may request in writing the original arbitration panel to rule on the matter. Such request shall identify the specific measure at issue and explain how the measure is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement, in a manner sufficient to present the legal basis for the complaint clearly. The original arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Parties and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration within 45 days of the date of submission of the request.   ARTICLE 360  Temporary remedies in case of non-compliance  1. If the Party complained against fails to notify any measure taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or if the arbitration panel rules that no measure taken to comply exists or that the measure notified under Article 359(1) of this Agreement is inconsistent with that Party's obligations under the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement, the Party complained against shall, if so requested by the complaining Party and after consultations with that Party, present an offer for temporary compensation.  2. If the complaining Party decides not to request an offer for temporary compensation under paragraph 1 of this Article, or, in case a request is made but no agreement on compensation is reached within 30 days from the end of the reasonable period of time or of the notification of the arbitration panel ruling under Article 359 of this Agreement that no measure taken to comply exists or that a measure taken to comply is inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement, the complaining Party shall be entitled, upon notification to the other Party and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, to suspend obligations arising from any provision referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement at a level equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the violation. The notification shall specify the level of suspension of obligations. The complaining Party may implement the suspension at any moment after the expiry of 10 days after the date of receipt of the notification by the Party complained against, unless the Party complained against has requested arbitration under paragraph 3 of this Article.  3. If the Party complained against considers that the level of suspension is not equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the violation, it may request in writing the original arbitration panel to rule on the matter. Such request shall be notified to the complaining Party and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration before the expiry of the ten day period referred to in paragraph 2. The original arbitration panel shall notify its ruling on the level of the suspension of obligations to the Parties and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration within 30 days of the date of submission of the request. Obligations shall not be suspended until the original arbitration panel has notified its ruling, and any suspension shall be consistent with the arbitration panel ruling.  4. The suspension of obligations and the compensation foreseen in this Article shall be temporary and shall not be applied after:  (a) the Parties have reached a mutually agreed solution pursuant to Article 365 of this Agreement;  (b) the Parties have agreed that the measure notified under Article 359(1) of this Agreement brings the Party complained against into conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement; or  (c) any measure found to be inconsistent with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it in conformity with those provisions, as ruled under Article 359(1) of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 361  Remedies for urgent energy disputes  1. In respect of a dispute concerning Chapter 11 (Trade-related Energy) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement which a Party considers to be urgent because of an interruption, in full or in part, of any transport of natural gas, oil, or electricity or a threat thereof between the Parties, the provisions of this Article on remedies shall apply.  2. By way of derogation from Articles 358, 359, and 360 of this Agreement, the complaining Party may suspend obligations arising under Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement to a level equivalent to the nullification or impairment caused by the Party failing to bring itself into compliance with the arbitration panel ruling within 15 days of its notification. That suspension may take effect immediately. Such suspension may be maintained as long as the Party complained against has not complied with the arbitration panel ruling.   3. Should the Party complained against dispute the existence of a failure to comply or the level of suspension due to the failure to comply, it may initiate proceedings under Articles 360(3) and 362 of this Agreement which shall be examined expeditiously. The complaining Party shall be required to remove or adjust the suspension only after the arbitration panel has ruled on the matter, and may maintain the suspension pending the proceedings.   ARTICLE 362  Review of any measure taken to comply after the adoption of temporary remedies for non-compliance  1. The Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, of the measure it has taken to comply with the ruling of the arbitration panel following the suspension of concessions or following the application of temporary compensation, as the case may be. With the exception of cases under paragraph 2 of this Article, the complaining Party shall terminate the suspension of concessions within 30 days from the receipt of the notification. In cases where compensation has been applied, and with the exception of cases under paragraph 2, the Party complained against may terminate the application of such compensation within 30 days from its notification that it has complied with the ruling of the arbitration panel.  2. If the Parties do not reach an agreement on whether the notified measure brings the Party complained against into conformity with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notification, the complaining Party shall request in writing the original arbitration panel to rule on the matter. Such a request shall be notified simultaneously to the other Party and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration. The arbitration panel ruling shall be notified to the Parties and to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration within 45 days of the date of submission of the request. If the arbitration panel rules that the measure taken to comply is in accordance with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement, the suspension of obligations or compensation, as the case may be, shall be terminated. Where relevant, the complaining Party shall adapt the level of suspension of concessions to the level determined by the arbitration panel.     SUB-SECTION 3  COMMON PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 363  Replacement of arbitrators  If in an arbitration proceeding under this Chapter, the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, are unable to participate, withdraw, or need to be replaced because they do not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement, the procedure set out in Article 352 of this Agreement shall apply. The timeframe-limit for the notification of the arbitration panel ruling shall be extended for the time necessary for the appointment of a new arbitrator but for no more than 20 days.   ARTICLE 364  Suspension and termination of arbitration and compliance procedures  The arbitration panel shall, at the written request of the Parties, suspend its work at any time for a period agreed by the Parties not exceeding 12 consecutive months. The arbitration panel shall resume its work before the end of that period at the written request of the Parties or at the end of that period at the written request of any Party. The requesting Party shall inform the Chairperson of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, and the other Party, accordingly. If a Party does not request the resumption of the arbitration panel's work at the expiry of the agreed suspension period, the procedure shall be terminated. The suspension and termination of the arbitration panel's work are without prejudice to the rights of either Party in another proceeding subject to Article 371 of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 365  Mutually agreed solution  The Parties may reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute under this Chapter at any time. They shall jointly notify the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, and the chairperson of the arbitration panel, where applicable, of any such solution. If the solution requires approval pursuant to the relevant domestic procedures of either Party, the notification shall refer to this requirement, and the dispute settlement procedure shall be suspended. If such approval is not required, or if the completion of any such domestic procedures is notified, the dispute settlement procedure shall be terminated.   ARTICLE 366  Rules of procedure  1. Dispute settlement procedures under this Chapter shall be governed by the Rules of Procedure set out in Annex XVI to this Agreement and by the Code of Conduct set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement.  2. Any hearing of the arbitration panel shall be open to the public unless provided otherwise in the Rules of Procedure.   ARTICLE 367  Information and technical advice  At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel may obtain any information it deems appropriate for the arbitration panel proceeding from any source, including the Parties involved in the dispute. The arbitration panel also has the right to seek the opinion of experts, as it deems appropriate. The arbitration panel shall consult the Parties before choosing such experts. Natural or legal persons established in the territory of a Party may submit amicus curiae briefs to the arbitration panel in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. Any information obtained under this Article shall be disclosed to each of the Parties and submitted for their comments.   ARTICLE 368  Rules of interpretation  The arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including those codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The arbitration panel shall also take into account relevant interpretations established in reports of panels and of the Appellate Body adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO (DSB). The rulings of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations of the Parties provided under this Agreement.     ARTICLE 369  Decisions and rulings of the arbitration panel  1. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take any decision by consensus. Where, nevertheless, a decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by majority vote. However, in no case shall dissenting opinions of arbitrators be disclosed.  2. The rulings of the arbitration panel shall be unconditionally accepted by the Parties. They shall not create any rights or obligations for natural or legal persons. The rulings shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement, and the basic rationale behind any findings and conclusions that they make. The Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, shall make the rulings of the arbitration panel publicly available in their entirety within 10 days of their notification, unless it decides not to do so in order to ensure the confidentiality of business confidential information.     SECTION 4  GENERAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 370  Lists of arbitrators  1. The Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, shall, no later than six months after the entry into force of this Agreement, establish a list of at least 15 individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators. The list shall be composed of three sub-lists: one sub-list for each Party and one sub-list of individuals that are not nationals of either Party and who may serve as chairperson to the arbitration panel. Each sub-list shall include at least five individuals. The Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration shall ensure that the list is always maintained at that level.  2. Arbitrators shall have specialised knowledge and experience of law and international trade. They shall be independent, serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government, or be affiliated with the government of any of the Parties, and shall comply with the Code of Conduct set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement.  3. The Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration may establish additional lists of 12 individuals with knowledge and experience in specific sectors covered by this Agreement. Subject to the agreement of the Parties, such additional lists shall be used to compose the arbitration panel in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 352 of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 371  Relation with WTO obligations  1. Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall be without prejudice to any action in the WTO framework, including dispute settlement proceedings.  2. However, a Party shall not, for any particular measure, seek redress for a substantially equivalent obligation under both this Agreement and the WTO Agreement in both fora. In such case, once a dispute settlement proceeding has been initiated, the Party shall not bring a claim seeking redress for the breach of the substantially equivalent obligation under the other Agreement to the other forum, unless the forum selected first fails for procedural or jurisdictional reasons to make findings on the claim seeking redress of that obligation.   3. For the purposes of paragraph 2 of this Article:  (a) dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement are deemed to be initiated by a Party's request for the establishment of a panel under Article 6 of the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes of the WTO; and  (b) dispute settlement proceedings under this Chapter are deemed to be initiated by a Party's request for the establishment of an arbitration panel under Article 351 of this Agreement.  4. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party from implementing the suspension of obligations authorised by the DSB. The WTO Agreement shall not be invoked to preclude a Party from suspending obligations under this Chapter.   ARTICLE 372  Timeframes-limits  1. All timeframes-limits laid down in this Chapter, including the limits for the arbitration panels to notify their rulings, shall be counted in calendar days from the day following the act or the fact to which they refer, unless otherwise specified.  2. Any timeframe-limit referred to in this Chapter may be modified by mutual agreement of the Parties to the dispute. The arbitration panel may at any time propose to the Parties to modify any timeframe-limit referred to in this Chapter, stating the reasons for the proposal.    TITLE VI  INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS   CHAPTER 1  INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK   ARTICLE 373  The Parties shall hold a regular Political and Strategic Dialogue at the level and frequency agreed by mutual consent.    ARTICLE 374  1. The Political and Strategic Dialogue established by Article 373 shall supervise and monitor the application and implementation of this Agreement and periodically review the functioning of this Agreement in the light of its objectives.  2. In addition to supervising and monitoring the application and implementation of this Agreement, the Political and Strategic Dialogue shall examine any major issues arising within the framework of this Agreement, and any other bilateral or international issues of mutual interest.   ARTICLE 375  1. The Political and Strategic Dialogue shall consist of members of the Government or senior officials of the UK and of the Republic of Moldova, at the level agreed by the Parties.  2. The Political and Strategic Dialogue shall establish its own rules of procedure.  3. Notwithstanding Article 373, the Political and Strategic Dialogue shall meet in a specific configuration to address all issues related to Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. The Political and Strategic Dialogue shall meet in that configuration at least once a year. The Parties may establish specific rules of procedure for the Political and Strategic Dialogue in this configuration.  4. The sub-committees established under Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement shall inform the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in paragraph 3, of the date and agenda of their meetings sufficiently in advance of their meetings. They shall report on their activities at each regular meeting of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration.  5. The existence of any of the sub-committees established under Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) shall not prevent either Party from bringing any matter directly to the Political and Strategic Dialogue, including in its Trade configuration, as set out in paragraph 3.  6. Nothing in this Agreement shall restrict cooperation between the UK Parliament and the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova or between civil society organisations in the UK and the Republic of Moldova.  7. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, any decisions adopted by the Council and any Committees or sub-committees established by the EU-Moldova Agreement before the EU-Moldova Agreement ceased to apply to the United Kingdom shall, to the extent those decisions relate to the Parties to this Agreement, be deemed to have been adopted, mutatis mutandis and subject to the provisions of this Agreement, by the Political and Strategic Dialogue established by Article 373.   ARTICLE 376  1. For the purpose of attaining the objectives of this Agreement, the Political and Strategic Dialogue shall have the power to take decisions within the scope of this Agreement. Such decisions shall be binding upon the Parties, which shall take appropriate measures, including, if necessary, action of bodies established under this Agreement, to implement the decisions taken. The Political and Strategic Dialogue may also make recommendations. It shall adopt its decisions and recommendations by agreement between the Parties following completion of the respective internal procedures.  2. In accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, the Political and Strategic Dialogue shall have the power to update or amend the Annexes to this Agreement without prejudice to any specific provisions under Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.     CHAPTER 2 GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 377 Access to courts and administrative organs Within the scope of this Agreement, each Party undertakes to ensure that natural and legal persons of the other Party have access, that is free of discrimination in relation to its own nationals, to its competent courts and administrative organs in order to defend their individual and property rights. ARTICLE 378 Access to official documents The provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to the application of the relevant internal laws and regulations of the Parties regarding public access to official documents. ARTICLE 379 Security exceptions Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures: (a) which it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;  (b) which relate to the production of, or trade in, arms, munitions or war materiel or to research, development or production indispensable for defence purposes, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military purposes; and  (c) which it considers essential to its own security, in the event of serious internal disturbances affecting the maintenance of law and order, in time of war or serious international tension constituting threat of war, or in order to carry out obligations it has accepted for the purpose of maintaining peace and international security. ARTICLE 380  Non-discrimination  1. In the fields covered by this Agreement and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein:  (a) the arrangements applied by the Republic of Moldova in respect of the UK shall not give rise to any discrimination between nationals, companies or firms of the UK; and  (b) the arrangements applied by the UK in respect of the Republic of Moldova shall not give rise to any discrimination between nationals, companies or firms of the Republic of Moldova.  2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall be without prejudice to the right of the Parties to apply the relevant provisions of their fiscal legislation to taxpayers who are not in identical situations as regards their place of residence.   ARTICLE 381  Monitoring  Monitoring shall mean the continuous appraisal of progress in implementing and enforcing measures covered by this Agreement. The Parties will cooperate in order to facilitate the monitoring process in the framework of the institutional bodies established by this Agreement.   ARTICLE 382  Results of monitoring  1. The results of monitoring activities, shall be discussed in the context of the Political and Strategic Dialogue established in Article 373, including the Political and Strategic Dialogue under its trade configuration as set out in Article 375(3) for matters related to Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters).  2. If the Parties agree that necessary measures covered by Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement have been implemented and are being enforced, the Political and Strategic Dialogue, under  the powers conferred on it by Article 375 of this Agreement, shall agree on further market opening as defined in Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.   3. Any discussion of monitoring as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be subject to dispute settlement as defined in Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. Any decision on monitoring taken by the Political and Strategic Dialogue, or failure to take such a decision, shall not be subject to dispute settlement as defined in Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 383  Fulfilment of obligations  1. The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their obligations under this Agreement. They shall ensure that the objectives set out in this Agreement are attained.  2. The Parties agree to consult promptly through appropriate channels at the request of either Party, to discuss any matter concerning the interpretation, implementation, or good faith application of this Agreement and other relevant aspects of the relations between the Parties.  3. The Parties shall refer to the Political and Strategic Dialogue any dispute related to the interpretation, implementation, or good faith application of this Agreement in accordance with Article 384 of this Agreement. The Political and Strategic Dialogue may settle a dispute by means of a binding decision.   ARTICLE 384  Dispute settlement  1. When a dispute arises between the Parties concerning the interpretation, implementation, or good faith application of this Agreement, any Party shall submit to the other Party and the Political and Strategic Dialogue a formal request that the matter in dispute be resolved. By way of derogation, disputes concerning the interpretation, implementation, or good faith application of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) shall be exclusively governed by Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of that Title.  2. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve the dispute by entering into good faith consultations within the Political and Strategic Dialogue, with the aim of reaching a mutually acceptable solution in the shortest time possible.  3. The Parties shall provide the Political and Strategic Dialogue with all information required for a thorough examination of the situation.   4. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 373 if a Party makes a formal request that a dispute be resolved, the Parties shall meet in the Political and Strategic Dialogue within 1 month of that request being made. The Parties shall ensure that the configuration of the Political and Strategic Dialogue convened to consider the dispute is comprised of Ministers or senior officials, of both Parties, as appropriate.  5. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 373, as long as a dispute is not resolved, the Political and Strategic Dialogue shall meet monthly to discuss the dispute. A dispute shall be deemed to be resolved when the Political and Strategic Dialogue has taken a binding decision to settle the matter as provided for in paragraph 3 of Article 383 of this Agreement, or when it has declared that the dispute has ended.   6. All information disclosed during the dispute shall remain confidential.   ARTICLE 385  Appropriate measures in case of non-fulfilment of obligations  1. A Party may take appropriate measures if the matter at issue is not resolved within three months of the date of notification of a formal request for dispute settlement according to Article 384 of this Agreement and if the complaining Party continues to consider that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Agreement. The requirement for a three-month consultation period shall not apply to exceptional cases set out in paragraph 3 of this Article.  2. In the selection of appropriate measures, priority shall be given to those which least disturb the functioning of this Agreement. Except in the cases described in paragraph 3 of this Article, such measures may not include the suspension of any rights or obligations provided for under provisions of this Agreement set out in Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters). The measures taken under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be notified immediately to the Political and Strategic Dialogue and shall be the subject of dispute settlement in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 383 and Article 384 of this Agreement.  3. The exceptions referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall concern:  (a) denunciation of this Agreement not sanctioned by the general rules of international law; or  (b) violation by the other Party of any of the essential elements of this Agreement, referred to in Article 2 of Title I (General Principles) of this Agreement.     ARTICLE 386  Amendments  1. Without prejudice to Article 376(2) or any specific provision under Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, the Parties may agree, in writing, to amend this Agreement. An amendment shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the later of the Parties’ notifications that they have completed their internal procedures, or on such date as the Parties may agree.  2. The Parties may complement this Agreement by concluding specific agreements in any area falling within its scope. Such agreements may be an integral part of the overall bilateral relations as governed by this Agreement and may form part of a common institutional framework, if the Parties agree.   ARTICLE 387  Retained law  1. Except as otherwise provided, references in this Agreement to EU law are to be read as references to that EU law in force as incorporated or implemented in United Kingdom law as retained EU law on the day after the United Kingdom ceases to be bound by the relevant EU law.  2. In this Article “United Kingdom law” includes the law of the territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible to whom this Agreement extends, as set out in Paragraph 1 of Article 391.  3. In view of the Republic of Moldova’s commitments to dynamic approximation, in case of differences, the Parties will address this in the relevant cooperation forum.   ARTICLE 388  Annexes and Protocols  The Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement shall form an integral part of this Agreement.     ARTICLE 389  Duration  1. This Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period.  2. Either Party may denounce this Agreement by notifying the other Party. This Agreement shall terminate six months from the date of receipt of such notification, except if the provisional application of the Agreement is terminated in accordance with paragraph 7 of Article 392.   ARTICLE 390  Definition of the Parties  For the purposes of this Agreement, the term ‘the Parties’ means the UK, of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part.   ARTICLE 391  Territorial application  1. This Agreement shall apply, to the extent that and under the conditions which the EU-Moldova Agreement applied immediately before it ceased to apply to the United Kingdom, on the one hand, to the United Kingdom and the following territories for whose international relations it is responsible: (a) Gibraltar; (b) the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and, on the other hand, to the territory of the Republic of Moldova.  2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the application of this Agreement, or of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) thereof, in relation to those areas of the Republic of Moldova over which the Government of the Republic of Moldova does not exercise effective control, shall commence once the Republic of Moldova ensures the full implementation and enforcement of this Agreement, or of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) thereof, respectively, on its entire territory.  3. The Political and Strategic Dialogue shall adopt a decision on when the full implementation and enforcement of this Agreement, or of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) thereof, on the entire territory of the Republic of Moldova is ensured.   4. Should a Party consider that the full implementation and enforcement of this Agreement, or of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) thereof, is no longer ensured in the areas of the Republic of Moldova referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, that Party may request the Political and Strategic Dialogue to reconsider the continued application of this Agreement, or of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) thereof, respectively, in relation to the areas concerned. The Political and Strategic Dialogue shall examine the situation and adopt a decision on the continued application of this Agreement, or of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) thereof, within three months of the request. If the Political and Strategic Dialogue does not adopt a decision within three months of the request, the application of this Agreement, or of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) thereof, shall be suspended in relation to the areas concerned until the Political and Strategic Dialogue adopts a decision.  5. Decisions of the Political and Strategic Dialogue under this Article on the application of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement shall cover the entirety of that Title and cannot cover only parts thereof.   ARTICLE 392  Entry into force and provisional application  1. This Agreement shall be ratified or approved in accordance with each of the Parties’ own internal procedures. Each Party shall notify the other Party of the completion of those procedures.   2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the later of the Parties’ notifications that they have completed their internal procedures.   3. Pending entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties agree to provisionally apply this Agreement in accordance with each of the Parties’ own internal procedures.   4. This Agreement shall be applied provisionally between the Parties on the later of:  (a) the date on which the EU-Moldova Agreement ceases to apply to the United Kingdom; and  (b) the date of receipt of the later notification of provisional application from the United Kingdom or from the Republic of Moldova.  5. Notifications under paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article shall be submitted by the United Kingdom to the Republic of Moldova’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration or its successor and by the Republic of Moldova to the United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office or its successor.   6. If pending the entry into force of this Agreement it is provisionally applied pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4, unless this Agreement provides otherwise, all references in this Agreement to the date of entry into force shall be deemed to refer to the date such provisional application takes effect. 7. Either Party may give written notification, through diplomatic channels, to the other Party of its intention to terminate the provisional application of this Agreement. Termination of provisional application shall take effect two months after receipt of the notification by the other Party of this Agreement. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorised thereto by their respective Authorities, have signed this Agreement. Done at Chisinau, this twenty fourth day of December 2020, in two originals, in the English and Romanian languages, both texts being equally authentic. For the United Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland: STEVEN FISHERFor the Republic of Moldova:      AURELIU CIOCOI ANNEX I  TO TITLE III (FREEDOM, SECURITY AND JUSTICE)  Commitments and Principles on personal data protection   1. The Parties shall, in the context of the implementation of this or other Agreements, ensure a legal level of data protection which at least corresponds to that set out in the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to the Automatic Processing of Personal Data, signed on 28 January 1981 (ETS No 108) and its Additional Protocol, regarding Supervisory Authorities and Transborder Data Flows, signed on 8 November 2001 (ETS No 181). Where relevant, the Parties shall take into account Recommendation No. R (87) 15 of 17 September 1987 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe Regulating the Use of Personal Data in the Police Sector.   2. In addition the following principles shall apply:  (a) both the transferring authority and the receiving authority shall take every reasonable step to ensure, as appropriate, the rectification, erasure or blocking of personal data where the processing does not comply with the provisions of Article 15 of this Agreement, in particular because those data are not adequate, relevant, or accurate, or because they are excessive in relation to the purpose of processing. This includes the notification of any rectification, erasure or blocking to the other Party;  (b) upon request, the receiving authority shall inform the transferring authority of the use of the transferred data and of the results obtained therefrom;  (c) personal data may only be transferred to the competent authorities. Further transfer to other authorities requires the prior authorisation of the transferring authority;  (d) the transferring and the receiving authorities are under an obligation to make a written record of the communication and receipt of personal data;  (e) upon request, each person shall have the right to be provided with information by the authority which processed the personal data in relation to the data concerning them, transmitted or processed under this Agreement;  (f) The Parties shall ensure that each individual, in the case of a breach of his right to data protection, can file a complaint with the independent supervisory authority in the field of personal data protection or before a law court and may claim damages.ANNEX II  Elimination of Customs Duties  1. The Parties shall eliminate all customs duties on goods originating in the other Party as from the date of entry into force of this Agreement except as provided in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 and without prejudice to paragraph 5 of this Annex.  2. Products listed in Annex II-A shall be imported into the UK free of customs duties within the limits of the tariff quotas set out in that Annex. The most-favoured-nation (MFN) customs duty rate shall apply to imports exceeding the tariff-rate quota limit.  3. Products listed in Annex II-B may be subject to an import duty into the UK with exemption of the ad valorem component of that import duty.  4. The elimination of certain customs duties by the Republic of Moldova as set out in Annex II-D shall take place in accordance with the following modalities: (a) the customs duties for the items in staging category ‘10-A’ in the Republic of Moldova’s Schedule shall be eliminated in 10 equal annual stages starting on 1 January 2015 and customs duties for such products shall be fully eliminated from 1 January 2024. (b) the elimination of customs duties for products in staging category ’10-S’ (products subject to a 5-year standstill) shall be eliminated in 10 equal annual stages, starting on 1 January 2019 and customs duties for such products shall be fully eliminated from 1 January 2028.    5. The import of products originating in the Republic of Moldova listed in Annex II-C shall be subject to the UK anti-circumvention mechanism set out in Article 125 of this Agreement. ANNEX II-A  PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO ANNUAL DUTY-FREE TARIFF-RATE QUOTAS (UK)  Order No  CN code 2020  Product description  Volume  Rate of  1  0702 00 00  Tomatoes, fresh or chilled  272  free  2  0703 20 00  Garlic, fresh or chilled  30  free  3  0806 10 10  Table grapes, fresh  2724  free  4  0808 10 80  Apples, fresh (excl. cider apples, in bulk, from 16 September to 15 December)  5448  free  5  0809 29 00  Cherries (excl. sour cherries), fresh  204  free  6  0809 40 05  Plums, fresh  2043  free  7  2009 61 10  Grape juice, incl. grape must, unfermented, Brix value <= 30 at 20°C, value of >  15 GBP per 100 kg, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. containing spirit)  68  free  2009 69 19  Grape juice, incl. grape must, unfermented, Brix value > 67 at 20°C, value of >  18 GBP per 100 kg, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. containing spirit)  2009 69 51  Concentrated grape juice, incl. grape must, unfermented, Brix value > 30 but <= 67 at 20°C, value of > 15 GBP per 100 kg, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. containing spirit)  2009 69 59  Grape juice, incl. grape must, unfermented, Brix value > 30 but <= 67 at 20°C, value of > 15 GBP per 100 kg, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. concentrated or containing spirit)   ANNEX II-B  PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO ENTRY PRICE (1) (1) Legal reference for entry price: “entry price system” refers to any law or regulation of the United Kingdom that applies an entry price system to certain fruits and vegetables in accordance with Part I, Section I-A of Schedule XIX (United Kingdom) to the GATT 1994 adopted by the United Kingdom on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement. The ad valorem component of the customs duties on the originating goods classified under the tariff lines listed in this Annex II-B shall be eliminated upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement. The tariff elimination shall only apply to the ad valorem component of the customs duties; the specific duty component of the customs duties resulting from any entry price system (which may be introduced on or after the entry into force of this Agreement) may be applied by the United Kingdom to these originating goods.  for which the ad valorem component of the import duty is exempted (UK)  CN code 2020  Product description  0707 00 05  Cucumbers, fresh or chilled  0709 91 00  Globe artichokes, fresh or chilled  0709 93 10  Courgettes, fresh or chilled  0805 10 22  Navel oranges  0805 10 24  White oranges  0805 10 28  Sweet oranges, fresh  0805 21 10  Satsumas  0805 21 90  Fresh or dried mandarins incl. tangerines (excl. clementines and satsumas)  0805 22 00  Fresh or dried clementines including monreales  0805 29 00  Fresh or dried wilkings and similar citrus hybrids  0805 50 10  Lemons ‘Citrus limon, Citrus limonum’  0808 30 90  Pears (excl. perry pears in bulk from 1 August to 31 December)  0809 10 00  Apricots, fresh  0809 21 00  Sour cherries ‘Prunus cerasus’, fresh  0809 30 10  Nectarines, fresh  0809 30 90  Peaches (excl. nectarines), fresh     CN code 2020  Product description  2204 30 92  Grape must, unfermented, concentrated within the meaning of Additional Note 7 to chapter 22, of a density <= 1,33 g/cm3 at 20 °C and of an actual alcoholic strength <= 1 % vol but > 0,5 % vol (excl. grape must whose fermentation has been arrested by the addition of alcohol)  2204 30 94  Grape must, unfermented, non-concentrated, of a density <= 1,33 g/cm3 at 20 °C and of an actual alcoholic strength <= 1 % vol but > 0,5 % vol (excl. grape must whose fermentation has been arrested by the addition of alcohol)  2204 30 96  Grape must, unfermented, concentrated within the meaning of Additional Note 7 to chapter 22, of a density > 1,33 g/cm3 at 20 °C and of an actual alcoholic strength <= 1 % vol but > 0,5 % vol (excl. grape must whose fermentation has been arrested by the addition of alcohol)  2204 30 98  Grape must, unfermented, non-concentrated, of a density > 1,33 g/cm3 at 20 °C and of an actual alcoholic strength <= 1 % vol but > 0,5 % vol (excl. grape must whose fermentation has been arrested by the addition of alcohol)      ANNEX II-C  PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO ANTI-CIRCUMVENTION MECHANISM (UK)  Agricultural products  Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   1 Pig meat   0203 11 10   Fresh or chilled domestic swine carcases and half-carcases   4 500   0203 12 11   Fresh or chilled with bone in, domestic swine hams and cuts thereof   0203 12 19   Fresh or chilled with bone in, domestic swine shoulders and cuts thereof   0203 19 11   Fresh or chilled fore-ends and cuts thereof of domestic swine   0203 19 13   Fresh or chilled loins and cuts thereof of domestic swine   0203 19 15   Fresh or chilled bellies ‘streaky’ and cuts thereof of domestic swine   0203 19 55   Fresh or chilled boneless meat of domestic swine (excl. bellies and cuts thereof)   0203 19 59   Fresh or chilled meat of domestic swine, with bone in (excl. carcases and half-carcases, hams, shoulders and cuts  thereof, and fore-ends, loins, bellies and cuts thereof)   0203 21 10   Frozen domestic swine carcases and half-carcases   0203 22 11   Frozen hams and cuts thereof of domestic swine, with bone in    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   1 Pig meat   0203 22 19   Frozen shoulders and cuts thereof of domestic swine, with bone in     0203 29 11   Frozen fore-ends and cuts thereof of domestic swine   0203 29 13   Frozen loins and cuts thereof of domestic swine, with bone in   0203 29 15   Frozen bellies ‘streaky’ and cuts thereof of domestic swine   0203 29 55   Frozen boneless meat of domestic swine (excl. bellies and cuts thereof)   0203 29 59   Frozen meat of domestic swine, with bone in (excl. fore-ends, loins, bellies and cuts thereof)   2 Poultry meat   0207 11 30   Fresh or chilled, plucked and drawn fowls of species Gallus domesticus, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘70 % chickens’   600   0207 11 90   Fresh or chilled, plucked and drawn fowls of species Gallus domesticus, without heads, feet, necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘65 % chickens’, and other forms of fresh or chilled fowl, not cut in pieces (excl. ‘83 % and 70 % chickens’)   0207 12 10   Frozen fowls of species Gallus domesticus, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘70 % chickens’    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat   0207 12 90   Frozen fowls of species Gallus domesticus, plucked and drawn, without heads, feet, necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘65 % chickens’, and other forms of fowl, not cut in pieces (excl. ‘70 % chickens’)     0207 13 10   Fresh or chilled boneless cuts of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   0207 13 20   Fresh or chilled halves or quarters of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   0207 13 30   Fresh or chilled whole wings, with or without tips, of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   0207 13 50   Fresh or chilled breasts and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in   0207 13 60   Fresh or chilled legs and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in   0207 13 99   Fresh or chilled edible offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (excl. livers)   0207 14 10   Frozen boneless cuts of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   0207 14 20   Frozen halves or quarters of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   0207 14 30   Frozen whole wings, with or without tips, of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat   0207 14 50   Frozen breasts and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in     0207 14 60   Frozen legs and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in   0207 14 99   Frozen edible offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (excl. livers)     0207 24 10   Fresh or chilled, plucked and drawn turkeys of the species domesticus, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘80 % turkeys’       0207 24 90   Fresh or chilled, plucked and drawn turkeys of the species domesticus, without heads, feet, necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘73 % turkeys’, and other forms of fresh or chilled turkeys, not cut in pieces (excl. ‘80 % turkeys’)     0207 25 10   Frozen turkeys of the species domesticus, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘80 % turkeys’   0207 25 90   Frozen turkeys of the species domesticus, plucked and drawn, without heads, feet, necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘73 % turkeys’, and other forms of turkeys, not cut in pieces (excl. ‘80 % turkeys’)   0207 26 10   Fresh or chilled boneless cuts of turkeys of the species domesticus    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat    0207 26 20   Fresh or chilled halves or quarters of turkeys of the species domesticus     0207 26 30   Fresh or chilled whole wings, with or without tips, of turkeys of the species domesticus   0207 26 50   Fresh or chilled breasts and cuts thereof of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in   0207 26 60   Fresh or chilled drumsticks and cuts thereof of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in   0207 26 70   Fresh or chilled legs and cuts thereof of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in (excl. drumsticks)   0207 26 80   Fresh or chilled cuts of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in (excl. halves or quarters, whole wings, with or without tips, backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing- tips, breasts, legs and cuts thereof)   0207 26 99   Fresh or chilled edible offal of turkeys of the species domesticus (excl. livers)   0207 27 10   Frozen boneless cuts of turkeys of the species domesticus   0207 27 20   Frozen halves and quarters of turkeys of the species domesticus   0207 27 30   Frozen whole wings, with or without tips, of turkeys of the species domesticus    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat   0207 27 50   Frozen breasts and cuts thereof of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in       0207 27 60   Frozen drumsticks and cuts thereof of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in     0207 27 70   Frozen legs and cuts thereof of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in (excl. drumsticks)   0207 27 80   Frozen cuts of turkeys of the species domesticus, with bone in (excl. halves or quarters, whole wings, with or without tips, backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips, breasts, legs and cuts thereof)   0207 27 99   Frozen edible offal of turkeys of the species domesticus (excl. livers)   0207 41 30   Fresh or chilled domestic ducks, not cut in pieces, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzard ‘70 % ducks’   0207 41 80   Fresh or chilled domestic ducks, not cut in pieces, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet and without necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, ‘63 % ducks’ or otherwise presented   0207 42 30   Frozen domestic ducks, not cut in pieces, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards ‘70 % ducks’    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat    0207 42 80   Frozen domestic ducks, not cut in pieces, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet and without necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, ‘63 % ducks’ or otherwise presented     0207 44 10   Fresh or chilled cuts of domestic ducks, boneless   0207 44 21   Fresh or chilled halves or quarters of domestic ducks   0207 44 31   Fresh or chilled whole wings of domestic ducks   0207 44 41   Fresh or chilled backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips of domestic ducks   0207 44 51   Fresh or chilled breasts and cuts thereof, of domestic ducks, with bone in   0207 44 61   Fresh or chilled legs and cuts thereof, of domestic ducks, with bone in   0207 44 71   Fresh or chilled paletots of domestic ducks, with bone in   0207 44 81   Fresh or chilled cuts of domestic ducks, with bone in, n.e.s.   0207 44 99   Fresh or chilled edible offal of domestic ducks (excl. livers)     0207 45 10   Frozen cuts of domestic ducks, boneless     0207 45 21   Frozen halves or quarters of domestic ducks    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat   0207 45 31   Frozen whole wings of domestic ducks     0207 45 41   Frozen backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips of domestic ducks   0207 45 51   Frozen breasts and cuts thereof, of domestic ducks, with bone in   0207 45 61   Frozen legs and cuts thereof, of domestic ducks, with bone in   0207 45 81   Frozen cuts of domestic ducks, with bone in, n.e.s.   0207 45 99   Frozen edible offal of domestic ducks (excl. livers)   0207 51 10   Fresh or chilled domestic geese, not cut in pieces, plucked, bled, not drawn, with heads and feet ‘82 % geese’   0207 51 90   Fresh or chilled domestic geese, not cut in pieces, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet, with or without hearts and gizzards, ‘75 % geese’ or otherwise presented   0207 52 90   Frozen domestic geese, not cut in pieces, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet, with or without hearts and gizzards, ‘75 % geese’ or otherwise presented   0207 54 10   Fresh or chilled cuts of domestic geese, boneless   0207 54 21   Fresh or chilled halves or quarters of domestic geese    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat   0207 54 31   Fresh or chilled whole wings of domestic geese     0207 54 41   Fresh or chilled backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips of domestic geese   0207 54 51   Fresh or chilled breasts and cuts thereof, of domestic geese, with bone in   0207 54 61   Fresh or chilled legs and cuts thereof, of domestic geese, with bone in   0207 54 71   Fresh or chilled paletots of domestic geese, with bone in   0207 54 81   Fresh or chilled cuts of domestic geese, with bone in, n.e.s.     0207 54 99   Fresh or chilled edible offal of domestic geese (excl. livers)     0207 55 10   Frozen cuts of domestic geese, boneless   0207 55 21   Frozen halves or quarters of domestic geese   0207 55 31   Frozen whole wings of domestic geese   0207 55 41   Frozen backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips of domestic geese   0207 55 51   Frozen breasts and cuts thereof, of domestic geese, with bone in   0207 55 61   Frozen legs and cuts thereof, of domestic geese, with bone in    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat   0207 55 81   Frozen cuts of domestic geese, with bone in, n.e.s.     0207 55 99   Frozen edible offal of domestic geese (excl. livers)   0207 60 05   Fresh, chilled or frozen domestic guinea fowls, not cut in pieces   0207 60 10   Fresh, chilled or frozen cuts of domestic guinea fowls, boneless   0207 60 31   Fresh, chilled or frozen whole wings of domestic guinea fowls   0207 60 41   Fresh, chilled or frozen backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips of domestic guinea fowls   0207 60 51   Fresh, chilled or frozen breasts and cuts thereof, of domestic guinea fowls, with bone in   0207 60 61   Fresh, chilled or frozen legs and cuts thereof, of domestic guinea fowls, with bone in   0207 60 81   Fresh, chilled or frozen cuts of domestic guinea fowls, with bone in, n.e.s.   0207 60 99   Fresh, chilled or frozen edible offal of domestic guinea fowls (excl. livers)   1602 32 11   Uncooked, prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus containing >= 57 % meat or offal of poultry (excl. sausages and similar products, and preparations of liver)    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   2 Poultry meat   1602 32 30   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus containing >= 25 % but < 57 % of poultry meat or offal (excl. sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weights of  <=250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)     1602 32 90   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (excl. that containing >= 25 % meat or offal of poultry, meat or offal of turkeys or guinea fowl, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts and juices)   3 Dairy products   0402 10 11   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg   1 700   0402 10 19   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg   0402 10 91   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   3 Dairy products   0402 10 99   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg     0405 10 11   Natural butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 %, in immediate packings of a net content of <= 1 kg (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   0405 10 19   Natural butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 % (excl. in immediate packings of a net content of <= 1 kg, and dehydrated butter and ghee)   0405 10 30   Recombined butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 % (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   0405 10 50   Whey butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 % (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   0405 10 90   Butter of a fat content, by weight, of > 85 % but <= 95 % (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   4 Eggs in shell   0407 21 00   Fresh eggs of domestic fowls, in shell (excl. fertilised for incubation)   7 000 (1)    0407 29 10   Fresh poultry eggs, in shell (excl. of fowls, and fertilised for incubation)  (1) 140 mln . 50 gr = 7 000 t   Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   4 Eggs in shell   0407 29 90   Fresh birds' eggs, in shell (excl. of poultry, and fertilised for incubation)     0407 90 10   Poultry eggs, in shell, preserved or cooked   5 Eggs and albumins   0408 91 80   Dried birds' eggs, not in shell, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, suitable for human consumption (excl. egg yolks)   400   0408 99 80   Birds' eggs, not in shell, fresh, cooked by steaming or by boiling in water, moulded, frozen or otherwise preserved, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, suitable for human consumption (excl. dried and egg yolks)   6 Wheat, flour and pellets   1001 91 90   Wheat seed for sowing (excl. durum, common wheat and spelt)   150 000   1001 99 00   Wheat and meslin (excl. seed for sowing, and durum wheat)   7 Barley, flour and pellets   1003 90 00   Barley (excl. seed for sowing)   100 000   8 Maize, flour and pellets   1005 90 00   Maize (excl. seed for sowing)   250 000   9 Sugars   1701 99 10   White sugar, containing in dry state>= 99,5 % sucrose (excl. flavoured or coloured)   37 400      Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   10 Cereal processed   1904 30 00   Bulgur wheat in the form of worked grains, obtained by cooking hard wheat grains   5 000   2207 10 00   Undenatured ethyl alcohol, of actual alcoholic strength of >= 80 %   2207 20 00   Denatured ethyl alcohol and other spirits of any strength   2208 90 91   Undenatured ethyl alcohol, of an alcoholic strength of < 80 % vol, in containers holding <= 2 l   2208 90 99   Undenatured ethyl alcohol, of an alcoholic strength of < 80 % vol, in containers holding > 2 l   2905 43 00   Mannitol   2905 44 11   D-glucitol ‘sorbitol’, in aqueous solution containing <= 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content   2905 44 19   D-glucitol ‘sorbitol’ in aqueous solution (excl. containing <= 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content)     2905 44 91   D-glucitol ‘sorbitol’, containing <= 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content (excl. in aqueous solution)      Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   10 Cereal processed   2905 44 99   D-glucitol ‘sorbitol’ (excl. in aqueous solution and containing <= 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content)     3505 10 10   Dextrins   3505 10 50   Starches, etherified or esterified (excl. dextrins)   3505 10 90   Modified starches (excl. etherified starches, esterified starches and dextrins)   3505 20 30   Glues containing >= 25 % but < 55 % starches, dextrins or other modified starches by weight (excl. those put up for retail sale and weighing net <= 1 kg)   3505 20 50   Glues containing >= 55 % but < 80 % starches, dextrins or other modified starches by weight (excl. those put up for retail sale and weighing net <= 1 kg)   3505 20 90   Glues containing >= 80 % starches, dextrins or other modified starches by weight (excl. those put up for retail sale and weighing net <= 1 kg)   3809 10 10   Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or fixing of dyestuffs and other products and preparations such as dressings and mordants of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or like industries, n.e.s., with a basis of amylaceous substances, containing < 55 % of these substances by weight    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   10 Cereal processed   3809 10 30   Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or fixing of dyestuffs and other products and preparations such as dressings and mordants of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or like industries, n.e.s., with a basis of amylaceous substances, containing >=55 % to < 70 % of these substances by weight     3809 10 50   Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or fixing of dyestuffs and other products and preparations such as dressings and mordants of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or like industries, n.e.s., with a basis of amylaceous substances, containing >=70 % to < 83 % of these substances by weight   3809 10 90   Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or fixing of dyestuffs and other products and preparations such as dressings and mordants of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or like industries, n.e.s., with a basis of amylaceous substances, containing >=83 % of these substances by weight     3824 60 11   Sorbitol in aqueous solution, containing <= 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content (excl. dglucitol [sorbitol])      Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   10 Cereal processed   3824 60 19   Sorbitol in aqueous solution, containing > 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content (excl. dglucitol [sorbitol])     3824 60 91   Sorbitol containing <= 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content (excl. sorbitol in aqueous solution and dglucitol [sorbitol])   3824 60 99   Sorbitol containing > 2 % by weight of d-mannitol, calculated on the d-glucitol content (excl. sorbitol in aqueous solution and dglucitol [sorbitol])   11 Cigarettes   2402 10 00   Cigars, cheroots and cigarillos containing tobacco  1 000 or 1 billion pieces (1)   2402 20 90   Cigarettes, containing tobacco (excl. containing cloves)   12 Dairy processed   0405 20 10   Dairy spreads of a fat content, by weight, of 39 % or more but less than 60 %   500   0405 20 30   Dairy spreads of a fat content, by weight, of >= 60 % but <= 75 %   1806 20 70   Chocolate milk crumb preparations in containers or immediate packings of a content of > 2 kg  (1) Provided that 1 piece weighs approximately 1 g.   Product  CN code 2020  Product  Trigger   12 Dairy processed   2106 10 80   Protein concentrates and textured protein substances, containing, by weight, >= 1,5 % milkfat, >= 5 % sucrose or isoglucose, >= 5 % glucose or starch     2202 99 99   Other non-alcoholic beverages, not including fruit or vegetable juice of heading 2009, containing by weight 2 % or more of fat obtained from the products of headings 0401 to 0404   13 Sugar processed   1302 20 10   Dry pectic substances, pectinates and pectates in powder form   4200   1302 20 90   Liquid pectic substances, pectinates and pectates   1702 50 00   Chemically pure fructose in solid form   1702 90 10   Chemically pure maltose, in solid form     1704 90 99   Pastes, marzipan, nougat and other prepared sugar confectionery, not containing cocoa (excl. chewing gum, white chocolate, throat pastilles and cough drops, gum and jelly confectionery incl. fruit pastes in the form of sugar confectionery, boiled sweets, toffees, caramels and similar sweets, compressed tablets, and pastes incl. marzipan in immediate packings of >=1 kg)      Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   13 Sugar processed   1806 10 30   Sweetened cocoa powder, containing >= 65 % but < 80 % sucrose, incl. inverted sugar expressed as sucrose or isoglucose expressed as sucrose     1806 10 90   Sweetened cocoa powder, containing >= 80 % sucrose, incl. inverted sugar expressed as sucrose or isoglucose expressed as sucrose   1806 20 95   Chocolate and other food preparations containing cocoa, in blocks, slabs or bars weighing > 2 kg or in liquid, paste, powder, granular or other bulk form, in containers or immediate packings of a content > 2 kg, containing < 18 % by weight of cocoa butter   1901 90 99   Food preparations of flour, groats, meal, starch or malt extract, not containing cocoa or containing cocoa in a proportion by weight of < 40 %, calculated on a totally defatted basis, and food preparations of milk, cream, butter milk, sour milk, sour cream   2101 12 98   Preparations with a basis of coffee   2101 20 98   Preparations with a basis of tea or maté   2106 90 98   Food preparations, n.e.s., containing, by weight, >= 1,5 % milkfat, >= 5 % sucrose or isoglucose, >= 5 % glucose or >= 5 % starch    Product  CN code 2020  Product description  Trigger   13 Sugar processed   3302 10 29   Preparations based on odoriferous substances, containing all flavouring agents characterizing a beverage, containing, by weight, >= 1,5 % milkfat, >= 5 % sucrose or isoglucose, >= 5 % glucose or >= 5 % starch, of a kind used in the drink industries (excl. of an actual alcoholic strength of > 0,5 % vol)     14 Sweet corn   0710 40 00   Sweet corn, uncooked or cooked by steaming or by boiling in water, frozen   1 500   0711 90 30   Sweet corn provisionally preserved, e.g. by sulphur dioxide gas, in brine, in sulphur water or in other preservative solutions, but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption   2001 90 30   Sweet corn ‘Zea mays var. saccharata’, prepared or preserved by vinegar or acetic acid   2004 90 10   Sweet corn ‘Zea mays var. saccharata’, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, frozen   2005 80 00   Sweet corn ‘Zea mays var. saccharata’, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid (excl. frozen)  ANNEX II-D  SCHEDULE OF CONCESSIONS (REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA)  2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0203 11 10   Fresh or chilled domestic swine carcases and half- carcases   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 12 11   Fresh or chilled with bone in, domestic swine hams and cuts thereof   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 12 19   Fresh or chilled with bone in, domestic swine shoulders and cuts thereof   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 19 11   Fresh or chilled fore-ends and cuts thereof of domestic swine   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 19 13   Fresh or chilled loins and cuts thereof of domestic swine   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 19 15   Fresh or chilled bellies ‘streaky’ and cuts thereof of domestic swine   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 19 55   Fresh or chilled boneless meat of domestic swine (excl. bellies and cuts thereof)   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0203 19 59   Fresh or chilled meat of domestic swine, with bone in (excl. carcases and half-carcases, hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, and fore-ends, loins, bellies and cuts thereof)   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 21 10   Frozen domestic swine carcases and half-carcases   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 22 11   Frozen hams and cuts thereof of domestic swine, with bone in     20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 22 19   Frozen shoulders and cuts thereof of domestic swine, with bone in   20 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 29 11   Frozen fore-ends and cuts thereof of domestic swine   10 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 29 13   Frozen loins and cuts thereof of domestic swine, with bone in   10 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 29 15   Frozen bellies ‘streaky’ and cuts thereof of domestic swine   10 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0203 29 55   Frozen boneless meat of domestic swine (excl. bellies and cuts thereof)   10 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0203 29 59   Frozen boneless meat of domestic swine, with bone in (excl. carcases and half-carcases, hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, and fore-ends, loins, bellies and cuts thereof)   10 % + 200 EUR/t   TRQ 1: 681 t in 2021; 749 t from 2022   0206 30 00   Fresh or chilled edible offal of swine   15   10-S   0206 41 00   Frozen edible livers of swine   15   10-S   0206 49 20   Frozen edible offal of domestic swine (excl. livers)   15   10-S   0207 11 10   Fresh or chilled, plucked and gutted fowls of species Gallus domesticus, with heads and feet, known as ‘83 % chickens’   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 11 30   Fresh or chilled, plucked and drawn fowls of species Gallus domesticus, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘70 % chickens’   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 11 90   Fresh or chilled, plucked and drawn fowls of species Gallus domesticus, without heads, feet, necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘65 % chickens’, and other forms of fresh or chilled fowl, not cut in pieces (excl. ‘83 % and 70 % chickens’)   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 12 10   Frozen fowls of species Gallus domesticus, plucked and drawn, without heads and feet but with necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘70 % chickens’   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0207 12 90   Frozen fowls of species Gallus domesticus, plucked and drawn, without heads, feet, necks, hearts, livers and gizzards, known as ‘65 % chickens’, and other forms of fowl, not cut in pieces (excl. ‘70 % chickens’)   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 13 10   Fresh or chilled boneless cuts of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 13 20   Fresh or chilled halves or quarters of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 13 30   Fresh or chilled whole wings, with or without tips, of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 13 50   Fresh or chilled breasts and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 13 60   Fresh or chilled legs and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 13 99   Fresh or chilled edible offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (excl. livers)   20 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 10   Frozen boneless cuts of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022  2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0207 14 20   Frozen halves or quarters of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 30   Frozen whole wings, with or without tips, of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 40   Frozen backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 50   Frozen breasts and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 60   Frozen legs and cuts thereof of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 70   Frozen cuts of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, with bone in (excl. halves or quarters, whole wings, with or without tips, backs, necks, backs with necks attached, rumps and wing-tips, breasts, legs and cuts thereof)   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 91   Frozen edible livers of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022   0207 14 99   Frozen edible offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (excl. livers)   15 % + 100 EUR/t   TRQ 2: 749 t in 2021; 817 t from 2022  2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0210 99 41   Edible domestic swine livers, salted, in brine, dried or smoked   15   10-A   0210 99 49   Edible domestic swine offal, salted, in brine, dried or smoked (excl. livers)   15   10-A   0401 10 10   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of <= 1 %, in immediate packings of <= 2 l, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter     TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 10 90   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of <= 1 %, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. in immediate packings of <= 2 l)   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 20 11   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of <= 3 % but > 1 %, in immediate packings of <= 2 l, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 20 19   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of <= 3 % but > 1 %, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. in immediate packings of <= 2 l)   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 20 91   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of > 3 % but <= 6 %, in immediate packings of <= 2 l, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   15   TRQ 3:  272 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0401 20 99   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of > 3 % but <= 6 %, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. in immediate packings of <= 2 l)   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 50 11   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of <= 21 % but > 6 %, in immediate packings of <= 2 l, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 50 19   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of <= 21 % but > 6 %, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. in immediate packings of <= 2 l)   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 50 31   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of > 21 % but <= 45 %, in immediate packings of <= 2 l, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 50 39   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of > 21 % but <= 45 %, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. in immediate packings of <= 2 l)   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0401 50 91   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of > 45 %, in immediate packings of <= 2 l, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   15   TRQ 3:  272 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0401 50 99   Milk and cream of a fat content by weight of > 45 %, not concentrated nor containing added sugar or other sweetening matter (excl. in immediate packings of <= 2 l)   15   TRQ 3:  272 t   0402 10 11   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 10 19   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 10 91   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 10 99   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 1,5 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 21 11   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of > 1,5 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 21 18   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 11 % but > 1,5 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg or put up otherwise   10   10-A   0402 21 91   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of > 27 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg   10   10-A  2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0402 21 99   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of > 27 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 29 15   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 27 % but > 1,5 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. for infants in hermetically sealed containers of <= 500 g)   10   10-A   0402 29 19   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of <= 27 % but > 1,5 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 29 91   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of > 27 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 29 99   Milk and cream in solid forms, of a fat content by weight of > 27 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg   10   10-A   0402 91 10   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of <= 8 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 91 30   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 8 %, but <= 10 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0402 91 51   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 10 % but <= 45 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 91 59   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 10 % but <= 45 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 91 91   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 45 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 91 99   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 45 %, unsweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 99 10   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of <= 9,5 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 99 31   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 9,5 % but <= 45 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 99 39   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 9,5 % but <= 45 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0402 99 91   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 45 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of <= 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0402 99 99   Milk and cream, concentrated, of a fat content by weight of > 45 %, sweetened, in immediate packings of > 2,5 kg (excl. in solid forms)   10   10-A   0405 10 11   Natural butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 %, in immediate packings of a net content of <= 1 kg (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   15 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 10 19   Natural butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 % (excl. in immediate packings of a net content of <= 1 kg, and dehydrated butter and ghee)   15 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 10 30   Recombined butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 % (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   15 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 10 50   Whey butter of a fat content, by weight, of >= 80 % but <= 85 % (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   15 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 10 90   Butter of a fat content, by weight, of > 85 % but <= 95 % (excl. dehydrated butter and ghee)   15 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 20 10   Dairy spreads of a fat content, by weight, of >= 39 % but < 60 %   20 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 20 30   Dairy spreads of a fat content, by weight, of >= 60 % but <= 75 %   20 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0405 20 90   Dairy spreads of a fat content, by weight, of > 75 % but < 80 %   20 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 90 10   Fats and oils derived from milk, of a fat content, by weight, of >= 99,3 % and of a water content, by weight, of <= 0,5 %   20 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0405 90 90   Fats and oils derived from milk, dehydrated butter and ghee (excl. of a fat content, by weight, of >= 99,3 % and a water content, by weight, of <= 0,5 %, and natural butter, recombined butter and whey butter)   20 % + 500 EUR/t   TRQ 3:  272 t   0806 10 10   Fresh table grapes   from 1 January to 14 July — 10; from 15 July to 20 November — 15; from 21 November to 31 December — 10   10-S   0808 10 80   Fresh apples (excl. cider apples, in bulk, from 16 September to 15 December)   from 1 January to 30 June — 10; from 1 July to 31 July — 20; from 1 August to 31 December — 10   10-S    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   0809 20 95   Fresh cherries (excl. sour cherries ‘Prunus cerasus’)   from 1 January to 20 May — 10; from 21 May to 10 August — 20; from 11 August to 31 December — 10   10-A   0809 30 90   Fresh peaches (excl. nectarines)   from 1 January to 10 June — 10; from 11 June to 30 September — 20; from 1 October to 31 December — 10   10-S   0809 40 05   Fresh plums   from 1 January to 10 June — 10; from 11 June to 30 September — 20; from 1 October to 31 December — 10   10-S   1601 00 10   Liver sausages and similar products and food preparations based thereon   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1601 00 91   Uncooked sausages of meat, offal or blood (excl. liver)   15   TRQ 4:  232 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1601 00 99   Sausages and similar products of meat, offal or blood and food preparations based thereon (excl. liver sausages and uncooked sausages)   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 31 11   Preparations containing exclusively uncooked turkey meat (excl. sausages and similar products)   20   10-A   1602 31 19   Meat or offal of turkeys ‘poultry’, prepared or preserved, containing >= 57 % by weight of meat or offal of poultry (excl. containing exclusively uncooked turkey meat, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   20   10-A   1602 31 30   Meat or offal of turkeys ‘poultry’, prepared or preserved, containing >= 25 % but < 57 % by weight of meat or offal of poultry (excl. sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   20   10-A    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1602 31 90   Meat or offal of turkeys ‘poultry’, prepared or preserved (excl. containing >= 25 % of meat or offal of poultry, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts and juices)   20   10-A   1602 32 11   Uncooked, prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus containing >= 57 % meat or offal of poultry (excl. sausages and similar products, and preparations of liver)   20   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 32 19   Cooked, prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus containing >= 57 % meat or offal of poultry (excl. sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   20   TRQ 4:  232 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1602 32 30   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus containing >= 25 % but < 57 % of poultry meat or offal (excl. of turkeys and guinea fowl, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   20   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 32 90   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (excl. that containing >= 25 % meat or offal of poultry, meat or offal of turkeys or guinea fowl, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts and juices)   20   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 39 21   Uncooked, prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of ducks, geese and guinea fowl of the species domesticus, containing >= 57 % meat or offal of poultry (excl. sausages and similar products, and preparations of liver)   20   10-A    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1602 39 29   Cooked, prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of ducks, geese and guinea fowl of the species domesticus, containing >= 57 % meat or offal of poultry (excl. sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   20   10-A   1602 39 40   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of ducks, geese and guinea fowl of the species domesticus, containing >= 25 % but < 57 % meat or offal of poultry (excl. sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   20   10-A   1602 39 80   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal of ducks, geese and guinea fowl of the species domesticus (excl. that containing >= 25 % meat or offal of poultry, and sausages and similar products, homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts and juices)   20   10-A   1602 41 10   Hams and cuts thereof, of domestic swine, prepared or preserved   20   TRQ 4:  232 t  2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1602 42 10   Prepared or preserved shoulders and cuts thereof, of domestic swine   20   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 49 11   Prepared or preserved domestic swine loins and parts thereof, incl. mixtures of loins or hams (excl. collars)   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 49 13   Prepared or preserved domestic swine collars and parts thereof, incl. mixtures of collars and shoulders   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 49 15   Prepared or preserved mixtures of domestic swine hams, shoulders, loins, collars and parts thereof (excl. mixtures of only loins and hams or only collars and shoulders)   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 49 19   Meat or offal, incl. mixtures, of domestic swine, prepared or preserved, containing, by weight, >= 80 % of meat or offal of any kind, incl. pork fat and fats of any kind or origin (excl. hams, shoulders, loins, collars and parts thereof, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of livers and meat extracts)   15   TRQ 4: 232 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1602 49 30   Prepared or preserved meat, offal and mixtures, of domestic swine, containing >= 40 % but < 80 % meat or offal of any kind and fats of any kind (excl. sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 49 50   Prepared or preserved meat, offal and mixtures of domestic swine containing < 40 % meat or offal of any kind and fats of any kind (excl. sausages and similar products, homogenised preparations for put up retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts and juices)   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 50 10   Prepared or preserved meat or offal of bovine animals, uncooked, incl. mixtures of cooked meat or offal and uncooked meat or offal (excl. sausages and similar products, and preparations of liver)   15   10-S   1602 50 31   Corned beef, in airtight containers   15   10-A   1602 50 95   Prepared or preserved meat or offal of bovine animals (excl. corned beef), in airtight containers (excl. uncooked; mixtures of cooked meat or offal and uncooked meat or offal)   15   10-S  2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1602 90 51   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal containing meat or offal of domestic swine (excl. of poultry, bovine animals, reindeer, game or rabbits, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts)   15   TRQ 4:  232 t   1602 90 61   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal, uncooked, containing meat or offal of bovines, incl. mixtures of cooked or uncooked meat and cooked or uncooked offal (excl. of poultry, domestic swine, reindeer, game or rabbits, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, and preparations of liver)   15   10-A   1602 90 69   Prepared or preserved meat or meat offal, cooked, containing meat or offal of bovine animals (excl. of poultry, domestic swine, game or rabbits, sausages and similar products, finely homogenised preparations put up for retail sale as infant food or for dietetic purposes, in containers of a net weight of <= 250 g, preparations of liver and meat extracts and juices)   15   10-A    2017  Description  MFN  Category   1701 11 10   Raw cane sugar, for refining (excl. added flavouring or colouring)   75    TRQ 5: 1090 t in 2021; 1226 from 2022   1701 11 90   Raw cane sugar (excl. for refining and added flavouring or colouring)   75     TRQ 5: 1090 t in 2021; 1226 from 2022   1701 12 10   Raw beet sugar, for refining (excl. added flavouring or colouring)   75     TRQ 5: 1090 t in 2021; 1226 from 2022   1701 12 90   Raw beet sugar (excl. for refining and added flavouring or colouring)   75     TRQ 5: 1090 t in 2021; 1226 from 2022   1701 91 00   Refined cane or beet sugar, containing added flavouring or colouring, in solid form   75     TRQ 5: 1090 t in 2021; 1226 from 2022   1701 99 10   White sugar, containing in dry state>= 99,5 % sucrose (excl. flavoured or coloured)   75     TRQ 5: 1090 t in 2021; 1226 from 2022   1701 99 90   Cane or beet sugar and chemically pure sucrose, in solid form (excl. cane and beet sugar containing added flavouring or colouring, raw sugar and white sugar)   75     TRQ 5: 1090 t in 2021; 1226 from 2022   1702 30 10   Isoglucose in the solid form, not containing fructose or containing in the dry state < 20 % by weight of fructose   75   TRQ 6: 87 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1702 30 51   Glucose and glucose syrup, in the form of white crystalline powder, whether or not agglomerated, not containing fructose or containing in the dry state less than 20 % by weight of fructose and containing in the dry state 99 % or more by weight of glucose (excl. isoglucose)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 30 59   Glucose and glucose syrup, not containing fructose or containing in the dry state less than 20 % by weight of fructose and containing in the dry state 99 % or more by weight of glucose (excl. isoglucose and glucose and glucose syrup in the form of white crystalline powder, whether or not agglomerated)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 30 91   Glucose and glucose syrup, in the form of white crystalline powder, whether or not agglomerated, not containing fructose or containing in the dry state less than 20 % by weight of fructose and containing in the dry state less than 99 % by weight of glucose (excl. isoglucose)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 30 99   Glucose in solid form and glucose syrup, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter and not containing fructose or containing in the dry state < 20 % by weight of fructose and < 99 % by weight of glucose (excl. isoglucose and glucose dextrose in the form of white crystalline powder, whether or not agglomerated)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t  2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1702 40 10   Isoglucose in solid form, containing in the dry state >= 20 % and < 50 % by weight of fructose (excl. invert sugar)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 40 90   Glucose in solid form and glucose syrup, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter, and containing in the dry state >= 20 % and < 50 % by weight of fructose (excl. isoglucose and invert sugar)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 50 00   Chemically pure fructose in solid form   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 60 10   Isoglucose in solid form, containing in the dry state > 50 % by weight of fructose (excl. chemically pure fructose and invert sugar)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 60 95   Fructose in solid form and fructose syrup not containing added flavouring or colouring matter and containing in the dry state > 50 % by weight of fructose (excl. isoglucose, inulin syrup, chemically pure fructose and invert sugar)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 90 10   Chemically pure maltose, in solid form   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 90 30   Isoglucose in solid form, containing in the dry state 50 % by weight of fructose, obtained from glucose polymers   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 90 60   Artificial honey, mixed or not mixed with natural honey   75   TRQ 6: 87 t    2017  Description  MFN applied  Category   1702 90 71   Sugar and molasses, caramelised, containing in the dry state >= 50 % by weight of sucrose   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 90 75   Sugar and molasses, caramelised, containing in the dry state < 50 % by weight of sucrose, in powder form, whether or not agglomerated   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 90 79   Sugar and molasses, caramelised, containing in the dry state < 50 % by weight of sucrose (excl. sugar and molasses in powder form, whether or not agglomerated)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t   1702 90 99   Sugars in solid form, incl. invert sugar, and sugar and sugar syrup blends containing in the dry state 50 % by weight of fructose, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter (excl. cane or beet sugar, chemically pure sucrose and maltose, lactose, maple sugar, glucose, fructose, maltodextrine, and syrups thereof, isoglucose, inulin syrup, artificial honey and caramel)   75   TRQ 6: 87 t      ANNEX III  COVERAGE  ANNEX III-A  SPS MEASURES   PART 1  Measures applicable to main live animal categories   I. Equidae (including zebras) or asinine species or the offspring of crossing of those species  II. Bovine animals (including Bubalus bubalis and Bison)  III. Ovine and caprine animals  IV. Porcine animals  V. Poultry (including fowl, turkeys, guinea fowl, ducks, geese)  VI. Live fish  VII. Crustaceans  VIII. Molluscs  IX. Eggs and gametes of live fish  X. Hatching eggs  XI. Semen-ova-embryos  XII. Other mammals  XIII. Other birds  XIV. Reptiles  XV. Amphibians  XVI. Other vertebrates  XVII.Bees     PART 2  Measures applicable to animal products   I. Main product categories of animal products for human consumption 1. Fresh meat of domestic ungulates, poultry and lagomorphs, farm and wild game, including offal 2. Minced meat, meat preparations, mechanically separated meat (‘MSM’), meat products 3. Live bivalve molluscs 4. Fishery products 5. Raw milk, colostrum, dairy products and colostrum-based products 6. Eggs and eggs products 7. Frogs’ legs and snails 8. Rendered animal fats and greaves 9. Treated stomachs, bladders and intestines 10. Gelatine, raw material for the production of gelatine for human consumption 11. Collagen 12. Honey and apicultural products              II. Main products’ categories of animal by-products:  In slaughterhouses  Animal by-products to be fed to fur animals  Animal by-products for the manufacture of pet food  Blood and blood products from equidae to be used outside the feed chain  Fresh or chilled hides and skins of ungulates  Animal by-products for the manufacture of derived products for uses outside the feed chain  In dairy plants  Milk, milk-based products and milk-derived products  Colostrum and colostrum products  In other facility for the collection or handling of animal by-products (i.e. unprocessed/untreated materials  Blood and blood products from equidae to be used outside the feed chain  Untreated blood products, excluding of equidae, for derived products for purposes outside the feed chain for farmed animals  Treated blood products, excluding of equidae, for the manufacture of derived products for purposes outside the feed chain for farmed animals  Fresh or chilled hides and skins of ungulates  Pig bristles from third countries or regions thereof that are free from African swine fever  Bones and bone products (excluding bone meal), horns and horn products (excluding horn meal) and hooves and hoof products (excluding hoof meal) for uses other than as feed material, organic fertiliser or soil improvers  Horns and horn products, excluding horn meal, and hooves and hoof products, excluding hoof meal, for the production of organic fertilisers or soil improvers  Gelatine not intended for human consumption to be used by the photographic industry  Wool and hair  Treated feathers, parts of feathers and down  In processing plants  Processed animal protein, including mixtures and products other than pet food containing such protein  Blood products that could be used as feed material  Treated hides and skins of ungulates  Treated hides and skins of ruminants and of equidae (21 days)  Pig bristles from third countries or regions thereof that are not free of African swine fever  Fish oil to be used as feed material or for purposes outside the feed chain  Rendered fats to be used as feed materials  Rendered fats for certain purposes outside the feed chain for farmed animals  Gelatine or Collagen to be used as feed material or for purposes outside the feed chain  Hydrolysed protein, Dicalcium phosphate or Tricalcium phosphate to be used as feed material or for purposes outside the feed chain  Apiculture by-products intended exclusively for use in apiculture  Fat derivatives to be used outside the feed chain  Fat derivatives to be used as feed or outside the feed chain  Egg products that could be used as feed material  In pet food plants (including plants manufacturing  Canned pet food  Processed pet food other than canned pet food  dogchews and flavouring innards)  Dogchews  Raw pet food for direct sale  Flavouring innards for use in the manufacture of pet food  In game trophies plants  Treated game trophies and other preparations of birds and ungulates, being solely bones, horns, hooves, claws, antlers, teeth, hides or skins  Game trophies or other preparations of birds and ungulates consisting of entire parts not having been treated  In plants or establishments manufacturing intermediate products  Intermediate products  Fertiliser and soil improvers  Processed animal protein including mixtures and products other than pet food containing such protein  Processed manure, derived products from processed manure and guano from bats  In storage of derived products  All derived products  III. Pathogenic agents PART 3  Plants, plant products and other objects   Plants, plant products and other objects (1) which are potential carriers of pests that, by their nature or that of their processing, may create a risk for the introduction and spread of pests (1) Packaging, conveyances, containers, soil and growing mediums and any other organisms, object or material capable of harbouring or spreading pests.  PART 4  Measures applicable to food and feed additives  Food:  1. Food additives (all food additives and colours);  2. Processing aids;  3. Food flavourings;  4. Food enzymes.  Feed (1): (1) Only animal by-products originated from animals or parts of animals, declared as fit for human consumption may enter into the feed chain of farmed animals.  5. Feed additives;  6. Feed materials;  7. Compound feed and pet food except if covered by Part 2 (II);  8. Undesirable substances in feed.  ANNEX III-B  ANIMAL WELFARE STANDARDS   Animal welfare standards concerning:  1. Stunning and slaughter of animals;  2. Transport of animals and related operations;  3. Farming animals. ANNEX III-C  OTHER MEASURES COVERED BY CHAPTER 4 OF TITLE V   1. Chemicals originating from the migration of substances from packaging materials;  2. Composite products;  3. Genetically Modified Organisms (‘GMOs’);  4. Growth promoting hormones, thyreostatics, certain hormones and B-agonists ANNEX IV  LIST OF NOTIFIABLE ANIMAL AND AQUACULTURE DISEASES AND REGULATED PESTS FOR WHICH REGIONAL FREEDOM CAN BE RECOGNISED  ANNEX IV-A  ANIMAL AND FISH DISEASES SUBJECT TO NOTIFICATION, FOR WHICH THE STATUS OF THE PARTIES IS RECOGNISED AND FOR WHICH REGIONALISATION DECISIONS MAY BE TAKEN   1. Foot-and-mouth disease  2. Swine vesicular disease  3. Vesicular stomatitis  4. African horse sickness  5. African swine fever  6. Bluetongue  7. Pathogenic Avian influenza  8. Newcastle disease (‘NCD’)  9. Rinderpest  10. Classical swine fever  11. Contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia  12. Peste des petits ruminants  13. Sheep and goat pox  14. Rift Valley fever  15. Lumpy skin disease  16. Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis  17. Glanders  18. Dourine  19. Enterovirus encephalomyelitis  20. Infectious haematopoietic necrosis (‘IHN’)  21. Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (‘VHS’) 22. Infectious Salmon Anaemia (‘ISA’)  23. Bonamia ostreae  24. Marteilia refringens ANNEX IV-B  RECOGNITION OF THE PEST STATUS OR PEST FREE AREAS  A. Recognition of pest status  Each Party shall establish and communicate a list of regulated pests based on the following principles:  1. Pests not known to occur within any part of its own territory;  2. Pests known to occur within any part of its own territory and under official control;  3. Pests known to occur within any part of its own territory, under official control and for which pest free areas are established;  4. Any change to the list of pest status shall be immediately notified to the other Party unless otherwise notified to the relevant international organisation.  B. Recognition of Pest Free Areas (‘PFAs’)   The Parties recognise the concept of PFAs, and its application in respect of relevant ISPMs.      ANNEX V  REGIONALISATION/ZONING AND PEST-FREE AREAS  A. Animal and aquaculture diseases 1. Animal diseases 2. Aquaculture diseases   The basis for recognition of the animal disease status of the territory or of a region of a Party shall be the Terrestrial Animal Health Code of the OIE. The basis for regionalisation decisions for an animal disease shall be the Terrestrial Animal Health Code of the OIE.   The basis for regionalisation decisions for aquaculture diseases shall be the Aquatic Animal Health Code of the OIE.  B. Pests  The criteria for the establishment of pest free areas for certain pests shall comply with the provisions of:  — the FAO International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures No 4 on Requirements for the establishment of pest free areas and the definitions of the relevant ISPMs.  C. Criteria for the recognition of the special status for animal diseases of the territory or a region of a Party 1. Where the importing Party considers that its territory or part of its territory is free from an animal disease other than a disease listed in Annex IV-A to this Agreement, it shall present to the exporting Party appropriate supporting documentation, setting out in particular the following criteria: — the nature of the disease and the history of its occurrence in its territory; — the results of surveillance testing based on serological, microbiological, pathological or epidemiological investigation and on the fact that the disease must by law be notified to the competent authorities; — the period over which the surveillance was carried out; — where applicable, the period during which vaccination against the disease has been prohibited and the geographical area concerned by the prohibition; — the arrangements for verifying the absence of the disease. 2. The additional guarantees, general or specific, which may be required by the importing Party must not exceed those, which the importing Party implements nationally. 3. The Parties shall notify each other of any change in the criteria specified in paragraph 1 of this point which relate to the disease. The additional guarantees defined in accordance with paragraph 2 of this point may, in the light of such notification, be amended or withdrawn by the SPS Sub-Committee.       ANNEX VI  PROVISIONAL APPROVAL OF ESTABLISHMENTS   Conditions and provisions for provisional approval of establishments  1. Provisional approval of establishments means that for the purpose of import the importing Party approves provisionally the establishments in the exporting Party on the basis of appropriate guarantees provided by that Party without prior inspection by the importing Party of the individual establishments in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of this Annex. The procedure and conditions set out in paragraph 4 of this Annex shall be used for modifying or completing the lists provided for in paragraph 2 of this Annex to take account of new applications and guarantees received. Verification may be part of the procedure, only as regards the initial list of establishments, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4(d).  2. The provisional approval shall initially be applied to the following categories of establishments  2.1. Establishments for products of animal origin for human consumption: — Slaughterhouses for fresh meat of domestic ungulates, poultry, lagomorphs and farm game (Annex III-A, Part 1); — Game handling establishments; — Cutting plants; — Establishments for minced meat, meat preparation, mechanically separated meat and meat products; — Purification centres and dispatched centres for live bivalve molluscs; — Establishments for: — eggs products; — dairy products; — fishery products; — treated stomachs, bladders and intestines; — gelatine and collagen; — fish oil; — Factory vessels; — Freezer vessels. 2.2. Approved or registered establishments producing animal by-products and main categories of animal by-products not for human consumption.                   Type of approved or    Slaughterhouses  Animal by-products to be fed to fur animals  Animal by-products for the manufacture of pet food  Blood and blood products from equidae to be used outside the feed chain  Fresh or chilled hides and skins of ungulates  Animal by-products for the manufacture of derived products for uses outside the feed chain  Dairy plants  Milk, milk-based products and milk-derived products  Colostrum and colostrum products  Type of approved or  Product  Other facility for the collection or handling of animal by-products (i.e. unprocessed/ untreated materials  Blood and blood products from equidae to be used outside the feed chain  Untreated blood products, excluding of equidae, for derived products for purposes outside the feed chain for farmed animals  Treated blood products, excluding of equidae, for the manufacture of derived products for purposes outside the feed chain for farmed animals  Fresh or chilled hides and skins of ungulates  Pig bristles from third countries or regions thereof that are free from African swine fever  Bones and bone products (excluding bone meal), horns and horn products (excluding horn meal) and hooves and hoof products (excluding hoof meal) for uses other than as feed material, organic fertiliser or soil improvers  Horns and horn products, excluding horn meal, and hooves and hoof products, excluding hoof meal, for the production of organic fertilisers or soil improvers  Gelatine not intended for human consumption to be used by the photographic industry  Wool and hair  Treated feathers, parts of feathers and down  Processing plants  Processed animal protein, including mixtures and products other than pet food containing such protein  Blood products that could be used as feed material  Treated hides and skins of ungulates  Treated hides and skins of ruminants and of equidae (21 days)  Pig bristles from third countries or regions thereof that are not free of African swine fever  Fish oil to be used as feed material or for purposes outside the feed chain  Rendered fats to be used as feed materials  Rendered fats for certain purposes outside the feed chain for farmed animals  Gelatine or Collagen to be used as feed material or for purposes outside the feed chain  Hydrolysed protein, Dicalcium phosphate or Tricalcium phosphate to be used as feed material or for purposes outside the feed chain  Apiculture by-products intended exclusively for use in apiculture  Fat derivatives to be used outside the feed chain  Fat derivatives to be used as feed or outside the feed chain  Egg products that could be used as feed material  Pet food plants (including plants manufacturing dogchews and flavouring innards)  Canned pet food  Processed pet food other than canned pet food  Dogchews  Raw pet food for direct sale  Flavouring innards for use in the manufacture of pet food  Game trophies plants  Treated game trophies and other preparations of birds and ungulates, being solely bones, horns, hooves, claws, antlers, teeth, hides or skins  Game trophies or other preparations of birds and ungulates consisting of entire parts not having been treated  Plants or establishments manufacturing intermediate products  Intermediate products  Fertiliser and soil improvers  Processed animal protein including mixtures and products other than pet food containing such protein  Processed manure, derived products from processed manure and guano from bats  Storage of derived products  All derived products     3. The importing Party shall draw up lists of provisionally approved establishments as referred to in paragraphs 2.1 and 2.2 and shall make these lists publicly available.   4. Conditions and procedures for provisional approval:  (a) If import of the animal product concerned from the exporting Party has been authorised by the importing Party and the relevant import conditions and certification requirements for the products concerned have been established;  (b) If the competent authority of the exporting Party has provided the importing Party with satisfactory guarantees that the establishments appearing on its list or lists meet the relevant health requirements of the importing Party and has officially approved the establishment appearing on the lists for exportation to the importing Party;  (c) In the event of non-compliance with the said guarantees the competent authority of the exporting Party must have a real power to suspend the activities of exportation to the importing Party from an establishment for which that authority provided guarantees;  (d) Verification in accordance with the provisions of Article 164 of this Agreement by the importing Party may be part of the provisional approval procedure. This verification concerns the structure and the organisation of the competent authority responsible for the approval of the establishment as well as the powers available to that competent authority and the guarantees that it can provide in regard to the implementation of importing Party’s rules. The verification may include on the spot inspection of a certain representative number of establishments appearing on the list or lists provided by the exporting Party;  (e) Based on the results of the verification provided for in point (d) of this paragraph, the importing Party may amend the existing list of establishments. ANNEX VII  PROCESS OF RECOGNITION OF EQUIVALENCE   1. Principles  (a) Equivalence can be determined for an individual measure, or a group of measures, or a system related to a certain commodity, or a category of commodities or all of them;  (b) The examination by the importing Party of a request for recognition of equivalence of measures pertaining to a certain commodity of the exporting Party shall not be a reason to disrupt trade or suspend on-going imports from the exporting Party of the commodity in question;  (c) The process of recognition of equivalence of measures is an interactive process between the exporting Party and the importing Party. The process consists of an objective demonstration of equivalence of individual measures by the exporting Party and an objective assessment of the equivalence with a view to the possible recognition of equivalence by the importing Party;  (d) The final recognition of equivalence of the relevant measures of the exporting Party rests solely with the importing Party.   2. Preconditions (a) The process depends on the health or pest status, the law and the effectiveness of the inspection and control system related to the commodity in the exporting Party. To this end the law in the sector concerned shall be taken into account, as well as the structure of the competent authority of the exporting Party, the command chain, the authority, the operational procedures and resources, and the effectiveness of the competent authorities as regards inspection and control systems, including the level of enforcement related to the commodity and the regularity and the rapidity of information flow to the importing Party in case of identified hazards. This recognition may be supported by documentation, verification and documents, reports and information related to past experiences, assessment and verifications; (b) The Parties may initiate the process of recognition of equivalence pursuant to Article 159 of this Agreement; (c) The exporting Party shall only initiate the process when no safeguard measures imposed by the importing Party apply to the exporting Party as regards the commodity.      3. The process (a) The exporting Party initiates the process by submitting to the importing Party a request for recognition of equivalence of an individual measure or groups of measures or a system for a commodity or a category of commodities in a sector or sub-sector or all of them; (b) When appropriate, this request includes also the request and the required documentation for approval by the importing Party on the basis of equivalence of any programme or plan of the exporting Party required by the importing Party regarding the measures or systems described in point (a) of this paragraph as a condition for allowing import of that commodity or a category of commodities; (c) With this request, the exporting Party: (i) explains the importance for trade of that commodity or a category of commodities; (ii) identifies the individual measure(s) with which it can comply from all the measures expressed in the import conditions of the importing Party applicable to that commodity or a category of commodities; (iii) identifies the individual measure(s) for which it seeks equivalence out of the total of the measures expressed in the import conditions of the importing Party, applicable to that commodity or a category of commodities; (d) In reply to this request the importing Party explains the overall and individual objective and the rationale behind its measure(s), including the identification of the risk; (e) With this explanation, the importing Party informs the exporting Party on the relationship of its domestic measures and the import conditions for that commodity; (f) The exporting Party objectively demonstrates to the importing Party that the measures that it has identified are equivalent to the import conditions for that commodity or a category of commodities; (g) The importing Party objectively assesses the demonstration of equivalence by the exporting Party; (h) The importing Party concludes whether equivalence is achieved or not; (i) The importing Party provides to the exporting Party full explanation and supporting data for its determination and decision if so required by the exporting Party.              4. Demonstration of equivalence of measures by the exporting Party and assessment of this demonstration by the importing Party (a) The exporting Party shall objectively demonstrate equivalence for each of the identified measures of the importing Party expressed in its import conditions. When appropriate, equivalence shall objectively be demonstrated for any plan or program required by the importing Party as a condition to allow import (e.g. residue plan); (b) Objective demonstration and assessment in this context should be based, as far as possible, on:    — internationally recognised standards; and/or standards based on proper scientific evidence; and/or  — risk assessment; and/or  — documents, reports and information related to past experiences, assessments and verifications; and  — legal status or level of administrative status of the measures; and  — level of implementation and enforcement on the basis of in particular: — corresponding and relevant results of surveillance and monitoring programmes; — inspection results of the exporting Party; — results of analysis with recognised analysis methods; — verification and import check results by the importing Party; — the performance of the competent authorities of the exporting Party; and — earlier experiences.        5. Conclusions of the importing Party  In case the importing Party arrives at a negative conclusion, it shall provide the exporting Party with a detailed and reasoned explanation.  6. For plants and plant products, equivalence concerning phytosanitary measures, shall be based on the conditions referred into Article 159(6) of this Agreement. ANNEX VIII  IMPORT CHECKS AND INSPECTION FEES   A. Principles of import checks  Import checks consist of documentary checks, identity checks and physical checks  As regards animals and animal products, the physical checks and their frequency shall be based on the level of the risk associated with such imports.  In carrying out the checks for plant health purposes, the importing Party shall ensure that the plants, plant products and other objects shall be meticulously inspected on an official basis, either in their entirety or by inspecting a representative sample, in order to make sure, that they are not contaminated by pests.  In the event that the checks reveal non-conformity with the relevant standards and/or requirements, the importing Party shall take official measures proportionate to the risk involved. Wherever possible, the importer or his representative shall be given access to the consignment and the opportunity to provide any relevant information to assist the importing Party in taking a final decision concerning the consignment. Such decision shall be proportional to the level of the risk associated with such imports.  B. Frequencies of physical checks B.1. Import of animals and animal products to the UK and the Republic of Moldova B.2. Import of non-animal food to the UK and the Republic of Moldova — Chilli (Capsicum annuum), crushed or ground — ex 0904 20 90 — Chilli products (curry) — 0910 91 05 — Curcuma longa (turmeric) — 0910 30 00 (Food — dried spices) — Red palm oil — ex 1511 10 90 B.3. Import in to the UK and the Republic of Moldova of plants, plant products and other objects   Type of frontier check  Frequency rate  1. Documentary checks  100 %  2. Identity checks  100 %  3. Physical checks    Live animals 100 %  100 %  Category I products  Fresh meat including offal, and products of the bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine and equine species defined in Council Directive 64/433/EEC of 26 June 1964 on health conditions for the production and marking of fresh meat, as amended. Fish products in hermetically sealed containers  20 %  intended to render them stable at ambient temperatures, fresh and frozen fish and dry and/or salted fisheries products Whole eggs Lard and rendered fats Animal casings Hatching eggs  Category II products  Poultry meat and poultry meat products Rabbit meat, game meat (wild/farmed) and products thereof Milk and milk products for human consumption Egg products Processed animal protein for human consumption (100 % for the first six bulked consignments, Council Directive 92/118/EEC of 17 December 1992 laying down animal health and public health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of products not subject to the said requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 89/662/EEC and, as regards pathogens, to Directive 90/425/EEC, as amended). Other fish products than those mentioned under the Commission Decision 2006/766/EC of 6 November 2006 establishing the lists of third countries and territories from which imports of bivalve molluscs, echinoderms, tunicates, marine gastropods and fishery products are permitted, as amended. Bivalve molluscs Honey  50 %  Type of frontier check  Frequency rate  Category III products Semen Embryos Manure Milk and milk products (not for human consumption) Gelatine Frog’s legs and snails Bones and bone products Hides and skins Bristles, wool, hair and feathers Horns, horn products, hooves and hoof products Apiculture products Game trophies Processed pet food Raw material for the manufacture of pet food Raw material, blood, blood products, glands and organs for pharmaceutical or technical use Hay and straw Pathogens Processed animal protein (packaged)  Minimum of 1 % Maximum of 10 %  Processed animal protein not for human consumption (bulked)  100 % for the first six consignments (points 10 and 11 of Chapter II of Annex VII to Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 October 2002 laying down health rules concerning animal by-products not intended for human consumption, as amended).      For ex 0904 20 90, 0910 91 05, 0910 30 00 (Food — dried spices), 10% for Sudan dyes from all third countries  For ex 1511 10 90, 50% for Sudan dyes from Ghana, 10 % for Sudan dyes from all other third countries   For plants, plant products and other objects listed in Annex V, Part B to Directive 2000/29/EC: The importing Party carries out checks in order to verify the phytosanitary status of the consignment(s). A reduced frequency of plant health import checks could be set up for regulated commodities with the exception of plants, plant product and other objects defined accordingly to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1756/2004 of 11 October 2004 specifying the detailed conditions for the evidence and the criteria for the type and level of the reduction of the plant health checks of certain plants, plant products or other objects listed in Part B of Annex V to Directive 2000/29/EC. ANNEX IX  CERTIFICATION   A. Principles of certification 1. The competent authorities of the Parties shall ensure that certifying officers have a satisfactory knowledge of the veterinary law as regards the animals or animal products to be certified and, in general, are informed about the rules to be followed for drawing up and issuing of the certificates and, if necessary, as to the nature and extent of the enquiries, tests or examinations which should be carried out before certification. 2. Certifying officers must not certify data of which they have no personal knowledge or which cannot be ascertained by them. 3. Certifying officers must not sign blank or incomplete certificates, or certificates relating to animals or animal products, which they have not inspected or which have passed out of their control. Where a certificate is signed on the basis of another certificate or attestation, the certifying officer shall be in possession of the latter document before signing. 4. A certifying officer may certify data which have been: (a) ascertained on the basis of paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Annex by another person authorised by the competent authority and acting under the control of the latter authority, provided that the certifying officer can verify the accuracy of the data; or (b) obtained, in the context of monitoring programmes, by reference to officially recognised quality assurance schemes or by means of an epidemiological surveillance system where this is authorised under veterinary legislation. 5. The competent authorities of the Parties shall take all necessary steps to ensure the integrity of certification. In particular they shall ensure that certifying officers designated by them: (a) have a status which ensures their impartiality and have no direct commercial interest in the animals or products being certified or in the holdings or establishments in which they originate; and (b) are fully aware of the significance of the contents of each certificate which they sign. 6. Certificates shall be drawn up in order to ensure that a specific certificate refers to a specific consignment in a language understood by the certifying officer and in at least one of the official languages of the importing Party as set out in part C of this Annex. 7. Each competent authority shall be in a position to link a certificate with the relevant certifying officer and ensure that a copy of all certificates issued is available for a period to be determined by that competent authority. 8. Each Party shall introduce the checks and the controls necessary to prevent the issuing of false or misleading certifications and the fraudulent production or use of certificates purported to be issued for the purpose set out in the veterinary law. 9. Without prejudice to any judicial proceedings or penalties, the competent authorities shall carry out investigations or checks and take appropriate measures to penalise any instances of false or misleading certification, which are brought to their attention. Such measures may include the temporary suspension of the certifying officers from their duties until the investigation is over. In particular: (a) if in the course of the checks it is found that a certifying officer has knowingly issued a fraudulent certificate, the competent authority shall take all necessary steps to ensure, as far as is possible, that the person concerned cannot repeat the offence; (b) if in the course of the checks it is found that an individual or an undertaking has made fraudulent use of or has altered an official certificate, the competent authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure, as far as possible, that the individual or the undertaking cannot repeat the offence. Such measures may include a refusal to issue an official certificate to the person or the undertaking concerned.  Plants and plant products and other objects:  In respect of certification of plants and plant products and other objects, the competent authorities shall apply the principles laid down in the relevant ISPMs   Animals and animal products:             The date of signature of the certificate cannot be after the date of dispatch of the consignment(s).         B. Certificate referred to in Article 162(2)(a) of this Agreement  Without prejudice to the importing Party’s right to draw up certificates to reflect its levels of protection, the certificate may be jointly discussed by the Parties including through the SPS Sub-Committee.  The health attestation in the certificate reflects the status of equivalence of the commodity concerned. The health attestation states compliance with the production standards of the exporting Party recognised equivalent by the importing Party.   C. Official languages for certification 1. Import into the UK. Plants, plant products and other objects: 2. Import into Republic of Moldova   Certificates shall be drawn up in a language understood by the certifying officer and in at least one of the official languages of the importing Party.  Animals and animal products:  The health certificate must be drawn up in at least one of the official languages of the UK.    The health certificate must be drawn up in the official language of the Republic of Moldova. ANNEX X  STATUS OF EQUIVALENCE  […]   ANNEX XI LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON ESTABLISHMENT; LIST OF COMMITMENTS ON CROSS-BORDER SUPPLY OF SERVICES; LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON KEY PERSONNEL, GRADUATE TRAINEES AND BUSINESS SELLERS; LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON CONTRACTUAL SERVICES SUPPLIERS AND INDEPENDENT PROFESSIONALS UK  1. List of reservations on establishment: Annex XI-A  2. List of commitments on cross-border supply of services: Annex XI-B  3. List of reservations on key personnel, graduate trainees and business sellers: Annex XI-C  4. List of reservations on contractual services suppliers and independent professionals: Annex XI-D   Republic of Moldova  5. List of reservations on establishment: Annex XI-E  6. List of commitments on cross-border supply of services: Annex XI-F  7. List of reservations on key personnel, graduate trainees and business sellers: Annex XI-G  8. List of reservations on contractual services suppliers and independent professionals: Annex XI-H  The following abbreviation is used for the purpose of Annexes XI-A, XI-B, XI-C, XI-D: UK United Kingdom  The following abbreviation is used for the purpose of Annexes XI-E, XI-F, XI-G, XI-H: MD Republic of Moldova   ANNEX XI-A  LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON ESTABLISHMENT (UK)   1. The list of reservations below indicates the economic activities where reservations to national treatment or most favoured treatment by the UK pursuant to Article 180(2) of this Agreement apply to establishments and investors of the Republic of Moldova. (a) a list of horizontal reservations applying to all sectors or sub-sectors; (b) a list of sector or sub-sector specific reservations indicating the sector or sub-sector concerned along with the reservation(s) applying.  The list is composed of the following elements:    A reservation corresponding to an activity which is not liberalised (Unbound) is expressed as follows: ‘No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations’.  2. In accordance with Article 177(3) of this Agreement, the list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by the Parties.  3. The rights and obligations arising from the list below shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly on natural or juridical persons.  4. In accordance with Article 180 of this Agreement, non-discriminatory requirements, such as those concerning the legal form or the obligation to obtain licences or permits applicable to all providers operating on the territory without distinction based on nationality, residency or equivalent criteria, are not listed in this Annex as they are not prejudiced by the Agreement.  5. Where the UK maintains a reservation that requires that a service supplier be a national, permanent resident or resident of its territory as a condition to the supply of a service in its territory, a reservation listed in Annex XI-C to this Agreement shall operate as a reservation with respect to establishment under this Annex, to the extent applicable.   Horizontal reservations   Most Favoured Nation   The UK reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure which accords differential treatment to a country pursuant to any existing or future bilateral or multilateral agreement which: (a) creates an internal market in services and investment;  (b) grants the right of establishment; or  (c) requires the approximation of legislation in one or more economic sectors.  An internal market on services and establishment means an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of services, capital and persons is ensured.  The right of establishment means an obligation to abolish in substance all barriers to establishment among the parties to the regional economic integration agreement by the entry into force of that agreement. The right of establishment shall include the right of nationals of the parties to the regional economic integration agreement to set up and operate enterprises under the same conditions provided for nationals under the law of the country where such establishment takes place.  The approximation of legislation means:  (a) the alignment of the legislation of one or more of the parties to the regional economic integration agreement with the legislation of the other party or parties to that agreement; or  (b) the incorporation of common legislation into the law of the parties to the regional economic integration agreement.  Such alignment or incorporation shall take place, and shall be deemed to have taken place, only at such time that it has been enacted in the law of the party or parties to the regional economic integration agreement.   Public utilities  Economic activities considered as public utilities at a national or local level may be subject to public monopolies or to exclusive rights granted to private operators (1). (1) Public utilities exist in sectors such as related scientific and technical consulting services, R & D services on social sciences and humanities, technical testing and analysis services, environmental services, health services, transport services and services auxiliary to all modes of transport. Exclusive rights on such services are often granted to private operators, for instance operators with concessions from public authorities, subject to specific service obligations. Given that public utilities often also exist at the sub-central level, detailed and exhaustive sector-specific scheduling is not practical. This reservation does not apply to telecommunications and to computer and related services.   Types of establishment  Treatment accorded to subsidiaries (of companies of the Republic of Moldova) formed in accordance with the law of the UK and having their registered office, central administration or principal place of business within the UK is not extended to branches or agencies established in the UK by companies of the Republic of Moldova.   Sectoral reservations   B: Fishing and Aquaculture  Access to and use of the biological resources and fishing grounds situated in the maritime waters coming under the sovereignty or within the jurisdiction of the UK may be restricted to fishing vessels flying the flag of the UK unless otherwise provided for.  No national treatment and most favoured nation obligations for the acquisition of UK flagged vessels, unless the investment is at least 75 % owned by British citizens and/or by companies which are at least 75 % owned by British citizens, in all cases resident and domiciled in the UK. Vessels must be managed, directed and controlled from within the UK.   C: Mining and quarrying  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations for juridical persons controlled (1) by natural or juridical persons of a country which accounts for more than 5 % of the UK's oil or natural gas imports. No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations for direct branching (incorporation is required). (1) A juridical person is controlled by other natural or juridical person(s) if the latter has/have the power to name majority of its directors or otherwise legally direct its actions. In particular, ownership of more than 50 % of the equity interests in a juridical person shall be deemed to constitute control. (2) A juridical person is controlled by other natural or juridical person(s) if the latter has/have the power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise legally direct its actions. In particular, ownership of more than 50 % of the equity interests in a juridical person shall be deemed to constitute control. (3) The horizontal limitation on public utilities applies.   D: Manufacturing  No national treatment and most favoured national obligations for juridical persons controlled (2) by natural or juridical persons of a country which accounts for more than 5 % of the UK's oil or natural gas imports. No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations for direct branching (incorporation is required).  For production, transmission and distribution on own account of electricity, gas, steam and hot water (3) (excluding nuclear based electricity generation)  No national treatment and most favoured nation obligations for production of electricity, transmission and distribution of electricity on own account and manufacture of gas, distribution of gaseous fuels.  For production, transmission and distribution of steam and hot water  No national treatment and most favoured national obligations for juridical persons controlled (1) by natural or juridical persons of a country which accounts for more than 5 % of the UK's oil, electricity or natural gas imports. Unbound for direct branching (incorporation is required). (1) A juridical person is controlled by other natural or juridical person(s) if the latter has/have the power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise legally direct its actions. In particular, ownership of more than 50 % of the equity interests in a juridical person shall be deemed to constitute control.   1.  Business services  Professional services  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to legal advisory and legal documentations and certification services provided by legal professionals entrusted with public functions, such as notaries, and with respect to services provided by bailiffs who are appointed by an official act of government.  Full admission to the Bar required for the practice of domestic law, which may be subject to a residency requirement.   Research and Development services  For publicly funded Research and Development services, exclusive rights and/or authorisations can only be granted to UK nationals and to UK juridical persons having their headquarters in the UK.   Rental/Leasing without Operators  B: Relating to aircraft:   With respect to rental and leasing relating to aircraft, although waivers can be granted for short-term lease contracts, aircraft must be owned either by natural persons meeting specific nationality criteria or by juridical persons meeting specific criteria regarding ownership of capital and control (including nationality of directors).    Other business services  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations for supply services of domestic help personnel, other commercial or industrial workers, nursing, and other personnel. Residency or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements may exist.  For investigation services, no national treatment and most favoured treatment obligations. Residency or commercial presence is required and nationality requirements may exist.   2. Communication services   Telecommunication services   No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment with respect to broadcast transmission services. Broadcasting is defined as the uninterrupted chain of transmission required for the distribution of TV and radio programme signals to the general public, but does not cover contribution links between operators.    4. Distribution services  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to distribution of arms, munitions and explosives.  Nationality condition and residency requirement applies to operate a pharmacy and operate as tobacconists   6. Environmental services  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations in respect of the provision of services relating to the collection, purification and distribution of water to household, industrial, commercial or other users, including the provision of drinking water, and water management.   7. Financial services (1) (1) The horizontal limitation on the difference in treatment between branches and subsidiaries applies. Foreign branches may only receive an authorisation to operate in the territory of the UK under the conditions provided for in the relevant legislation of the UK and may therefore be required to satisfy a number of specific prudential requirements.  Only firms having their registered office in the UK can act as depositories of the assets of investment funds. The establishment of a specialised management company, having its head office and registered office in the UK, is required to perform the activities of management of unit trusts and investment companies.   8. Health, Social and Education services  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to publicly funded health, social and education services.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to privately funded other human health services.  With respect to privately funded education services, nationality conditions may apply for majority of members of the Board.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to the provision of privately funded other education services, which means other than those classified as being primary, secondary, higher and adult education services.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to the provision of privately funded social services other than services relating to convalescent and rest houses and old people's homes.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to the provision of privately-funded ambulance services or privately-funded residential health services other than hospital services.   10. Recreational cultural and sporting services  Sporting and other recreational services  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to gambling and betting services. For legal certainty it is clarified that no market access is granted.   Libraries, archives, museum and other cultural services  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment with respect to libraries, archives, museum and other cultural services.    11. Transport  Maritime transport  No national treatment and most favoured treatment obligations for the establishment of a registered company for the purpose of operating a fleet under the national flag of the UK.   Internal Waterways Transport (1) (1) Including services auxiliary to internal waterways transport. (2) Equivalent treatment implies non-discriminatory treatment of UK air carriers and UK CRS services suppliers.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to national cabotage transport. Measures based upon existing or future agreements on access to inland waterways reserve some traffic rights for operators based in the UK and meeting nationality criteria regarding ownership.    Air transport services   The conditions of mutual market access in air transport shall be dealt with by an agreement or arrangement governing air services between the Republic of Moldova and the UK.  Aircraft used by an air carrier of the UK have to be registered in the UK. With respect to rental of aircraft with crew, aircraft must be owned either by natural persons meeting specific nationality criteria or by juridical persons meeting specific criteria regarding ownership of capital and control. Aircraft must be operated by air carriers owned either by natural persons meeting specific nationality criteria or by juridical persons meeting specific criteria regarding ownership of capital and control.  With respect to computer reservation systems (CRS) services, where air carriers of the UK are not accorded equivalent treatment (2) to that provided in the UK by CRS services suppliers outside the UK, or where CRS services suppliers of the UK are not accorded equivalent treatment to that provided in the UK by non-UK air carriers, measures may be taken to accord equivalent treatment, respectively, to the non-UK air carriers by the CRS services suppliers in the UK, or to the non-UK CRS services suppliers by the air carriers in the UK.   Space transport and rental of space craft   No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment with respect to the transportation services via space and the rental of space craft.   Road transport  Incorporation is required (no branching) for cabotage operations. Residency requirement for the transport manager.   14. Energy services  No national treatment and most favoured treatment obligations with respect to juridical persons of Republic of Moldova controlled (1) by natural or juridical persons of a country which accounts for more than 5 % of the UK's oil or natural gas imports, unless the UK provides comprehensive access to this sector to natural or juridical persons of this country, in the context of an economic integration agreement concluded with that country. (1) A juridical person is controlled by other natural or juridical person(s) if the latter has/have the power to name a majority of its directors or otherwise legally direct its actions. In particular, ownership of more than 50 % of the equity interest in a juridical person shall be deemed to constitute control.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations for nuclear-based electricity generation and with respect to processing of nuclear fuel.  Certification of a transmission system operator which is controlled by a natural or juridical person or persons from a third country or third countries may be refused where the operator has not demonstrated that granting certification will not put at risk the security of energy supply in the UK, in accordance with Article 11 of Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity and Article 11 of Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to pipeline transportation of fuels services, other than consultancy services.  No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment obligations with respect to services incidental to energy distribution, other than consultancy services.      ANNEX XI-B  LIST OF COMMITMENTS ON CROSS-BORDER SERVICES (UK)  1. The list of commitments below indicates the economic activities liberalised by the UK pursuant to Article 187 of this Agreement and, by means of reservations, the market access and national treatment limitations that apply to services and service suppliers of the Republic of Moldova in those activities. The lists are composed of the following elements: (a) a first column indicating the sector or sub-sector in which the commitment is assumed by the Party, and the scope of liberalisation to which the reservations apply; (b) a second column describing the applicable reservations.    Sectors or sub-sectors not mentioned in the list below are not committed.  2. In identifying individual sectors and sub-sectors: (a) CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991; (b) CPC ver. 1.0 means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC ver 1.0, 1998.    3. The list below does not include measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures when they do not constitute a market access or a national treatment limitation within the meaning of Articles 185 and 186 of this Agreement. Those measures (e.g. need to obtain a licence, universal service obligations, need to obtain recognition of qualifications in regulated sectors, need to pass specific examinations, including language examinations, non-discriminatory requirement that certain activities may not be carried out in environmental protected zones or areas of particular historic and artistic interest), even if not listed, apply in any case to investors of the other Party.  4. The list below is without prejudice to the feasibility of Mode 1 in certain services sectors and sub-sectors and without prejudice to the existence of public monopolies and exclusive rights as described in the list of commitments on establishment.  5. In accordance with Article 177(3) of this Agreement, the list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by the Parties.  6. The rights and obligations arising from this list of commitments shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly to individual natural persons or juridical persons.  7. Mode 1 and Mode 2 refer to the means of the supply of services as described in Article 178(13)(a) and (b) of this Agreement respectively.   Sector or sub Description of reservations  1. BUSINESS SERVICES  A. Professional Services     (a) Legal Services (CPC 861) (1)  (excluding legal advisory and legal documentations and certification services provided by professionals entrusted with public functions, such as notaries)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (b) 1. Accounting and Bookkeeping Services   (CPC 86212 other than ‘auditing services’, CPC 86213, CPC 86219 and CPC 86220)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (b) 2. Auditing services   For Mode 1   Sector or sub Description of reservations   (CPC 86211 and 86212 other than accounting services)   Unbound  For Mode 2  None   (c)  Taxation Advisory Services  (CPC 863) (1)    For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (d)  Architectural services   And  (e)  Urban planning and landscape architectural services  (CPC 8671 and CPC 8674)    For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None    (f)  Engineering services; and  (g)  Integrated engineering services  (CPC 8672 and CPC 8673)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (h)  Medical (including Psychologists), and Dental services  (CPC 9312 and part of CPC 85201)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None  Sector or sub Description of reservations   (i)  Veterinary services   (CPC 932)     For Mode 1  Unbound except for veterinary laboratory and technical services supplied to veterinary surgeons, general advice, guidance and information e.g. nutritional behaviour and pet care.  For Mode 2  None   (j)  1. Midwives services   (part of CPC 93191)  2. Services provided by Nurses, Physiotherapists and Paramedical Personnel  (part of CPC 93191)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None   (k)  Retail sales of pharmaceuticals and retail sales of medical and orthopaedical goods  (CPC 63211)  and other services supplied by pharmacists (1)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None   B. Computer and Related Services (CPC 84)   For Modes 1 and 2   None   C. Research and Development Services     (a) R & D services on Social Sciences and   For Modes 1 and 2   Sector or sub Description of reservations  Humanities  (CPC 852 excluding psychologists services) (1)  (b) R & D services on natural sciences (CPC 851) and  (c) Interdisciplinary R & D services (CPC 853)  For publicly funded R & D services, exclusive rights and/or authorisations can only be granted to UK nationals and to juridical persons of the UK having their headquarters in the UK.   D. Real Estate Services (2)     (a) Involving Own or Leased Property (CPC 821)   For Mode 1  None   For Mode 2  None   (b) On a Fee or Contract Basis (CPC 822)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   E. Rental/Leasing Services without Operators     (a)  Relating to Ships  (CPC 83103)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None      Sector or sub Description of reservations  (b) Relating to Aircraft   (CPC 83104)  For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  Aircraft used by UK air carriers have to be registered in the UK. Waivers can be granted for short-term lease contracts or under exceptional circumstances.    (c) Relating to Other Transport Equipment  (CPC 83101, CPC 83102 and CPC 83105)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2   None   (d) Relating to Other Machinery and Equipment  (CPC 83106, CPC 83107, CPC 83108 and CPC 83109)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (f) Telecommunications equipment rental  (CPC 7541)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   F. Other Business Services     (a) Advertising  (CPC 871)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (b) Market Research and Opinion Polling  (CPC 864)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (c) Management Consulting Services  (CPC 865)   For Modes 1 and 2  None  Sector or sub Description of reservations   (d) Services Related to Management Consulting  (CPC 866)   For Modes 1 and 2  None     (e)  Technical Testing and Analysis Services  (CPC 8676)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (f)  Advisory and Consulting services incidental to Agriculture, Hunting and Forestry  (part of CPC 881)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (g)  Advisory and Consulting Services Relating to Fishing  (part of CPC 882)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (h)  Advisory and Consulting Services incidental to Manufacturing (part of CPC 884 and part of CPC 885)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (i)  1. Executive search   (CPC 87201)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (i)  2. Placement   For Mode 1  Sector or sub Description of reservations  Services  (CPC 87202)   Unbound  For Mode 2  None   (i)  3. Supply  Services of office support personnel  (CPC 87203)    For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (j) 2. Security Services  (CPC 87302, CPC 87303, CPC 87304 and CPC 87305)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (k) Related Scientific and Technical Consulting Services  (CPC 8675)     For Mode 1  Unbound for exploration services  For Mode 2  None   (l) 1. Maintenance and repair of vessels  (part of CPC 8868)   For Mode 1  For maritime transport vessels:  Unbound.  For internal waterways transport vessels:  Unbound.  For Mode 2  None   (l) 2. Maintenance   For Mode 1  Sector or sub Description of reservations  and Repair of Rail Transport Equipment  (part of CPC 8868)   Unbound  For Mode 2   None   (l) 3. Maintenance and Repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles and road transport Equipment  (CPC 6112, CPC 6122, part of CPC 8867 and part of CPC 8868)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (l) 4. Maintenance and Repair of Aircraft and parts thereof  (part of CPC 8868)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None   (l) 5.  Maintenance and Repair services of metal products, of (non office) machinery, of (non transport and non-office) equipment and of personal and household goods (1)  (CPC 633, CPC 7545, CPC 8861, CPC 8862, CPC 8864, CPC 8865 and CPC 8866)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (m) Building-Cleaning Services  (CPC 874)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  Sector or sub Description of reservations   None   (n) Photographic Services   (CPC 875)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (o) Packaging Services  (CPC 876)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (p) Printing and Publishing  (CPC 88442)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (q) Convention Services  (part of CPC 87909) (part of CPC 87909)   For Modes 1 and 2  None  None   (r)  Other     (r)  1.  Translation and Interpretation Services  (CPC 87905)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   (r)  2.  Interior design and other specialty design services  (CPC 87907)    For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   r)    5.Duplicating services    For Mode 1   Sector or sub Description of reservations  (CPC 87904) (1)  Unbound  For Mode 2   None   r)    6.Electronic communications consulting services  (CPC 7544)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   r)    7.Telephone answering services  (CPC 87903)   For Modes 1 and 2  None  2. COMMUNICATION SERVICES   A. Postal and Courier Services  Services relating to the handling (2) of postal items (3) according to the following list of sub-sectors, whether for domestic or foreign destinations:     (i) Handling of addressed written communications on any kind of physical medium (4), including Hybrid mail service and Direct mail,  (ii) Handling of addressed parcels and   For Modes 1 and 2  None (12)  Sector or sub Description of reservations  packages (1),  (iii) Handling of addressed press products (2)  (iv) Handling of items referred to in (i) to (iii) above as registered or insured mail,  (v) Express delivery services (3) for items referred to in (i) to (iii) above,  (vi) Handling of non-addressed items.  (vii) Document exchange (4)   Sub-sectors (i), (iv) and (v) are however excluded when they fall into the scope of the services which may be reserved, which is: for items of correspondence the price of which is less than 5 times the public basic tariff, provided that they weigh less than 350 grams (5), plus the registered mail service used in the course of judicial or  Sector or sub Description of reservations  administrative procedures.  (part of CPC 751, part of CPC 71235 (1) and part of CPC 73210 (2))   B. Telecommunications Services  (These services do not cover the economic activity consisting of the provision of content which requires telecommunications services for its transport)     (a) All services consisting of the transmission and reception of signals by any electromagnetic means (4), excluding broadcasting (5)   For Modes 1 and 2   None   (b)Satellite broadcast transmission services(6)   For Modes 1 and 2  None except that service providers in this sector may be subject to obligations to safeguard general interest objectives related to the conveyance of content through their network in line with the UK regulatory framework for electronic communications   3. CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ENGINEERING SERVICES  Sector or sub Description of reservations   Construction and related engineering services  (CPC 511, CPC 512, CPC 513, CPC 514, CPC 515, CPC 516, CPC 517 and CPC 518)   For Modes 1 and 2  None  4. DISTRIBUTION SERVICES (excluding distribution of arms, munitions, explosives and other war material)   A. Commission Agents' Services  (a) Commission Agents' Services of motor vehicles, motorcycles and snowmobiles and parts and accessories thereof  (part of CPC 61111, part of CPC 6113 and part of CPC 6121)  (b) Other Commission Agents' Services  (CPC 621)  B. Wholesale Trade Services  (a) Wholesale Trade Services of motor vehicles, motorcycles and snowmobiles and parts and accessories thereof  (part of CPC 61111, part of CPC 6113 and part of CPC 6121)  (b) Wholesale Trade Services of telecommunication   For Modes 1 and 2  Unbound for distribution of chemical products, and of precious metals (and stones).             For Mode 1                   Sector or sub Description of reservations  terminal equipment  (part of CPC 7542)  (c) Other wholesale trade services (CPC 622 excluding wholesale trade services of energy products (1))  C. Retailing Services(2)  Retailing Services of motor vehicles, motorcycles and snowmobiles and parts and accessories thereof  (CPC 61112, part of CPC 6113 and part of CPC 6121)  Retailing Services of telecommunication terminal equipment  (part of CPC 7542) Food retailing services (CPC 631)  Retailing services of other (non-energy) goods, except retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods (3)  (CPC 632 excluding CPC 63211 and 63297)            For retailing services, unbound except for mail order  Sector or sub Description of reservations   D. Franchising  (CPC 8929)  5. EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (only privately-funded services)   A. Primary Education  Services   (CPC 921)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   C. Secondary Education  D. Services  (CPC 922)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   D. Higher Education  E. Services   (CPC 923)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   E. Adult Education  F.  Services  (CPC 924)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   6. ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES   A. Waste Water Services  (CPC 9401) (1)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for consulting services  For Mode 2  Sector or sub Description of reservations   None   B.  Solid/hazardous waste management, excluding cross-border transport of hazardous waste  (a)  Refuse Disposal Services (CPC 9402)  (b)  Sanitation and Similar Services (CPC 9403)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for consulting services  For Mode 2  None     C.  Protection of ambient air and climate  (CPC 9404) (1)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for consulting services  For Mode 2  None   D.  Remediation and clean-up of soil and waters    For Mode 1  Unbound except for consulting services  For Mode 2  None   (a)  Treatment, remediation of contaminated/polluted soil and water (part of CPC 94060) (2)     E.  Noise and vibration abatement  (CPC 9405)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for consulting services  For Mode 2   Sector or sub Description of reservations   None   F.  Protection of biodiversity and landscape  (a)  Nature and landscape protection services  (part of CPC 9406)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for consulting services  For Mode 2   None   G. Other environmental and ancillary services  (CPC 94090)   For Mode 1   Unbound except for consulting services  For Mode 2   None  7. FINANCIAL SERVICES   A. Insurance and insurance-related services    For Modes 1 and 2  Unbound for direct insurance services except for insurance of risks relating to:  i) Maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods and any liability arising therefrom; and  ii) goods in international transit. i) Maritime shipping and commercial aviation and space launching and freight (including satellites), with such insurance to cover any or all of the following: the goods being transported, the vehicle transporting the goods and any liability arising therefrom; and ii) goods in international transit.  For Mode 1  Unbound for direct insurance intermediation services except for insurance of risks relating to:   Sector or sub Description of reservations    For Mode 2  Unbound for intermediation   B. Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)    For Mode 1  Unbound except for provision of financial information and financial data processing and for advisory and other auxiliary services excluding intermediation.  For Mode 2  None   8. HEALTH SERVICES AND SOCIAL SERVICES (only privately-funded services)    A. Hospital Services  (CPC 9311)  C. Residential health facilities other than hospital services  (CPC 93193)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None   D. Social Services (CPC 933)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None  (1) Includes legal advisory services, legal representational services, legal arbitration and conciliation/mediation services, and legal documentation and certification services. Provision of legal services is only authorised in respect of public international law, and the law of any jurisdiction where the service supplier or its personnel is qualified to practise as a lawyer, and, like the provision of other services, is subject to licensing requirements and procedures applicable in the relevant jurisdiction of the United Kingdom. For lawyers providing legal services in respect of public international law and foreign law, these licensing requirements and procedures may take, inter alia, the form of compliance with local codes of ethics, use of home title (unless recognition with a United Kingdom title has been obtained), insurance requirements, simple registration with the United Kingdom regulators or a simplified admission to practise in the United Kingdom through an aptitude test and a legal or professional domicile in the United Kingdom. Legal services in respect of the law of the United Kingdom or the relevant jurisdiction shall in principle be carried out by or through a fully qualified lawyer admitted to practise in that jurisdiction and acting personally. Full admission to practise in the relevant jurisdiction of the United Kingdom might therefore be necessary for representation before courts and other competent authorities in the United Kingdom since it involves practice of national procedural law. (1) Does not include legal advisory and legal representational services on tax matters, which are to  be found under 1.A.a). Legal services. (1) The supply of pharmaceuticals to the general public, like the provision of other services, is subject to licensing and qualification requirements and procedures applicable in the United Kingdom. (1) Part of CPC 85201, which is to be found under 1.A.h. Medical and dental services. (2) The service involved relates to the profession of real estate agent and does not affect any rights and/or restrictions on natural and juridical persons purchasing real estate.  (1) Maintenance and repair services of transport equipment (CPC 6112, 6122, 8867 and CPC 8868) are to be found under l.F. l) 1 to 1.F.l) 4. (1) Does not include printing services, which fall under CPC 88442 and are to be found under 1.F p). (2) The term ‘handling’ should be taken to include clearance, sorting, transport and delivery. (3) ‘Postal item’ refers to items handled by any type of commercial operator, whether public or private. (4) E.g. letter, postcards. (12) For subsectors i) to iv), individual licences imposing particular universal services obligations and/or financial contribution to a compensation fund may be required. (1) Books, catalogues are included hereunder. (2) Journals, newspapers, periodicals. (3) Express delivery services may include, in addition to greater speed and reliability, value added elements such as collection from point of origin, personal delivery to addressee, tracing and tracking, possibility of changing the destination and addressee in transit, confirmation of receipt. (4) Provision of means, including the supply of ad hoc premises as well as transportation by a third party, allowing self-delivery by mutual exchange of postal items between users subscribing to this service. Postal item refers to items handled by any type of commercial operator, whether public or private. (5) ‘Items of correspondence’: a communication in written form on any kind of physical medium  to be conveyed and delivered at the address indicated by the sender on the item itself or on its wrapping. Books, catalogues, newspapers and periodicals are not regarded as items of correspondence. (1) Transportation of mail on own account by any land Mode. (2) Transportation of mail on own account by air. (4) These services do not include on-line information and/or data processing (including transaction processing) (part of CPC 843) which is to be found under 1.B. Computer services. (5) Broadcasting is defined as the uninterrupted chain of transmission required for the distribution of TV and radio programme signals to the general public, but does not cover contribution links between operators. (6) These services cover the telecommunications service consisting of the transmission and reception of radio and television broadcast by satellite (the uninterrupted chain of transmission via satellite required for the distribution of TV and radio programme signals to the general public). This covers selling use of satellite services, but does not include the selling of television programme packages to households. (1) These services, which include CPC 62271, are to be found in ENERGY SERVICES under 18.D. (2) Does not include maintenance and repair services, which are to be found in BUSINESS SERVICES under 1.B. and 1.F.l). (3) Retail sales of pharmaceutical, medical and orthopaedic goods are to be found under PROFESSIONAL SERVICES in 1.A.k).   (1) Corresponds to sewage services. (1) Corresponds to Cleaning Services of Exhaust Gases. (2) Corresponds to parts of Nature and Landscape Protection Services     Sector or sub Description of reservations     A. Hotel, Restaurants and Catering (CPC 641, CPC 642 and CPC 643) excluding catering in air transport services (1)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for catering.  For Mode 2  None   B. Travel Agencies and Tour Operators Services  (including tour managers) (CPC 7471)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   C. Tourist Guides Services (CPC 7472)   For Mode 1  None  For Mode 2  None   10. RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL AND SPORTING SERVICES (other than audiovisual services)    A. Entertainment Services (including Theatre, Live Bands, Circus and Discotheque Services)  (CPC 9619)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None    B. News and Press Agencies Services   For Modes 1 and 2   Sector or sub Description of reservations   (CPC 962)  None   D. Sporting services (CPC 9641)   For Modes 1 and 2  None     E. Recreation park and beach Services  (CPC 96491)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   11. TRANSPORT SERVICES    A. Maritime transport  (a)  International passenger transportation  (CPC 7211 less national cabotage transport(1))  (b)  International freight transportation  (CPC 7212 less national cabotage transport30) (2)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   B. Internal Waterways Transport  (a)  Passenger transportation  (CPC 7221 less national cabotage transport30)   For Modes 1 and 2  Measures based upon existing or future agreements on access to inland waterways reserve some traffic rights for operators based in the countries concerned and meeting nationality criteria regarding ownership.  Sector or sub Description of reservations   (b)  Freight transportation  (CPC 7222 less national cabotage transport30)   C. Rail Transport  (a)  Passenger transportation  (CPC 7111)  (b)  Freight transportation  (CPC 7112)   For Mode 1  Unbound   For Mode 2  None   D. Road Transport  (a)  Passenger Transportation  (CPC 7121 and CPC 7122)  (b)  Freight Transportation  (CPC 7123, excluding transportation of mail on own account (1)).   For Mode 1  Unbound   For Mode 2  None   12. SERVICES AUXILIARY TO TRANSPORT (2)    A.  Services auxiliary to Maritime Transport  (a)  Maritime Cargo Handling Services    For Mode 1  Unbound for maritime cargo handling services, pushing and towing services, customs clearance services and for container station and depot   Sector or sub Description of reservations  (b)  Storage and warehousing Services (part of CPC 742)  (c)  Customs Clearance Services   (d)  Container Station and Depot Services  (e)  Maritime Agency Services   (f)  Maritime freight forwarding Services  (g)  Rental of Vessels with Crew  (CPC 7213)  (h)  Pushing and towing services (CPC 7214)  (i)  Supporting services for maritime transport (part of CPC 745)  (j)  Other supporting and auxiliary services (part of CPC 749)                  Unbound for storage and warehousing services       For Mode 2  None   B.  Services auxiliary to internal waterways transport  (a)  Cargo-handling services (part of CPC 741)  (b)  Storage and warehouse services (part of CPC 742)  (c)  Freight transport agency services  (part of CPC 748)   For Modes 1 and 2  Measures based upon existing or future agreements on access to inland waterways reserving some traffic rights for operators based in the countries concerned and meeting nationality criteria regarding ownership.       Unbound for pushing and towing services.  Sector or sub Description of reservations   (d)  Rental of vessels with crew (CPC 7223)  (e)  Pushing and towing services (CPC 7224)  (f)  Supporting services for internal waterway transport (part of CPC 745)  (g)  Other supporting and auxiliary services (part of CPC 749)   C.  Services auxiliary to rail transport  (a)  Cargo-handling services (part of CPC 741)  (b)  Storage and warehouse services (part of CPC 742)  (c)  Freight transport agency services (part of CPC 748)  (d)  Pushing and towing services (CPC 7113)  (e)  Supporting services for rail transport services (CPC 743)  (f)  Other supporting and auxiliary services (part of CPC 749)   For Mode 1   Unbound for pushing and towing services  For Mode 2  None   D. Services auxiliary to road transport  (a) Cargo-handling   For Mode 1  None    Sector or sub Description of reservations  services (part of CPC 741)  (b) Storage and warehouse services (part of CPC 742)  (c) Freight transport agency services (part of CPC 748)  (d) Rental of Commercial Road Vehicles with Operators (CPC 7124)  (e) Supporting services for road transport (CPC 744)  (f) Other supporting and auxiliary services (part of CPC 749)  For Mode 2  None   D. Services auxiliary to air transport services     a) Ground-handling services (including catering services)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for catering.  For Mode 2  None   (b) Storage and warehouse services  (part of CPC 742)   For Modes 1 and 2  None.   (c) Freight transport agency services  (part of CPC 748)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   (d) Rental of aircraft   For Modes 1 and 2  Sector or sub Description of reservations  with crew (CPC 734)   Aircraft used by UK air carriers have to be registered in the UK.  To be registered, aircraft may be required to be owned either by natural persons meeting specific nationality criteria or by juridical persons meeting specific criteria regarding ownership of capital and control.  By exception, aircraft registered outside UK may be leased by a foreign air carrier to an air carrier of the UK in specific circumstances for the air carrier of the UK's exceptional needs, seasonal capacity needs, or needs to overcome operational difficulties, which cannot reasonably be satisfied through leasing aircraft registered within the UK, and subject to obtaining the approval of a limited duration from the UK.   (e)  Sales and Marketing  (f)  Computer Reservations System   For Modes 1 and 2  Where air carriers of the UK are not accorded equivalent treatment (1) to that provided in the UK by CRS services suppliers outside UK, or where CRS services suppliers of the UK are not accorded equivalent treatment to that provided in the UK by non-UK air carriers, measures may be taken to accord equivalent treatment, respectively, to the non-UK air carriers by the CRS services suppliers in the UK, or to the non-UK CRS services suppliers by the air carriers in the UK.   (g)  Airport management   For Mode 1  Unbound   For Mode 2  None   E.  Services auxiliary to pipeline transport of goods other than fuel (2)   For Mode 1  Unbound  Sector or sub Description of reservations   (a)  Storage and warehouse services of goods other than fuel transported by pipelines  (part of CPC 742)   For Mode 2   None   13. OTHER TRANSPORT SERVICES    Provision of Combined Transport Service   None, without prejudice to the limitations inscribed in this List of Commitments affecting any given mode of transport.   14. ENERGY SERVICES    A.  Services Incidental to Mining (CPC 883) (1)   For Modes 1 and 2  None   C.  Storage and warehouse services of fuels transported through pipelines  (part of CPC 742)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None   D.  Wholesale trade services of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels and related products.  (CPC 62271)  And wholesale trade services of electricity,   For Mode 1  Unbound for wholesale trade services of electricity, steam and hot water  For Mode 2  None  Sector or sub Description of reservations  steam and hot water   E.  Retailing services of motor fuel (CPC 613)   For Mode 1  Unbound  For Mode 2  None   F.  Retail sales of fuel oil, bottles gas, coal and wood (CPC 63297)  And retailing services of electricity (non-bottled) gas, steam and hot water   For Mode 1  Unbound for retailing services of electricity, (non-bottled) gas, steam and hot water  For retail sales of fuel oil, bottled gas, coal and wood, unbound except for mail order where: none  For Mode 2  None   G.  Services incidental to energy distribution  (CPC 887)   For Mode 1  Unbound except for consultancy services where: none  For Mode 2  None   15. OTHER SERVICES NOT INCLUDED ELSEWHERE    (a)  Washing, Cleaning and Dyeing services  (CPC 9701)   For Mode 1  Unbound   For Mode 2  None   (b)  Hairdressing services   For Mode 1   Sector or sub Description of reservations   (CPC 97021)  Unbound  For Mode 2  None   (c) Cosmetic treatment, manicuring and pedicure services  (CPC 97022)   For Mode 1  Unbound   For Mode 2   None   (d)  Other beauty treatment services n.e.c  (CPC 97029)   For Mode 1  Unbound   For Mode 2  None   (e) Spa services and non therapeutical massages, to the extent that they are provided as relaxation physical well-being services and not for medical or rehabilitation purposes (1)  (CPC ver. 1.0 97230)   For Mode 1   Unbound   For Mode 2  None   (g) Telecommunications connection services   (CPC 7543)   For Modes 1 and 2  None  (1) Catering in air transport services is to be found in SERVICES AUXILARY TO TRANSPORT SERVICES under 12.D.a) Groundhandling services. (1) Without prejudice to the scope of activities which may be considered as cabotage under the relevant national legislation, this schedule does not include national cabotage transport, which is assumed to cover transportation of passengers or goods between a port or point located in a the UK and another port or point located in the UK, including on its continental shelf as provided in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, and traffic originating and terminating in the same port or point located in the UK. (2) Includes feedering services and movement of equipment by international maritime transport suppliers between ports located in the UK when no revenue is involved. (1) Part of CPC 71235, which is to be found in COMMUNICATION SERVICES under 2.A. Postal and courier services. (2) Does not include maintenance and repair services of transport equipment, which are to be found in BUSINESS SERVICES under 1.F.l) 1 to 1.F.l) 4 (1) Equivalent treatment’ implies non-discriminatory treatment of UK air carriers and CRS services suppliers of the UK. (2) Services auxiliary to pipeline transportation of fuels are to be found in ENERGY SERVICES under 13.C (1) Includes the following service rendered on a fee or contract basis: advisory and consulting services relating to mining, on land site preparation, on land rig installation, drilling, drilling bits services, casing and tubular services, mud engineering and supply, solids control, fishing and down-hole special operations, wellsite geology and drilling control, core taking, well testing, wireline services, supply and operation of completion fluids (brines) supply and installation of completion devices, cementing (pressure pumping), stimulation services (fracturing, acidising and pressure pumping), workover and well repair services, plugging and abandoning of wells. (1) Therapeutical massages and thermal cure services are to be found under 1.A.h) Medical services, 1.A.j) 2 Services provided by nurses, physiotherapists and para-medical personnel and health services (8.A and 8.C).    ANNEX XI-C  LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON KEY PERSONNEL, GRADUATE TRAINEES AND BUSINESS SELLERS (UK)   1. The list of reservations below indicates the economic activities liberalised pursuant to Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter 6 (Establishment, Trade in Services and Electronic Commerce) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement for which limitations on key personnel and graduate trainees in accordance with Article 190 and on business sellers in accordance with Article 191 of this Agreement apply and specifies such limitations. The list below is composed of the following elements: (a) the first column indicating the sector or sub-sector in which limitations apply; and (b) the second column describing the applicable limitations.    The UK does not undertake any commitment for key personnel, graduate trainees and business sellers in economic activities which are not liberalised (remain unbound) pursuant to pursuant to Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter 6 (Establishment, Trade in Services and Electronic Commerce) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.  2. In identifying individual sectors and sub-sectors: (a) CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991; and (b) CPC ver. 1.0 means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC ver 1.0, 1998.    3. Commitments on key personnel, graduate trainees, business service sellers and sellers of goods do not apply in cases where the intent or effect of their temporary presence is to interfere with, or otherwise affect the outcome of, any labour/management dispute or negotiation.  4. The list below does not include measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures when they do not constitute a limitation within the meaning of Articles 190 and 191 of this Agreement. Those measures (e.g. need to obtain a licence, need to obtain recognition of qualifications in regulated sectors, need to pass specific examinations, including language examinations), even if not listed below, apply in any case to key personnel, graduate trainees and business sellers of the Republic of Moldova.  5. All other requirements of the laws and regulations of the UK regarding entry, stay, work and social security measures shall continue to apply, including regulations concerning period of stay, minimum wages as well as collective wage agreements.  6. In accordance with Article 177(3) of this Agreement, the list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by a Party.  7. The list below is without prejudice to the existence of public monopolies and exclusive rights as described in the list of commitments on establishment.  8. In the sectors where economic needs tests are applied, their main criteria will be the assessment of the relevant market situation in the UK or the region where the service is to be provided, including with respect to the number of, and the impact on, existing services suppliers.  9. The rights and obligations arising from the list below shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly on natural or juridical persons.   Sector or sub Description of reservations   6. BUSINESS SERVICES     E. Rental/Leasing Services without Operators     e) Relating to personal and household goods (CPC 832)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.   f) Telecommunications equipment rental (CPC 7541)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.   F. Other Business Services     l) 3. Maintenance and Repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles and road transport Equipment (CPC 6112, CPC 6122, part of CPC 8867 and part of CPC 8868)   For maintenance and repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles and snowmobiles, nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.  Sector or sub Description of reservations   l) 5. Maintenance and Repair services of metal products, of (non office) machinery, of (non transport and non office) equipment and of personal and household goods (1) (CPC 633, CPC 7545, CPC 8861, CPC 8862, CPC 8864, CPC 8865 and CPC 8866)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainee, except for: CPC 633, 8861, 8866;    r) 5. Duplicating services (CPC 87904) (2)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.   16.  TRANSPORT SERVICES     A. Maritime transport     (a) International passenger transportation (CPC 7211 less national cabotage transport).  (b) International freight transportation (CPC 7212 less national cabotage transport)    Nationality condition for ships' crew.    20. OTHER SERVICES NOT INCLUDED ELSEWHERE     (a) Washing, Cleaning and Dyeing services (CPC 9701)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.  Sector or sub Description of reservations     b) Hairdressing services (CPC 97021)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.   c) Cosmetic treatment, manicuring and pedicuring services (CPC 97022)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.   d) Other beauty treatment services n.e.c (CPC 97029)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.   e) Spa services and non therapeutical massages, to the extent that they are provided as relaxation physical well-being services and not for medical or rehabilitation purposes (1) (CPC ver. 1.0 97230)   Nationality condition for specialists and for graduate trainees.  (1) Maintenance and repair services of transport equipment (CPC 6112, 6122, 8867 and CPC 8868) are to be found under 6.F. l) 1. to 6.F.l) 4. Maintenance  and  repair  services  of  office  machinery  and  equipment  including  computers  (CPC  845)  are  to  be  found  under  6.B. Computer and Related Services. (2) Does not include printing services, which fall under CPC 88442 and are to be found under 6.F. p). (1) Therapeutical  massages  and  thermal  cure  services  are  to  be  found  under  6.A.h)  Medical  and  Dental  services,  6.A.j)  2.  Services provided by Nurses, Physiotherapists and Paramedical personnel, and health services (13.A and 13.C).  ANNEX XI-D  LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON CONTRACTUAL SERVICES SUPPLIERS AND INDEPENDENT PROFESSIONALS (UK)  1. The Parties shall allow the supply of services into their territories by contractual service suppliers and independent professionals of the other Party through the presence of natural persons, in accordance with Articles 192 and 193 of this Agreement, for the economic activities which are listed below, and subject to the relevant limitations.  2. The list is composed of the following elements: (a) the first column indicating the sector or sub-sector in which limitations apply; and (b) the second column describing the applicable limitations.    The UK does not undertake any commitment for contractual service suppliers and independent professionals for any sector of economic activity other than those which are explicitly listed below.  3. In identifying individual sectors and sub-sectors: (a) CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991; and (b) CPC ver. 1.0 means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC ver 1.0, 1998.    4. Commitments for contractual service suppliers and independent professionals do not apply in cases where the intent or effect of their temporary presence is to interfere with, or otherwise affect the outcome of, any labour/ management dispute or negotiation.  5. The list below does not include measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures when they do not constitute a limitation within the meaning of Articles 192 and 193 of this Agreement. Those measures (e.g. need to obtain a license, need to obtain recognition of qualifications in regulated sectors, need to pass specific examinations, including language examinations), even if not listed below, apply in any case to contractual service suppliers and independent professionals of the Republic of Moldova.  6. All other requirements of the laws and regulations of the UK regarding entry, stay, work and social security measures shall continue to apply, including regulations concerning period of stay, minimum wages as well as collective wage agreements.  7. The list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by a Party.  8. The list below is without prejudice to the existence of public monopolies or exclusive rights in the relevant sectors, as set out by the UK in Annex XI-A to this Agreement.  9. In the sectors where economic needs tests are applied, their main criteria will be the assessment of the relevant market situation in the UK or the region where the service is to be provided, including with respect to the number of, and the impact on, existing services suppliers.  10. The rights and obligations arising from the list below shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly on natural or juridical persons.  The Parties shall allow the supply of services into their territory by contractual services suppliers of the other Party through the presence of natural persons, subject to the conditions specified in Article 192(1) of this Agreement, in the following sub-sectors:  1. Legal services in respect of public international law and foreign law (i.e. non-UK law)  2. Accounting and bookkeeping services  3. Taxation advisory services  4. Architectural services, urban planning and landscape architectural services  5. Engineering services, integrated engineering services  6. Computer and related services  7. Advertising  8. Management consulting services  9. Services related to management consulting  10. Technical testing and analysis services  11. Related scientific and technical consulting services  12. Maintenance and repair of metal products, of (non office) machinery, of (non transport and non office) equipment and household goods equipment in the context of an after-sales or after-lease services contract  13. Translation services  14. Site investigation work  15. Environmental services    The Parties shall allow the supply of services into their territory by independent professionals of the other Party through the presence of natural persons, subject to the conditions specified in Article 193(2), in the following sub-sectors:  1. Legal services in respect of public international law and foreign law (i.e. non-UK law)  2. Architectural services, urban planning and landscape architecture  3. Engineering and integrated engineering services  4. Computer and related services  5. Management consulting services and services related to management consulting  6. Translation services Sector or sub Description of reservations  Legal Advisory Services in respect of public international law and foreign law (i.e. non-UK law) (part of CPC 861) (1)    None.    Accounting and Bookkeeping Services (CPC 86212 other than ‘auditing services’, CPC 86213, CPC 86219 and CPC 86220)    None.    Taxation Advisory Services (CPC 863) (2)    None.    Architectural services and Urban planning and landscape architectural services (CPC 8671 and CPC 8674)    None.   Sector or sub Description of reservations   Engineering services and Integrated engineering services (CPC 8672 and CPC 8673)    None.    Computer and Related Services (CPC 84)   Economic needs test.    Advertising (CPC 871)    None.    Management Consulting Services (CPC 865)    None.    Services Related to Management Consulting (CPC 866)    None.    Technical Testing and Analysis Services (CPC 8676)    None.    Related Scientific and Technical Consulting Services (CPC 8675)    None.      Maintenance and repair of metal products, of (non office) machinery, of (non transport and non office)    None.   Sector or sub Description of reservations  equipment and of personal and household goods (1)  (CPC 633, CPC 7545, CPC 8861,CPC 8862, CPC 8864, CPC 8865 and CPC 8866)   Translation  (CPC 87905, excluding official or certified activities)    None.    Site investigation work   (CPC 5111)    None.    Environmental services  (CPC 9401 (2), CPC 9402, CPC 9403, CPC 9404 (3), part of CPC 94060 (4), CPC 9405, part of CPC 9406, CPC 9409)    None.   (1) Like the provision of other services, legal services are subject to licensing requirements and procedures applicable in the relevant jurisdiction of the United Kingdom. For lawyers providing legal services in respect of public international law and foreign law, these licensing requirements and procedures may take, inter alia, the form of compliance with local codes of ethics, use of home title (unless recognition with a United Kingdom title has been obtained), insurance requirements, simple registration with the United Kingdom regulators or a simplified admission to practise in the United Kingdom through an aptitude test and a legal or professional domicile in the United Kingdom. (2) Does  not  include  legal  advisory  and  legal  representational  services  on  tax  matters,  which  are  to  be  found  under  Legal  Advisory Services in respect of public international law and foreign law. (1) Maintenance and repair services of office machinery and equipment including computers (CPC 845) are to be found under Computer services (2) Corresponds to sewage services. (3) Corresponds to Cleaning Services of Exhaust Gases. (4) Corresponds to parts of Nature and Landscape Protection Services   ANNEX XI-E  LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON ESTABLISHMENT (REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA)   1. The list below indicates the economic activities where reservations to national treatment or most favoured treatment by the Republic of Moldova pursuant to Article 180(1) of this Agreement apply to establishments and investors of the UK.  The list is composed of the following elements:  (a) the first column indicating the sector or subsector in which limitations apply;  (b) the second column describing the applicable reservations in the sector or subsector indicated in the first column.  2. In identifying individual sectors and sub-sectors: (a) CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991; (b) CPC ver. 1.0 means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC ver 1.0, 1998.    3. In accordance with Article 177(3) of this Agreement, the list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by the Parties.  4. In accordance with Article 180 of this Agreement, non-discriminatory requirements, such as those concerning the legal form or the obligation to obtain licences or permits applicable to all providers operating on the territory without distinction based on nationality, residency or equivalent criteria, are not listed in this Annex as they are not prejudiced by the Agreement.  5. The rights and obligations arising from the list below shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly on natural or juridical persons.   Most Favoured Nation   The Republic of Moldova reserves the right to adopt or maintain any measure which accords differential treatment to a country pursuant to any existing or future bilateral or multilateral agreement which:  a) creates an internal market in services and investment;  b) grants the right of establishment; or  c) requires the approximation of legislation in one or more economic sectors.  An internal market on services and establishment means an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of services, capital and persons is ensured.  The right of establishment means an obligation to abolish in substance all barriers to establishment among the parties to the regional economic integration agreement by the entry into force of that agreement. The right of establishment shall include the right of nationals of the parties to the regional economic integration agreement to set up and operate enterprises under the same conditions provided for nationals under the law of the country where such establishment takes place.  The approximation of legislation means:  (a) the alignment of the legislation of one or more of the parties to the regional economic integration agreement with the legislation of the other Party or parties to that agreement; or  (b) the incorporation of common legislation into the law of the parties to the regional economic integration agreement.  Such alignment or incorporation shall take place, and shall be deemed to have taken place, only at such time that it has been enacted in the law of the Party or Parties to the regional economic integration agreement.   Space transport and rental of space craft   No national treatment and most favoured nation treatment with respect to the transportation services via space and the rental of space craft.  Sector or  Description of reservations   I. HORIZONTAL RESERVATIONS  Reservations include all sectors   Land  Land lease not exceeding 99 years permitted.  Foreign supplier may purchase land except for agriculture land and forestry land.    I. SPECIFIC RESERVATIONS 1. BUSINESS SERVICES A. Professional Services (a)  Legal Services:     — Limited on consultancy on host country law; (CPC 861   Legal services related to representation in courts and other public authorities can be provided by a legal professional from the UK upon association with a local lawyer or following 1 year internship to get a licence in the Republic of Moldova.  Legal advising services, except representation in court and other authorities, can be provided after prior registration in special registry of the Council of Bar Association.  Translation and/or interpretation services for the judiciary can be provided after prior recognition of the authorisation as a sworn interpreter/translator issued in another state, by the Attestation Commission of the Ministry of Justice.  Mediation services can be provided by a person licensed as a mediator in another state after certification by the Mediation Board.  Services of authorised bankruptcy administrator can be provided following one year internship and after passing the exam in the Commission for certification and discipline of the Ministry of Justice.  Nationality requirement for public notaries and bailiffs   (h) Private medical and dental services (CPC 9312) (CPC 9312 excluding services provided by the public sector)  G. Other Business Services H.  (k) Placement and supply services of personnel (CPC 872);  (l) Investigation and security (CPC 873);  2. COMMUNICATION SERVICES A. Postal Services   (a) International postal services, as well as internal postal services related to letters up to 350 grams (CPC 7511);  7. FINANCIAL SERVICES Banking sector and other financial services (excluding insurance)  Participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of service related to such issues.  . Practice of medical profession by foreigners requires the permission from local health authorities, based on economic needs test.      Services can only be supplied through juridical persons incorporated in the Republic of Moldova.           Monopoly of the ‘Posta Moldova’ State Company             The National Bank of Moldova is a fiscal agency of the Government on the T-bills market.  ANNEX XI-F  LIST OF COMMITMENTS ON CROSS-BORDER SERVICES (REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA)  1. The list of commitments below indicates the economic activities liberalised by the Republic of Moldova pursuant to Article 187 of this Agreement and, by means of reservations, the market access and national treatment limitations that apply to services and service suppliers of the UK in those activities. (a) the first column indicating the sector or subsector in which the commitment is undertaken; (b) the second column describing the applicable reservations in the sector or subsector indicated in the first column;   The list is composed of the following elements:    Sectors or sub-sectors not mentioned in the list below are not committed.  2. In identifying individual sectors and sub-sectors: (a) CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991; (b) CPC ver. 1.0means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC ver 1.0, 1998.    3. The list below does not include measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures when they do not constitute a market access or a national treatment limitation within the meaning of Articles 185 and 186 of this Agreement. Those measures (e.g. need to obtain a license, universal service obligations, need to obtain recognition of qualifications in regulated sectors, need to pass specific examinations, including language examinations, non-discriminatory requirement that certain activities may not be carried out in environmental protected zones or areas of particular historic and artistic interest), even if not listed, apply in any case to investors of the other Party.  4. The list below is without prejudice to the feasibility of Mode 1 in certain services sectors and sub-sectors and without prejudice to the existence of public monopolies and exclusive rights as described in the list of commitments on establishment.  5. In accordance with Article 177(3) of this Agreement, the list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by the Parties.  6. The rights and obligations arising from this list of commitments shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly to individual natural persons or juridical persons.  7. Mode 1 and Mode 2 refer to the means of the supply of services as described in Article 178(13)(a) and (b) of this Agreement respectively.   Sector or sub Description of reservations   I. SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS 1. BUSINESS SERVICES A. Professional Services (a) (a) Legal Services: (b)              — Except consultancy on home country and international law;  (CPC 861)   (1) Unbound, except for drafting of legal documents.  (2) None   — Consultancy on home and third country and international law;  (Part of CPC 861)   (1) None  (2) None   (b) Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services (CPC 862);   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Taxation services (CPC 863);  (d) Architectural services; (CPC 8671);  (e) Engineering services; (CPC 8672);     (f) Integrated engineering services (CPC 8673);  (g) Urban planning and landscape architectural services (CPC 8674);     (h) Private medical and dental services (CPC 9312) (CPC 9312 excluding services provided by the public sector)   (1) None  (2) Public medical insurance  Sector or sub Description of reservations  programmes do not cover the cost of medicare supplied abroad.   (i) Veterinary services. (CPC 932)   (1) None  (2) None   (j) Services provided by midwives, nurses, physiotherapists and para-medical personnel  (CPC 93191 excluding services provided within the public sector)   (1) None  (2) Public insurance programs do not cover the cost of foreign medical services consumed abroad.   B. Computer and Related Services     (a) Consultancy services related to the installation of computer hardware (CPC 841);  (b) Software implementation services (CPC 842);  (c) Data processing services; (CPC 843);  (d) Data base services (CPC 844);  (e) Other (CPC 845 + 849).   (1) None  (2) None   C. Research and Development Services     (a) Research and development services on natural sciences (CPC 851);  (b) Research and development services on social sciences and humanities (CPC 852);  (c) Interdisciplinary research and development services (CPC 853).   (1) None  (2) None   D. Real Estate Services     (a) Involving own or leased property (CPC 821);   (1) None   Sector or sub Description of reservations   (b) On a fee or contract basis (CPC 822).  (2) None   E. Rental/leasing Services without Operators     (a) Relating to ships (CPC 83103);   (b) Relating to aircraft  (CPC 83104);  (c) Relating to other transport equipment (CPC 83101 + 83102 + 83105);  (d) Relating to other machinery and equipment  (CPC 83106-83109);   (1) None   (2) None   (e) Other (CPC 832), including pre-recorded video cassettes and optical discs for use in home entertainment equipment.     F. Other Business Services     (a) Advertising services (CPC 871);  (b) Market research and public opinion polling services (CPC 864);    (1) None  (2) None   (c) Management consulting service (CPC 865);  (d) Services related to management consulting (CPC 866);  (e) Technical testing and analysis services (CPC 8676);  (f) Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry (CPC 881);     (g) Services incidental to fishing (CPC    Sector or sub Description of reservations  882);  (h) Services incidental to mining (CPC 883 + 5115);  (i) Services incidental to manufacturing (CPC 884 + 885); (except for 88442);   (j) Services incidental to energy distribution (CPC 887);     (k) Placement and supply services of personnel (CPC 872);     (l) Investigation and security (CPC 873);     (m) Related scientific and technical consulting services (CPC 8675);  (n) Maintenance and repair of equipment (not including maritime vessels, aircraft or other transport equipment) (CPC 633 + 8861-8866);  (o) Building-clearing services (CPC 874);     (p) Photographic services (CPC 875);  (q) Packaging services (CPC 876);  (r) Printing, publishing (CPC 88442);  (s) Convention services (CPC 87909*);  (t) Other (CPC 8790).     2. COMMUNICATION SERVICES     A. Postal Services     (a) International postal services, as well as internal postal services related to letters up to 350 grams (CPC 7511);   (1) Monopoly of the ‘Posta Moldova’ State Company   Sector or sub Description of reservations  (2) None    (b) Postal services related to parcels (CPC 75112);   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Post office counter services (CPC 75113).     B. Courier Services (CPC 7512)   (1) None  (2) None   C. Telecommunication Services     (a) Public telephone services; (CPC 7521);   (1) None  (2) None   (b) Analogue cellular services (CPC 75213.1);     (c) Digital cellular services (CPC 75213.2);     (d) Mobile services (CPC 75213): — paging services, (CPC 75291), — mobile data services;     (e) Satellite communication;     (f) Business network services (CPC 7522);     (g) Packet-switched data transmission services (CPC 75232);     (h) Circuit-switched data transmission services (CPC 7523*);     (i) Telegraph and telex services (CPC 7522 and 7523)           (m) Voicemail (CPC 7523*)  (n) On-line information and database retrieval (CPC 7523*);  (o) Electronic data interchange (EDI) (CPC 7523*);     (p) Enhance/value-added facsimile services incl. Store and forward, store and retrieve (CPC 7523*);     (q) Code and protocol conversion (CPC is not available);  (r) On-line information and/or data processing (incl. Transaction processing) (CPC 843);  (s) Other telecommunications services (CPC 7529);  (t) Other (CPC 7549).     3. CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ENGINEERING SERVICES     (a) General construction work for buildings (CPC 512);  (b) General construction work for civil engineering (CPC 513);   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Installation and assembly work (CPC 514 + 516);  (d) Building completion and finishing work (CPC 517);     (e) Other (CPC511 + 515 + 518).   4. DISTRIBUTION SERVICES     (a) Commission agents' services (CPC 621);  (b) Wholesale trade services (CPC 611, 622);   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Retailing services (CPC 611 + 613 + 631 + 632 + 633 + 6111 + 6113 + 6121), including audio and video records and tapes and optical discs (CPC 63234);  (d) Franchising (CPC 8929);  (e) Other distribution services.     5. EDUCATIONAL SERVICES     (a) Primary education services (CPC 921);  (b) Secondary education services (CPC 922);   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Higher education services (Part of CPC 923);  (d) Adult Education (CPC924);  (e) Other educational services (CPC 929).     6. ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES     A. Waste Water Services (CPC 9401) (1)   (1) None  (2) None   B. Solid/hazardous waste management, excluding cross-border transport of hazardous waste    (1) Corresponds to sewage services.  (a) Refuse Disposal Services (CPC 9402)     (b) Sanitation and Similar Services (CPC 9403)     C. Protection of ambient air and climate (CPC 9404) (1)     D. Remediation and clean-up of soil and waters     (a) Treatment, remediation of contaminated/polluted soil and water (part of CPC 94060) (2)     E. Noise and vibration abatement (CPC 9405)     F. Protection of biodiversity and landscape     (a) Nature and landscape protection services (part of CPC 9406)     G. Other environmental and ancillary services (CPC 94090)     7. FINANCIAL SERVICES     A. Insurance and insurance-related services     (a) Life, accident and health insurance services;  (b) Non-life insurance services (CPC 8129, except marine, aviation and transport insurance);   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Marine, aviation and transport insurance;  (d) Reinsurance and retrocession;    (1) Corresponds to Cleaning Services of Exhaust Gases. (2) Corresponds to parts of Nature and Landscape Protection Services.  (e) Services auxiliary to insurance (incl. Broking and agency services).   B. Banking  sector  and other financial services (excluding insurance)     (a) Acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;  (b) Lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring and financing of commercial transactions;   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Financial leasing;  (d) All payment and money transmission services;  (e) Guarantees and commitments;     (f) Trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following: — Money market instruments (cheques, bills, certificates of deposits, etc.);     — foreign exchange; — derivative products including, but not limited to, futures and options; — exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as swaps, forward rate agreements, etc.; — transferable securities;     — other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion;  (g) Money broking;  (h) Asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial,    depository and trust services;   (i) Settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;     (j) Advisory and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities listed in Article 1B of MNT.TNC/W/50, including credit reference and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, and advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy;     (k) Provisions and transfer of financial information, financial data processing and related software by providers of other financial services;     (l) Participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of service related to such issues.     8. HOSPITAL AND OTHER HEALTH AND CARE FACILITIES     (a) Hospital services Private hospital and sanatorium services (CPC 9311 excluding services provided by the public sector);  (b) Social services (CPC 933);  (c) Other human health services (CPC 9319 other than 93191).   (1) None  (2) None   9. TOURISM AND TRAVEL-RELATED SERVICES     (a) Hotels and Restaurants (Including Catering) (CPC 641-643);  (b) Travel Agencies and Tour Operators' Services (CPC 7471);   (1) None  (2) None      (c) Tourist guides services (CPC 7472);  (d) Other tourism and travel related services.   10. RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL AND SPORTING SERVICES     (a) Cinema theatre operation services operation (CPC 96199**) (1)   (1) Unbound  (2) Unbound   (b) Other entertainment services (CPC 96191 + 96194);  (c) News Agency Services (CPC 962);   (1) None  (2) None   (e) Sporting and other recreational services (CPC 964).     11. TRANSPORT SERVICES     (a) Maritime transport services (CPC 7211, 7212, 7213, 8868**, 7214, 745**);  (b) Internal waterways transport (CPC 7221, 7222, 7223, 8868**, 7224, 745**);   (1) None  (2) None   (c) Air transport services defined in the air transport annex: a) and b) Passenger and freight transportation (CPC 731, 732),   c) Rental of vessels with crew (CPC 734),     d) Maintenance and repair of aircraft (CPC 8868**),  e) Selling and marketing of air transport services; (CPC 746*),     (1) **  Indicates that the service specified constitutes only part of the total range of activities covered by the CPC concordance. f) Computer reservation systems; (CPC 746*);  g) Airport management  h) Ground-handling services (including catering services)   (d)  Space transport (CPC 733);     (e) Rail transport services (CPC 7111, 7112, 7113, 8868**, 743);     (f) Road transport services a) Passenger transportation (CPC 7121 + 7122), b) Freight transportation   (CPC 7123, for 7123 except cabotage services),     c) Rental of commercial vehicles with operators (CPC 7124),  d) Maintenance and repair of road transport equipment (CPC 6112 + 8867),  e) Supporting services for road transport services (CPC 744); a) Cargo handling, storage and warehousing services (CPC 741, 742), b) freight transport agency and other supporting and auxiliary transport services (CPC 748, 749).     (g)  Pipeline transport (CPC 7131, 7139);     (h) Services auxiliary to all modes of transport:      ANNEX XI-G  LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON KEY PERSONNEL, GRADUATE TRAINEES AND BUSINESS SELLERS (REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA)   1. The reservations below indicate the economic activities liberalised pursuant to Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter 6 (Establishment, Trade in Services and Electronic Commerce) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement for which limitations on key personnel and graduate trainees in accordance with Article 190 and on business sellers in accordance with Article 191 of this Agreement apply and specifies such limitations.  The list below is composed of the following elements:  (a) the first column indicating the sector or sub-sector in which limitations apply; and  (b) the second column describing the applicable limitations.  The Republic of Moldova does not undertake any commitment for key personnel, graduate trainees and business sellers in economic activities which are not liberalised (remain unbound) pursuant to Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter 6 (Establishment, Trade in Services and Electronic Commerce) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.  2. In identifying individual sectors and sub-sectors:   (a)  CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991; and  (b) CPC ver. 1.0 means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC ver 1.0, 1998.  3. Commitments on key personnel, graduate trainees, business service sellers and sellers of goods do not apply in cases where the intent or effect of their temporary presence is to interfere with, or otherwise affect the outcome of, any labour/management dispute or negotiation.  4. The list below does not include measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures when they do not constitute a limitation within the meaning of Articles 190 and 191 of this Agreement. Those measures (e.g. need to obtain a license, need to obtain recognition of qualifications in regulated sectors, need to pass specific examinations, including language examinations), even if not listed below, apply in any case to key personnel, graduate trainees and business sellers of the UK.  5. All other requirements of the laws and regulations of the Republic of Moldova regarding entry, stay, work and social security measures shall continue to apply, including regulations concerning period of stay, minimum wages as well as collective wage agreements.  6. In accordance with Article 177(3) of this Agreement, the list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by a Party.  7. The list below is without prejudice to the existence of public monopolies and exclusive rights as described in the list of commitments on establishment.  8. In the sectors where economic needs tests are applied, their main criteria will be the assessment of the relevant market situation in the Republic of Moldova, including with respect to the number of, and the impact on, existing services suppliers.  9. The rights and obligations arising from the list below shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly on natural or juridical persons. Sector or sub Description of reservations  I. SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS 1. BUSINESS SERVICES A. Professional Services    (a) Legal Services:  — Limited on consultancy on host country; (CPC 861)                                (j) Services provided by midwives, nurses, physiotherapists and para-medical personnel  (CPC 93191, excluding services provided within the public sector)        Legal services related to representation in courts and other public authorities can be provided by a legal professional from the UK upon association with a local lawyer or following 1 year internship to get a licence in the Republic of Moldova.  Legal advising services, except representation in court and other authorities, can be provided after prior registration in special registry of the Council of Bar Association.  Translation and/or interpretation services for the judiciary can be provided after prior recognition of the authorisation as a sworn interpreter/ translator issued in another state, by the Attestation Commission of the Ministry of Justice.  Mediation services can be provided by a person licensed as a mediator in another state after certification by the Mediation Board.  Services of authorised bankruptcy administrator can be provided following one year internship and after passing the exam in the Commission for certification and discipline of the Ministry of Justice.  Nationality requirement for public notaries and bailiffs. Nationality requirements.  Nationality requirements.  ANNEX XI-H  LIST OF RESERVATIONS ON CONTRACTUAL SERVICES SUPPLIERS AND INDEPENDENT PROFESSIONALS (REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA)   1. The Parties shall allow the supply of services into their territories by contractual service suppliers and independent professionals of the other Party through the presence of natural persons, in accordance with Articles 192 and 193 of this Agreement, for the economic activities which are listed below, and subject to the relevant limitations.  2. The list is composed of the following elements: (a) the first column indicating the sector or sub-sector in which limitations apply; and (b) the second column describing the applicable limitations.    The Republic of Moldova does not undertake any commitment for contractual service suppliers and independent professionals for any sector of economic activity other than those which are explicitly listed below.  3. In identifying individual sectors and sub-sectors: (a) CPC means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC prov, 1991; and (b) CPC ver. 1.0 means the Central Products Classification as set out in Statistical Office of the United Nations, Statistical Papers, Series M, No 77, CPC ver 1.0, 1998.    4. Commitments for contractual service suppliers and independent professionals do not apply in cases where the intent or effect of their temporary presence is to interfere with, or otherwise affect the outcome of, any labour/management dispute or negotiation.  5. The list below does not include measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures when they do not constitute a limitation within the meaning of Articles 192 and 193 of this Agreement. Those measures (e.g. need to obtain a license, need to obtain recognition of qualifications in regulated sectors, need to pass specific examinations, including language examinations), even if not listed below, apply in any case to contractual service suppliers and independent professionals of the UK.  6. All other requirements of the laws and regulations of the Republic of Moldova regarding entry, stay, work and social security measures shall continue to apply, including regulations concerning period of stay, minimum wages as well as collective wage agreements.  7. The list below does not include measures concerning subsidies granted by a Party.  8. The list below is without prejudice to the existence of public monopolies or exclusive rights in the relevant sectors, as set out by the Republic of Moldova in Annex XI-E to this Agreement.  9. The rights and obligations arising from the list below shall have no self-executing effect and thus confer no rights directly on natural or juridical persons.  Sector or sub Description of reservations   I. SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS 1. BUSINESS SERVICES A. Professional Services      (a) Legal Services:  — Except consultancy on home country and international law (CPC 861);                                Legal services related to representation in courts and other public authorities can be provided by a legal professional from the UK upon association with a local lawyer or following 1 year internship to get a licence in the Republic of Moldova.  Legal advising services, except representation in court and other authorities, can be provided after prior registration in special registry of the Council of Bar Association.  Translation and/or interpretation services for the judiciary can be provided after prior recognition of the authorisation as a sworn interpreter/translator issued in another state, by the Attestation Commission of the Ministry of Justice.   Sector or sub Description of reservations                  — Consultancy on home and third country and international law; (Part of CPC 861)  (b) Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services (CPC 862);  (c) Taxation services (CPC 863);  (d) Architectural services (CPC 8671);  (e) Engineering services (CPC 8672);  (f) Integrated engineering services (CPC 8673)  (g) Urban planning and landscape architectural services (CPC 8674)  (h) Private medical and dental services (CPC 9312) (CPC 9312 excluding services provided by the public sector)  (i) Veterinary services. (CPC 932)  i) Services provided by midwives, nurses, physiotherapists and para-medical personnel B. Computer and Related Services (CPC 93191 excluding services provided within the public sector)  Mediation services can be provided by a person licensed as a mediator in another state after certification by the Mediation Board.  Services of authorised bankruptcy administrator can be provided following one year internship and after passing the exam in the Commission for certification and discipline of the Ministry of Justice.  Nationality requirement for public notaries and bailiffs.   None    None                     Nationality requirements  Sector or sub Description of reservations    (a) Consultancy services related to the installation of computer hardware (CPC 841);  (b) Software implementation services (CPC 842);  (c) Data processing services; (CPC 843)  (d) Data base services; (CPC 844);  (e) Other (CPC 845 + 849)   None   C. Research and Development Services  (a) Research and development services on natural sciences (CPC 851);  (b) Research and development services on social sciences and humanities (CPC 852);  (c) Interdisciplinary research and development services (CPC 853).   None   D. Real Estate Services  (a) Involving own or leased property (CPC 821);  (b) On a fee or contract basis (CPC 822).   None   E. Rental/leasing Services without Operators  (a) Relating to ships (CPC 83103);  (b) Relating to aircraft (CPC 83104);  (c) Relating to other transport   None  Sector or sub Description of reservations  equipment (CPC 83101 + 83102 + 83105);  (d) Relating to other machinery and equipment (CPC 83106-83109);  (e) Other (CPC 832), including pre-recorded video cassettes and optical discs for use in home entertainment equipment.   F. Other Business Services  (a) Advertising services (CPC 871);  (b) Market research and public opinion polling services (CPC 864);  (c) Management consulting service (CPC 865);  (d) Services related to management consulting (CPC 866);  (e) Technical testing and analysis services (CPC 8676);  (f) Services incidental to agriculture, hunting and forestry (CPC 881);  (g) Services incidental to fishing (CPC 882);  (h) Services incidental to mining (CPC 883 + 5115);  (i) Services incidental to manufacturing (CPC 884 + 885); (except for 88442);  (j) Services incidental to energy distribution (CPC 887);  (k) Placement and supply services of personnel (CPC 872);     None  Sector or sub Description of reservations   (l) Investigation and security (CPC 873);  (m) Related scientific and technical consulting services (CPC 8675);  (n) Maintenance and repair of equipment (not including maritime vessels, aircraft or other transport equipment) (CPC 633 + 8861-8866);  (o) Building-clearing services (CPC 874);  (p) Photographic services (CPC 875);  (q) Packaging services (CPC 876);  (r) Printing, publishing (CPC 88442);  (s) Convention services (CPC 87909*);  (t) Other (CPC 8790). 2. COMMUNICATION SERVICES A. Postal Services     (a) International postal services, as well as internal postal services related to letters up to 350 grams; (CPC 7511);  (b) Postal services related to parcels (CPC 75112);  (c) Post office counter services (CPC 75113); B. Courier Services (CPC 7512) C. Telecommunications Services          None         None      Sector or sub Description of reservations   (a) Public telephone services; (CPC 7521);  (b) Analogue cellular services (CPC 75213.1);  (c) Digital cellular services (CPC 75213.2);  (d) Mobile services (CPC 75213): — paging services, (CPC 75291), — mobile data services;  (e) Satellite communication;  (f) Business network services (CPC 7522);  (g) Packet-switched data transmission services (CPC 75232);  (h) Circuit-switched data transmission services (CPC 7523*);  (i) Telegraph and telex services; (CPC 7522 and 7523)  (j) Facsimile services; (CPC 7521*+7529*);  (k) Private leased circuit services; (CPC 7522*+7523*)  (l) Electronic mail (CPC 7523*);  (m) Voice mail (CPC 7523*);  (n) On-line information and database retrieval (CPC 7523*);  (o) Electronic data interchange (EDI) (CPC 7523*);   None  Sector or sub Description of reservations  (p) Enhance/value-added facsimile services incl. Store and forward, store and retrieve (CPC 7523*);  (q) Code and protocol conversion (CPC is not available);  (r) Online information and/or data processing (incl. Transaction processing) (CPC 843);  (s) Other telecommunications services (CPC 7529);  (t) Other (CPC 7549).   3. CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ENGINEERING SERVICES  (a) General construction work for buildings (CPC 512)  (b) General construction work for civil engineering (CPC 513);  (c) Installation and assembly work; (CPC 514 + 516);  (d) Building completion and finishing work (CPC 517);  (e) Other (CPC511 + 515 + 518).       None   4.DISTRIBUTION SERVICES  (a) Commission agents' services (CPC 621);  (b) Wholesale trade services (CPC 611, 622);  (c) Retailing services (CPC 611 + 631 + 632 + 633 + 6111 + 6113 + 6121), including audio and video     None  Sector or sub Description of reservations  records and tapes and optical discs (CPC 63234);  (d) Franchising (CPC 8929);  (e) Other distribution services.   5. EDUCATIONAL SERVICES  (a) Primary education services (CPC 921);  (b) Secondary education services (CPC 922);  (c) Higher education services (Part of CPC 923);  (d) Adult Education (CPC924);  (e) Other educational services (CPC 929).     None   6. ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES  A. Waste Water Services (CPC 9401) (1)  B. Solid/hazardous waste management, excluding cross-border transport of hazardous waste  (a) Refuse Disposal Services (CPC 9402)  (b) Sanitation and Similar Services (CPC 9403) D. Remediation and clean-up of soil and waters E. Noise and vibration abatement (CPC 9405) F. Protection of biodiversity and landscape G. Other environmental and ancillary services (CPC 94090)  C. Protection of ambient air and climate (CPC 9404) (2)       None  Sector or sub Description of reservations  (a) Treatment, remediation of contaminated/polluted soil and water (part of CPC 94060) (1)    (a) Nature and landscape protection services (part of CPC 9406)    7. FINANCIAL SERVICES  A. Insurance and insurance-related services  (a) Life, accident and health insurance services (CPC 8121);  (b) Non-life insurance services (CPC 8129, except marine, aviation and transport insurance);  (c) Marine, aviation and transport insurance (CPC 8129);  (d) Reinsurance and retrocession (CPC 81299);  (e) Services auxiliary to insurance (incl. Broking and agency services) (CPC 8140).      None   B. Banking sector and other financial services (excluding insurance)  (a) Acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public (CPC 81115-81119);       None  Sector or sub Description of reservations   (b) Lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring and financing of commercial transactions (CPC 8113);  (c) Financial leasing (8112);  (d) All payment and money transmission services (CPC 81339*);  (e) Guarantees and commitments (CPC 81199*);  (f) Trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following: — Money market instruments (cheques, bills, certificates of deposits, etc.) (81339*), — foreign exchange (81333); — derivative products including, but not limited to, futures and options — exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products such as swaps, forward rate agreements, etc. (81339*); — transferable securities; (CPC 81321*); — other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including bullion    (81339*);    (81339*);  (g) Money broking (81339*);  (h) Asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of  Sector or sub Description of reservations  collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial, depository and trust services (8119**, 81323*);  (i) Settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities, derivative products, and other negotiable instruments (81339* or 81319*);  (j) Advisory and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities listed in Article 1B of MNT.TNC/W/50, including credit reference and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, and advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy (8131 or 8133);  (k) Provisions and transfer of financial information, financial data processing and related software by providers of other financial services (8131);  (l) Participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of service related to such issues (8132).   8. HOSPITAL AND OTHER HEALTH AND CARE FACILITIES  (a) Hospital services Private hospital and sanatorium services (CPC 9311 excluding services provided by the public sector);  (b) Social services (CPC 933);  (c) Other human health services (CPC 9319 other than 93191).      None  Sector or sub Description of reservations   9. TOURISM AND TRAVEL-RELATED SERVICES  (a) Hotels and Restaurants (Including Catering) (CPC 641-643);  (b) Travel Agencies and Tour Operators' Services (CPC 7471);  (c) Tourist guides services (CPC 7472);  (d) Other tourism and travel related services.      None   10. RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL AND SPORTING SERVICES  (a) Cinema theatre operation services operation (CPC 96199**) (1);  (b) Other entertainment services (CPC 96191 + 96194);  (c) News Agency Services (CPC 962);  (d) Sporting and other recreational services (CPC 964).      None   11. TRANSPORT SERVICES  (a) Maritime transport services (CPC 7211, 7212, 7213, 8868**, 7214, 745**);  (b) Internal waterways transport (CPC 7221, 7222, 7223, 8868**, 7224, 745**);  (c) Air transport services defined in the air transport annex: a) and b) Passenger and freight transportation (CPC 731, 732),     None  Sector or sub Description of reservations   c)  Rental of vessels with crew (CPC 734);  d)  Maintenance and repair of aircraft (CPC 8868);  e)  Selling and marketing of air transport services; (CPC 746*);  f) Computer reservation systems; (CPC 746*);  (d) Space transport (CPC 733);  (e) Rail transport services (CPC 7111, 7112, 7113, 8868**, 743);  (f) Road transport services  a) Passenger transportation (CPC 7121 + 7122);  b) Freight transportation (CPC 7123, for 7123 except cabotage services);  (c) Rental of commercial vehicles with operators (CPC 7124);  (d) Maintenance and repair of road transport equipment (CPC 6112 + 8867);  (e) Supporting services for road transport services (CPC 744);  Sector or sub Description of reservations  (g) Pipeline transport (CPC 7131, 7139);  (h) Services auxiliary to all modes of transport:  a) Cargo handling, storage and warehousing services (CPC 741, 742);  b) freight transport agency and other supporting and auxiliary transport services (CPC 748, 749).    (1) Corresponds to sewage services. (2) Corresponds to Cleaning Services of Exhaust Gases. (1) Corresponds to parts of Nature and Landscape Protection Services. (1) ** Indicates that the service specified constitutes only part of the total range of activities covered by the CPC concordance. 1. Training, in the UK and the Republic of Moldova, of officials of the Republic of Moldova from government bodies engaged in public procurement. 2. Training of suppliers interested in participating in public procurement. 3. Exchange of information and experience on best practice and regulatory rules in the field of public procurement. 4. Enhancement of the functionality of the public procurement website and establishment of a system of public procurement monitoring. 5. Consultations and methodological assistance from the UK in application of modern electronic technologies in the field of public procurement. 6. Strengthening the bodies charged with guaranteeing a coherent policy in all areas related to public procurement and the independent and impartial consideration (review) of contracting authorities' decisions (see Article 242 of this Agreement).    ANNEX XII  PUBLIC PROCUREMENT   ANNEX XII-A  THRESHOLDS   1. The value thresholds referred to in Article 241(3) of this Agreement shall be for both Parties:  (a)  EUR 139 000 for public supply and service contracts awarded by central government authorities and design contests awarded by such authorities;  (b)  EUR 214 000 in the case of public supply and public service contracts not covered by point (a);  (c) EUR 5 350 000 in the case of public works contracts;  (d) EUR 5 350 000 in the case of works contracts in the utilities sector;  (e) EUR 5 350 000 in the case of concessions;  (f) EUR 428 000 in the case of supply and service contracts in the utilities sector;  (g) EUR 750 000 for public service contracts for social and other specific services;  (h) EUR 1 000 000 for service contracts for social and other specific services in the utilities sector.     ANNEX XII-B  INDICATIVE TIME SCHEDULE FOR MARKET ACCESS   Phase      Market access  Market  1  Implementation of Articles 242(2) and 243 of this Agreement  1 June 2015  Supplies for central government authorities  Supplies for central government authorities  2    1 September 2019  Supplies for state, regional and local authorities and bodies governed by public law  Supplies for state, regional and local authorities and bodies governed by public law    1 September 2019  Supplies for all contracting entities in the utilities sector  Supplies for all contracting entities    1 September 2019  Service and works contracts for all contracting authorities  Service and works contracts for all contracting authorities  3    1 September 2020  Concessions for all contracting authorities  Concessions for all contracting authorities  4    1 September 2022  Service and works contracts for all contracting entities in the utilities sector  Service and works contracts for all contracting entities in the utilities sector    ANNEX XII-C  THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA: INDICATIVE LIST OF ISSUES FOR COOPERATION           ANNEX XIII  GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS  ANNEX XIII-A  ELEMENTS FOR REGISTRATION AND CONTROL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 267(1) AND (2)   PART A  Legislation referred to in Article 267(1)  Law on the Protection of Geographical Indications, Designations of Origin and Traditional Specialties Guaranteed, No 66-XVI of 27.03.2008 and its implementing rules, for the procedure of filing, examination and registration of geographical indications, designations of origin and traditional specialties guaranteed in the Republic of Moldova.   PART B  Legislation referred to in Article 267(2)  1. Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 November 2012 on quality schemes for agricultural products and foodstuffs  2. Part II, Title II, Chapter I, Section 1a of Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007 of 22 October 2007 establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products (Single CMO Regulation), with its implementing rules  3. Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks, with its implementing rules  4. Council Regulation (EEC) No 1601/91 of 10 June 1991 laying down general rules on the definition, description and presentation of aromatised wines, aromatised wine-based drinks and aromatised wine-product cocktails, with its implementing rules    PART C  Elements for registration and control of geographical indications referred to in Article 267(1) and 267(2)  1. A register listing geographical indications protected in the territory.  2. An administrative process verifying that geographical indications identify a good as originating in a territory, region or locality of one or more states, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.  3. A requirement that a registered name shall correspond to a specific product or products for which a product specification is laid down, which can only be amended by due administrative process.  4. Control provisions applying to production.  5. An objection procedure that allows the legitimate interests of prior users of names, whether those names are protected as a form of intellectual property or not, to be taken into account.  6. A rule that protected names may not become generic.  7. Provisions concerning the registration, which may include refusal of registration, of terms homonymous or partly homonymous with registered terms, terms customary in common language as the common name for goods, terms comprising or including the names of plant varieties and animal breeds. Such provisions shall take into account the legitimate interests of all parties concerned.  ANNEX XIII-B  CRITERIA TO BE INCLUDED IN THE OBJECTION PROCEDURE FOR PRODUCTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 268(1)   1. List of name(s) with, where applicable, the corresponding transcription into Latin characters.  2. Information about the product class.  3. Invitation to the United Kingdom, the Republic of Moldova or any third country or any natural or legal persons having a legitimate interest, established or resident in the UK, in the Republic of Moldova or in a third country, to submit objections to such protection by lodging a duly substantiated statement.  4. Statements of objection must reach the UK Government or the Government of the Republic of Moldova within two months from the date of the publication of the information notice.  5. Statements of objection shall be admissible only if they are received within the time-limit set out in paragraph 4 and if they show that the protection of the name proposed would: — conflict with the name of a plant variety, including a wine grape variety or an animal breed, and as a result would be likely to mislead the consumer as to the true origin of the product; — conflict with a homonymous name which would mislead the consumer into believing that products come from another territory; — in the light of a trade mark’s reputation and renown and the length of time it has been used, be liable to mislead the consumer as to the true identity of the product; — jeopardise the existence of an entirely or partly identical name or of a trade mark or the existence of products which have been legally on the market for at least five years preceding the date of the publication of the information notice; — conflict with a name that is considered generic.       6. The criteria referred to in paragraph 5 shall be evaluated in relation to the territory of the UK, which in the case of intellectual property rights refers only to the territory or territories where the rights are protected, or the territory of the Republic of Moldova.    ANNEX XIII-C  GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF PRODUCTS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 267(3) AND 267(4)   Agricultural products and foodstuffs other than wines, spirits and aromatised wines of the UK to be protected in the Republic of Moldova  UK  Isle of Man Manx Loaghtan Lamb  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Orkney beef  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Orkney lamb  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Scotch Beef  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Scotch Lamb  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Shetland Lamb  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Welsh Beef  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Welsh lamb  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  West Country Beef*  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  West Country Lamb*  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Lakeland Herdwick*  Fresh meat (and offal)  UK  Melton Mowbray Pork Pie  Meat products (cooked, salted, smoked, etc.)  UK  Newmarket Sausage*  Meat products (cooked, salted, smoked, etc.)  UK  Stornoway Black Pudding*  Meat products (cooked, salted, smoked, etc.)  UK  Traditional Cumberland Sausage*  Meat products (cooked, salted, smoked, etc.)  UK  Beacon Fell traditional Lancashire cheese  Cheeses  UK  Bonchester cheese  Cheeses  UK  Buxton blue  Cheeses  UK  Dorset Blue Cheese  Cheeses  UK  Dovedale cheese  Cheeses  UK  Exmoor Blue Cheese  Cheeses  UK  Single Gloucester  Cheeses  UK  Staffordshire Cheese  Cheeses  UK  Swaledale cheese  Cheeses  UK  Teviotdale Cheese  Cheeses  UK  Traditional Ayrshire Dunlop*  Cheeses  UK  West Country farmhouse Cheddar cheese  Cheeses  UK  White Stilton cheese / Blue Stilton cheese  Cheeses  UK  Orkney Scottish Island Cheddar*  Cheeses  UK  Swaledale ewes’ cheese*  Cheeses  UK  Yorkshire Wensleydale*  Cheeses  UK  Cornish Clotted Cream  Other products of animal origin (eggs, honey, various dairy products except butter, etc.)  UK  Jersey Royal potatoes  Fruit, vegetables and cereals, fresh or processed  UK  Yorkshire Forced Rhubarb  Fruit, vegetables and cereals, fresh or processed  UK  Armagh Bramley Apples*  Fruit, vegetables and cereals, fresh or processed  UK  Fenland Celery*  Fruit, vegetables and cereals, fresh or processed  UK  New Season Comber Potatoes/Comber Earlies*  Fruit, vegetables and cereals, fresh or processed  UK  Pembrokeshire Earlies / Pembrokeshire Early Potatoes*  Fruit, vegetables and cereals, fresh or processed  UK  Arbroath Smokies  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Conwy Mussels*  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Scottish Farmed Salmon  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Whitstable oysters  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Cornish Sardines*  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Fal Oyster*  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Isle of Man Queenies*  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Lough Neagh Eel*  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Scottish Wild Salmon*  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Traditional Grimsby Smoked Fish*  Fresh fish, molluscs, and crustaceans and products derived therefrom  UK  Kentish ale and Kentish strong ale  Beers  UK  Rutland Bitter  Beers  UK  Cornish Pasty*  Bread, pastry, cakes, confectionery, biscuits and other baker's wares  UK  Native Shetland Wool*  Wool  UK  Anglesey Sea Salt/Halen Môn*  Other products of Annex I to the Treaty (spices etc.)  UK  Gloucestershire cider/perry  Other products of Annex I to the Treaty (spices etc.)  UK  Herefordshire cider/perry  Other products of Annex I to the Treaty (spices etc.)  UK  Worcestershire cider/perry  Other products of Annex I to the Treaty (spices etc.)  UK  East Kent Goldings*  Other products of Annex I to the Treaty (spices etc.)   Agricultural products and foodstuffs other than wines, spirits and aromatised wines of the Republic of Moldova to be protected in the UK  MD  Dulcea.a din petale de trandafir C.l.ra.i*  Other products of Annex I to the Treaty (spices etc.)     ANNEX XIII-D  GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF PRODUCTS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 267(3) AND 267(4)   PART A  Wines of the UK to be protected in the Republic of Moldova    Name to be protected    UK  English  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)  UK  English Regional  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)  UK  Welsh  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)  UK  Welsh Regional  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)    Wines of the Republic of Moldova to be protected in the UK  MD  Ciumai/.....  Wine with a protected geographical  MD  Rom.ne.ti  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)  MD  Codru*  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)  MD  Stefan Voda*  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)  MD  Valul lui Traian*  Wine with a protected geographical indication (PGI)     PART B  Spirit drinks of the UK to be protected in the Republic of Moldova    Name to be  Product Type  UK(1)  Irish Whiskey / Uisce Beatha Eireannach / Irish Whisky(2)  Whiskey/Whisky  UK(3)  Irish Cream(4)  Liqueur  UK(5)  Irish Poteen/Irish Poitín(6)  Other Spirit Drinks  UK  Scotch Whisky  Whiskey/Whisky  UK  Somerset Cider Brandy*  Cider Spirits & Perry Spirits  (1) This includes distilled spirits that is produced on the island of Ireland in accordance with the applicable laws of the United Kingdom (2) The geographical indication Irish Whiskey / Uisce Beatha Eireannach / Irish Whisky covers whisky/whiskey produced in Ireland and Northern Ireland. (3) This includes distilled spirits that is produced on the island of Ireland in accordance with the applicable laws of the United Kingdom (4) The geographical indication Irish Cream covers the corresponding liqueur produced in Ireland and Northern Ireland. (5) This includes distilled spirits that is produced on the island of Ireland in accordance with the applicable laws of the United Kingdom. (6) The geographical indication “Irish Poteen/Irish Poitín” covers the corresponding spirit drink produced in Ireland and Northern Ireland.   Spirits drinks of the Republic of Moldova to be protected in the UK  MD  Divin*  Wine distillate  MD  Rachiu de caise de Nimoreni*  Fruit spirit    PART C  Aromatised wines of the UK to be protected in the Republic of Moldova  […]   Aromatised wines of the Republic of Moldova to be protected in the UK  […] ANNEX XIV  EARLY WARNING MECHANISM   1. The UK and the Republic of Moldova hereby establish an Early Warning Mechanism with the objective of setting out practical measures aimed at preventing and rapidly reacting to an emergency situation or to a threat thereof. It foresees an early evaluation of potential risks and problems related to the supply and demand of natural gas, oil or electricity and the prevention and rapid reaction in case of an emergency situation or a threat thereof.  2. For the purposes of this Annex, an emergency situation is a situation causing a significant disruption or a physical interruption of supply of natural gas, oil or electricity between the UK and the Republic of Moldova.  3. For the purposes of this Annex, the Coordinators are the Minister of the Republic of Moldova in charge of Energy and the UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy or its successor.  4. Regular evaluations of potential risks and problems related to the supply and demand of energy materials and products should be undertaken jointly by the Parties and reported to the Coordinators.  5. Should one of the Parties become aware of an emergency situation or of a situation which, in its opinion, could lead to an emergency situation, that Party shall inform the other Party without delay.  6. Under the circumstances set out in paragraph 5, the Coordinators shall notify each other, within the shortest possible time, of the necessity to initiate the Early Warning Mechanism. The notification shall indicate, inter alia, designated persons that are authorised by the Coordinators to maintain permanent contact with each other.  7. Upon notification in accordance with paragraph 6, each Party shall provide the other Party with its own assessment.  Such an assessment shall include an estimate of the timeframe within which the emergency situation or the threat thereof could be eliminated. The Parties shall react promptly to the assessment provided by the other Party and complement it with available additional information.   8. If one Party is unable to adequately assess or accept the other Party's assessment of the situation, or the estimated timeframe within which an emergency situation or a threat thereof may be eliminated, the corresponding Coordinator may request consultations, which are to commence within a time period not exceeding 3 days from the moment of forwarding the notification provided for in paragraph 6. Such consultations shall take place through an Experts Group consisting of representatives authorised by the Coordinators. The consultations shall aim at: (a) elaborating a common evaluation of the situation and of possible further developments; (b) elaborating recommendations to overcome the emergency situation or to eliminate the threat thereof; (c) elaborating recommendations on a joint action plan in order to minimise the impact of an emergency situation and, if possible, to overcome the emergency situation, including the possibility of establishing a Special Monitoring Group.     9. The consultations, common evaluations and proposed recommendations shall be based on the principles of transparency, non-discrimination and proportionality.  10. The Coordinators, within their competencies, shall work to overcome the emergency situation or to eliminate the threat thereof taking into account the recommendations that have been elaborated as the result of the consultations.  11. The Experts Group referred to in paragraph 8 shall report on its activities to the Coordinators promptly after the implementation of any agreed plan of action.  12. If an emergency situation occurs, the Coordinators may establish a Special Monitoring Group with the task of examining the ongoing circumstances and development of events and keeping an objective record of them. The Special Monitoring Group shall consist of: (a) representatives of both Parties; (b) representatives of energy companies of the Parties; (c) representatives of international energy organisations, proposed and mutually approved by the Parties; (d) independent experts proposed and mutually approved by the Parties.      13. The Special Monitoring Group shall start its work without delay and shall operate, as necessary, until the emergency situation has been solved. A decision on the termination of the work of the Special Monitoring Group shall be taken jointly by the Coordinators.   14. From the time at which a Party informs the other Party of the circumstances described in paragraph 5, and until the completion of the procedures set out in this Annex and the resolution of the emergency situation or the elimination of the threat thereof, the Parties will do their utmost to minimise negative consequences for the other Party. The Parties shall cooperate with the aim to reach an immediate solution in a spirit of transparency. The Parties shall refrain from any actions unrelated to the ongoing emergency situation that could create or deepen the negative consequences for the supply of natural gas, oil or electricity between the UK and the Republic of Moldova.  15. Each Party independently carries the costs relating to the actions in the framework of this Annex.  16. The Parties shall maintain in confidence all information exchanged between them that is designated as being of a confidential nature. The Parties shall take any necessary measures to protect confidential information on the basis of the relevant legal and normative acts of the Republic of Moldova, or the UK, as applicable, as well as in accordance with applicable international agreements and conventions.  17. The Parties may invite, by mutual agreement, representatives of third parties to take part in the consultations or monitoring referred to in paragraphs 8 and 12.  18. The Parties may agree to adapt the provisions of this Annex in view of establishing an Early Warning Mechanism between them and other Parties.  19. A violation of the Early Warning Mechanism cannot serve as a basis for dispute settlement procedures under Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. Moreover, a Party shall not rely on, or introduce as evidence in such dispute settlement procedures: (a) positions taken or proposals made by the other Party in the course of the procedure set out in this Annex; or (b) the fact that the other Party has indicated its willingness to accept a solution to the emergency situation subject to the Early Warning Mechanism.  ANNEX XV  MEDIATION MECHANISM   ARTICLE 1  Objective  The objective of this Annex is to facilitate a mutually agreed solution through a comprehensive and expeditious procedure with the assistance of a mediator.     SECTION 1  PROCEDURE UNDER THE MEDIATION MECHANISM   ARTICLE 2  Request for information  1. Before the initiation of the mediation procedure, a Party may request, at any time, in writing, information regarding a measure adversely affecting trade or investment between the Parties. The Party to which such request is made shall provide, within 20 days, a written response containing its comments on the information contained in the request.  2. Where the responding Party considers that a response within 20 days is not practicable, it shall inform the requesting Party of the reasons for the delay, together with an estimate of the shortest period within which it will be able to provide its response.   ARTICLE 3  Initiation of the procedure  1. A Party may request, at any time, that the Parties enter into a mediation procedure. Such request shall be addressed to the other Party in writing. The request shall be sufficiently detailed in order to clearly present the concerns of the requesting Party and shall:  (a) identify the specific measure at issue;  (b) provide a statement of the alleged adverse effects that the requesting Party believes the measure has, or will have, on trade or investment between the Parties; and  (c) explain how the requesting Party considers that those effects are linked to the measure.  2. The mediation procedure may only be initiated by mutual agreement of the Parties. The Party to which a request pursuant to paragraph 1 is addressed shall give sympathetic consideration to the request and reply by accepting or rejecting it in writing within 10 days of its receipt.     ARTICLE 4  Selection of the mediator  1. Upon the launch of the mediation procedure, the Parties shall endeavour to agree on a mediator no later than 15 days after the receipt of the reply to the request referred to in Article 3 of this Annex.  2. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the mediator within the time frame laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article, either Party may request the chair or co-chairs of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, or their delegates, to select the mediator, by drawing lots, from the list established under Article 370(1) of this Agreement. Representatives of both Parties shall be invited, with sufficient advance notice, to be present when the lots are drawn. In any event, the drawing of lots shall be carried out with the Party/Parties that is/are present.  3. The chair or co-chairs of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, or their delegates, shall select the mediator within five working days of the request made under paragraph 2 of this Article by either Party.  4. Should the list referred to in Article 370(1) of this Agreement not be established at the time a request is made pursuant to Article 3 of this Annex, the mediator shall be selected, by drawing lots, from the individuals which have been formally proposed by one or both of the Parties.  5. A mediator shall not be a citizen of either Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise.  6. The mediator shall assist, in an impartial and transparent manner, the Parties in bringing clarity to the measure and its possible trade effects, and in reaching a mutually agreed solution. The Code of Conduct for Arbitrators and Mediators set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement shall apply to mediators, mutatis mutandis. Rules 3 to 7 (Notifications) and 41 to 45 (Translation and interpretation) of the Rules of Procedure of Annex XVI to this Agreement shall also apply, mutatis mutandis.     ARTICLE 5  Rules of the mediation procedure  1. Within 10 days after the appointment of the mediator, the Party having invoked the mediation procedure shall present, in writing, a detailed description of the problem to the mediator and to the other Party, in particular of the operation of the measure at issue and its trade effects. Within 20 days after the date of delivery of this description, the other Party may provide, in writing, its comments on the description of the problem. Either Party may include in its description or comments any information that it deems relevant.  2. The mediator may decide on the most appropriate way of bringing clarity to the measure concerned and its possible trade effects. In particular, the mediator may organise meetings between the Parties, consult the Parties jointly or individually, seek the assistance of, or consult with, relevant experts and stakeholders and provide any additional support requested by the Parties. However, before seeking the assistance of, or consulting with, relevant experts and stakeholders, the mediator shall consult with the Parties.  3. The mediator may offer advice and propose a solution for the consideration of the Parties. The Parties may accept or reject the proposed solution or agree on a different solution. However, the mediator shall not advise or give comments on the consistency of the measure at issue with this Agreement.  4. The mediation procedure shall take place in the territory of the Party to which the request was addressed, or by mutual agreement in any other location or by any other means.  5. The Parties shall endeavour to reach a mutually agreed solution within 60 days from the appointment of the mediator. Pending a final agreement, the Parties may consider possible interim solutions, especially if the measure relates to perishable goods.  6. The solution may be adopted by means of a decision of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement. Either Party may make such a solution subject to the completion of any necessary internal procedures. Mutually agreed solutions shall be made publicly available. The version disclosed to the public may not contain any information that a Party has designated as confidential.   7. On request of the Parties, the mediator shall issue to the Parties, in writing, a draft factual report, providing a brief summary of the measure at issue in these procedures, the procedures followed, and any mutually agreed solution reached as the final outcome of these procedures, including possible interim solutions. The mediator shall allow the Parties 15 days to comment on the draft report. After considering the comments of the Parties submitted within that period, the mediator shall submit, in writing, a final factual report to the Parties within 15 days. The factual report shall not include any interpretation of this Agreement.  8. The procedure shall be terminated:  (a) by the adoption of a mutually agreed solution by the Parties, on the date of its adoption;  (b) by mutual agreement of the Parties at any stage of the procedure, on the date of that agreement;  (c) by a written declaration of the mediator, after consultation with the Parties, that further efforts at mediation would be to no avail, on the date of that declaration; or  (d) by a written declaration of a Party after exploring mutually agreed solutions under the mediation procedure and after having considered any advice and proposed solutions by the mediator, on the date of that declaration.     SECTION 2  IMPLEMENTATION   ARTICLE 6  Implementation of a mutually agreed solution  1. Where the Parties have reached agreement on a solution, each Party shall take the measures necessary to implement the mutually agreed solution within the agreed timeframe.  2. The implementing Party shall inform the other Party in writing of any steps or measures taken to implement the mutually agreed solution.     SECTION 3  GENERAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 7  Confidentiality and relationship to dispute settlement  1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, and without prejudice to Article 5(6) of this Annex, all steps of the procedure, including any advice or proposed solution, are confidential. However, any Party may disclose to the public the fact that mediation is taking place.  2. The mediation procedure is without prejudice to the Parties' rights and obligations under the provisions of Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement or any other agreement.  3. Consultations under Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement are not required before initiating the mediation procedure. However, a Party should normally avail itself of the other cooperation or consultation provisions provided for in this Agreement before initiating the mediation procedure.  4. A Party shall not rely on or introduce as evidence in other dispute settlement procedures under this Agreement or any other agreement, nor shall an arbitration panel take into consideration:  (a) positions taken by the other Party in the course of the mediation procedure or information gathered under Articles 5(1) and 5(2) of this Annex;  (b) the fact that the other Party has indicated its willingness to accept a solution to the measure subject to mediation; or  (c) advice given or proposals made by the mediator.  5. A mediator may not serve as member of an arbitration panel in a dispute settlement proceeding under this Agreement or under the WTO Agreement involving the same matter for which he/she has been a mediator.   ARTICLE 8  Time limits  Any time limit referred to in this Annex may be modified by mutual agreement between the Parties involved in the mediation procedures.   ARTICLE 9  Costs  1. Each Party shall bear its own expenses derived from its participation in the mediation procedure.  2. The Parties shall share jointly and equally the expenses derived from organisational matters, including the remuneration and expenses of the mediator. The remuneration of the mediator shall be in accordance with that foreseen for the chairperson of an arbitration panel in accordance with rule 8(e) of the Rules of Procedure. ANNEX XVI  RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR DISPUTE SETTLEMENT   General provisions  1. In Chapter 14 (Dispute settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement and under these Rules: (a) ‘adviser’ means a person retained by a Party to the dispute to advise or assist that Party in connection with the arbitration panel proceeding; (b) ‘arbitrator’ means a member of an arbitration panel established under Article 352 of this Agreement; (c) ‘arbitration panel’ means a panel established under Article 352 of this Agreement; (d) ‘assistant’ means a person who, under the terms of appointment of an arbitrator, conducts research or provides assistance to that arbitrator; (e) ‘complaining Party’ means any Party that requests the establishment of an arbitration panel under Article 351 of this Agreement; (f) ‘day’ means a calendar day; (g) ‘party complained against’ means the Party that is alleged to be in violation of the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement; (h) ‘representative of a Party’ means an employee or any person appointed by a government department or agency or any other public entity of a Party who represents the Party for the purposes of a dispute under this Agreement.          2. The Party complained against shall be in charge of the logistical administration of the dispute settlement proceedings, in particular the organisation of hearings, unless otherwise agreed. The Parties shall share the expenses derived from organisational matters, including the remuneration and expenses of the arbitrators.     Notifications  3. Each Party to the dispute and the arbitration panel shall transmit any request, notice, written submission or other document by e-mail to the other Party and, as regards written submissions and requests in the context of arbitration, to each of the arbitrators. The arbitration panel shall circulate documents to the Parties also by e-mail. Unless proven otherwise, an e-mail message shall be deemed to be received on the date of its sending. If any of the supporting documents are above ten megabytes, they shall be provided in another electronic format to the other Party and, where relevant, to each of the arbitrators within two days from the sending of the e-mail.  4. A copy of the documents transmitted in accordance with rule 3 shall be submitted to the other Party and, where relevant, to each of the arbitrators on the day of sending the e-mail by facsimile transmission, registered post, courier, or delivery against receipt or any other means of telecommunication that provides a record of the sending thereof.  5. All notifications shall be addressed to the Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Moldova and to the Department for International Trade of the United Kingdom, or its successor, respectively.  6. Minor errors of a clerical nature in any request, notice, written submission or other document related to the arbitration panel proceeding may be corrected by delivery of a new document clearly indicating the changes.  7. If the last day for delivery of a document falls on an official holiday of the UK or of the Republic of Moldova, the document shall be deemed delivered within the deadline on the next business day.   Commencing the arbitration  8. (a)    If, pursuant to Article 352 of this Agreement or to rule 20 of these Rules, an arbitrator is selected by drawing lots, the drawing of lots shall be carried out at a time and place decided by the complaining Party to be promptly communicated to the Party complained against. The Party complained against may, if it so chooses, be present during the drawing of lots. In any event, the drawing of lots shall be carried out with the Party/Parties that is/are present. (b) If, pursuant to Article 352 of this Agreement or to rule 20 of these Rules, an arbitrator is selected by drawing lots and there are two chairs of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, both chairs, or their delegates, or one chair alone in cases where the other chair or his/her delegate does not accept to participate in the drawing of lots, shall perform the selection. (c) The Parties shall notify the selected arbitrators of their appointment. (d) An arbitrator who has been appointed according to the procedure established in Article 352 of this Agreement shall confirm his/her availability to serve as an arbitrator to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement within five days of the date in which he/she was informed of his/her appointment. If a candidate declines the appointment for a justified reason, a new arbitrator shall be selected following the same procedure used for the selection of the unavailable candidate. (e) Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, they shall meet the arbitration panel within seven days of its establishment in order to determine such matters as the Parties or the arbitration panel deem appropriate, including the remuneration and expenses to be paid to the arbitrators, which shall be in accordance with WTO standards. The remuneration for each arbitrator's assistant shall not exceed 50 % of the remuneration of that arbitrator. Arbitrators and representatives of the Parties to the dispute may take part in this meeting via telephone or video conference.       9. (a)   Unless the Parties agree otherwise within five days from the date of selection of the arbitrators, the terms of reference of the arbitration panel shall be ‘to examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Agreement invoked by the parties to the dispute, the matter referred to in the request for establishment of the arbitration panel, to rule on the compatibility of the measure in question with the provisions referred to in Article 348 of this Agreement and to make a ruling in accordance with Articles 354 and 369 of this Agreement’.  (b) The Parties shall notify the agreed terms of reference to the arbitration panel within three days of their agreement.   Initial submissions  10. The complaining Party shall deliver its initial written submission no later than 20 days after the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. The Party complained against shall deliver its written counter-submission no later than 20 days after the date of receipt of the initial written submission.   Working of arbitration panels  11. The chairperson of the arbitration panel shall preside over all its meetings. An arbitration panel may delegate to the chairperson the authority to make administrative and procedural decisions.   12. Unless otherwise provided in Chapter 14 (Dispute settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, the arbitration panel may conduct its activities by any means, including telephone, facsimile transmissions or computer links.  13. Only arbitrators may take part in the deliberations of the arbitration panel, but the arbitration panel may permit its assistants to be present at its deliberations.  14. The drafting of any ruling shall remain the exclusive responsibility of the arbitration panel and shall not be delegated.  15. Where a procedural question arises that is not addressed by the provisions of Chapter 14 (Dispute settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement and Annexes XV, XVI and XVII to this Agreement, the arbitration panel, after consulting the Parties, may adopt an appropriate procedure that is compatible with those provisions.  16. When the arbitration panel considers that there is a need to modify any of the time limits for its proceedings other than the time limits set out in Chapter 14 (Dispute settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement or to make any other procedural or administrative adjustment, it shall inform the Parties to the dispute in writing of the reasons for the change or adjustment and of the period of time or adjustment needed.   Replacement  17. If an arbitrator is unable to participate in an arbitration panel proceeding, withdraws from it, or must be replaced because he/she does not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, as set out in Annex XVII to this Agreement, a replacement shall be selected in accordance with Article 352 of this Agreement and rule 8 of these Rules.  18. Where a Party to the dispute considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct and for this reason should be replaced, this Party shall notify the other Party to the dispute within 15 days from the time at which it obtained evidence of the circumstances underlying the arbitrator's material violation of the Code of Conduct.  19. Where a Party to the dispute considers that an arbitrator other than the chairperson does not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, the Parties to the dispute shall consult and, if they so agree, select a new arbitrator in accordance with Article 352 of this Agreement and rule 8 of these Rules.  If the Parties to the dispute fail to agree on the need to replace an arbitrator, any Party to the dispute may request that such matter be referred to the chairperson of the arbitration panel, whose decision shall be final.  If, pursuant to such a request, the chairperson finds that an arbitrator does not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, the new arbitrator shall be selected in accordance with Article 352 of this Agreement and rule 8 of these Rules.  20. Where a Party considers that the chairperson of the arbitration panel does not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, the Parties shall consult and, if they so agree, select a new chairperson in accordance with Article 352 of this Agreement and rule 8 of these Rules.  If the Parties fail to agree on the need to replace the chairperson, any Party may request that such matter be referred to one of the remaining members of the pool of individuals from the sub-list of chairpersons referred to in Article 370(1) of this Agreement. His/her name shall be drawn by lot by the chair of the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, or the chair's delegate within five days from the request. The decision by the so selected person on the need to replace the chairperson shall be final.  If the so selected person decides that the original chairperson does not comply with the requirements of the Code of Conduct, he/she shall select a new chairperson by lot among the remaining pool of individuals from the sub-list of chairpersons referred to in Article 370(1) of this Agreement. The selection of the new chairperson shall be carried out within five days of the date of the decision referred to in this paragraph.  21. The arbitration panel proceedings shall be suspended for the period taken to carry out the procedures provided for in rules 18, 19 and 20 of these Rules.   Hearings  22. The chairperson of the arbitration panel shall fix the date and time of the hearing in consultation with the Parties to the dispute and the other arbitrators, and shall confirm this in writing to the Parties to the dispute. This information shall also be made publicly available by the Party in charge of the logistical administration of the proceedings, unless the hearing is closed to the public. Unless a Party disagrees, the arbitration panel may decide not to convene a hearing.  23. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the hearing shall be held in London if the complaining Party is the Republic of Moldova, and in Chisinau if the complaining Party is the UK.  24. The arbitration panel may convene additional hearings, if the Parties so agree.  25. All arbitrators shall be present during the entirety of any hearings.  26. The following persons may attend the hearing, irrespective of whether the proceedings are open to the public or not: (a) representatives of the Parties to the dispute;  (b) advisers to the Parties to the dispute; (c) administrative staff, interpreters, translators and court reporters; and (d) arbitrators' assistants.     Only the representatives and advisers of the Parties to the dispute may address the arbitration panel.  27. No later than five days before the date of a hearing, each Party to the dispute shall deliver to the arbitration panel a list of the names of individuals who will make oral arguments or presentations at the hearing on behalf of that Party and of other representatives or advisers attending the hearing.  28. The arbitration panel shall conduct the hearing in the following manner, ensuring that the complaining Party and the Party complained against are afforded equal time: (a) argument of the complaining Party; (b) counter-argument of the Party complained against;  Argument    Rebuttal Argument  (a) argument of the complaining Party;  (b) counter-argument of the Party complained against.  29. The arbitration panel may direct questions to either Party to the dispute at any time during the hearing.  30. The arbitration panel shall arrange for a transcript of each hearing to be prepared and delivered as soon as possible to the Parties to the dispute. The Parties to the dispute may comment on the transcript, and the arbitration panel may consider those comments.  31. Each Party to the dispute may deliver a supplementary written submission concerning any matter that arose during the hearing within 10 days of the date of the hearing.   Questions in writing  32. The arbitration panel may at any time during the proceedings address questions in writing to one or both Parties to the dispute. Each Party to the dispute shall receive a copy of any questions put by the arbitration panel.  33. A Party to the dispute shall also provide a copy of its written response to the arbitration panel's questions to the other Party to the dispute. Each Party to the dispute shall be given the opportunity to provide written comments on the other Party's reply within five days of the date of receipt of such reply.   Confidentiality  34. Each Party to the dispute and its advisers shall treat as confidential any information submitted by the other Party to the dispute to the arbitration panel which that Party has designated as confidential. Where a Party to the dispute submits a confidential version of its written submissions to the arbitration panel, it shall also, upon request of the other Party, provide a non-confidential summary of the information contained in its submissions that could be disclosed to the public no later than 15 days after the date of either the request or the submission, whichever is later, and an explanation as to why the non-disclosed information is confidential. Nothing in these Rules shall preclude a Party to the dispute from disclosing statements of its own positions to the public to the extent that, when making reference to information submitted by the other Party, it does not disclose any information designated by the other Party as confidential. The arbitration panel shall meet in closed session when the submission and the arguments of a Party contain confidential information. The Parties to the dispute and their advisers shall maintain the confidentiality of the arbitration panel hearings where the hearings are held in closed session.   Ex parte contacts  35. The arbitration panel shall not meet or communicate with a Party in the absence of the other Party.  36. No arbitrator may discuss any aspect of the subject matter of the proceedings with either Party or both Parties to the dispute in the absence of the other arbitrators.   Amicus curiae submissions  37. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within three days of the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel, the arbitration panel may receive unsolicited written submissions from natural or legal persons established in the territory of a Party to the dispute who are independent from the governments of the Parties to the dispute, provided that they are made within 10 days of the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel, that they are concise and in no case longer than 15 pages typed at double space and that they are directly relevant to a factual or a legal issue under consideration by the arbitration panel.   38. The submission shall contain a description of the person making the submission, whether natural or legal, including its nationality or place of establishment, the nature of its activities, its legal status, general objectives and the source of its financing, and specify the nature of the interest that the person has in the arbitration panel proceeding. It shall be drafted in the languages chosen by the Parties to the dispute in accordance with rules 41 and 42 of these Rules.  39. The arbitration panel shall list in its ruling all the submissions it has received that conform to rules 37 and 38 of these Rules. The arbitration panel shall not be obliged to address in its ruling the arguments made in such submissions. Any such submission shall be notified by the arbitration panel to the Parties to the dispute for their comments. The comments of the Parties to the dispute shall be submitted within 10 days, and any such comments shall be taken into consideration by the arbitration panel.   Urgent cases  40. In the cases of urgency referred to in Chapter 11 (Trade-related Energy) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, the arbitration panel, after consulting the Parties to the dispute, shall adjust the time limits referred to in these Rules, as appropriate, and shall notify the Parties of such adjustments.   Translation and interpretation  41. During the consultations referred to in Article 349 of this Agreement and no later than the meeting referred to in rule 8(e) of these Rules, the Parties to the dispute shall endeavour to agree on a common working language for the proceedings before the arbitration panel.  42. If the Parties to the dispute are unable to agree on a common working language, each Party shall make its written submissions in its chosen language. In such case, that Party shall provide at the same time a translation in the language chosen by the other Party, unless its submissions are written in one of the working languages of the WTO. The Party complained against shall arrange for the interpretation of oral submissions into the languages chosen by the Parties to the dispute.  43. Arbitration panel rulings shall be notified in the language or languages chosen by the Parties to the dispute.  44. Any Party to the dispute may provide comments on the accuracy of the translation of any translated version of a document drawn up in accordance with these Rules.  45. Each Party shall bear the costs of the translation of its written submissions. Any costs incurred for translation of an arbitration ruling shall be borne equally by the Parties to the dispute.  Other procedures  46. These Rules of Procedure are also applicable to procedures established under Article 349, Article 358(2), Article 359(2), Article 360(2) and Article 362(2) of Chapter 14 (Dispute settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement. However, the time limits laid down in these Rules of Procedure shall be adjusted by the arbitration panel in line with the special time limits provided for the adoption of a ruling by the arbitration panel in those other procedures. ANNEX XVII  CODE OF CONDUCT FOR ARBITRATORS AND MEDIATORS   Definitions  1. In this Code of Conduct: (a) ‘arbitrator’ means a member of an arbitration panel established under Article 352 of this Agreement; (b) ‘assistant’ means a person who, under the terms of appointment of an arbitrator, conducts, researches or provides assistance to the arbitrator; (c) ‘candidate’ means an individual whose name is on the list of arbitrators referred to in Article 370(1) of this Agreement and who is under consideration for selection as an arbitrator under Article 352 of this Agreement; (d) ‘mediator’ means a person who conducts a mediation procedure in accordance with Annex XV (Mediation Mechanism) to this Agreement; (e) ‘proceeding’, unless otherwise specified, means an arbitration panel proceeding under Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement; (f) ‘staff’, in respect of an arbitrator, means persons under the direction and control of an arbitrator, other than assistants.         Responsibilities to the process  2. Throughout the proceedings, every candidate and arbitrator shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of impropriety, shall be independent and impartial, shall avoid direct and indirect conflicts of interest and shall observe high standards of conduct so that the integrity and impartiality of the dispute settlement mechanism is preserved. Former arbitrators must comply with the obligations established in rules 15, 16, 17 and 18 of this Code of Conduct.   Disclosure obligations  3. Prior to confirmation of his/her selection as an arbitrator under Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement, a candidate shall disclose any interest, relationship or matter that is likely to affect his/her independence or impartiality or that might reasonably create an appearance of impropriety or bias in the proceeding. To this end, a candidate shall make all reasonable efforts to become aware of any such interests, relationships and matters.  4. A candidate or an arbitrator shall communicate matters concerning actual or potential violations of this Code of Conduct only to the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, as set out in Article 375(3) of this Agreement, for consideration by the Parties.  5. Once selected, an arbitrator shall continue to make all reasonable efforts to become aware of any interests, relationships or matters referred to in rule 3 of this Code of Conduct and shall disclose them. The disclosure obligation is a continuing duty which requires an arbitrator to disclose any such interests, relationships or matters that may arise during any stage of the proceeding. The arbitrator shall disclose such interests, relationships or matters by informing the Political and Strategic Dialogue in Trade configuration, in writing, for consideration by the Parties.   Duties of arbitrators  6. An arbitrator included in the lists of arbitrators provided for in Article 370(1) of this Agreement may decline the appointment as an arbitrator only for justified reasons such as, for example, disease, participation in other court or panel proceedings or conflict of interest. Upon confirmation of his/her selection, an arbitrator shall be available to perform and shall perform his/her duties thoroughly and expeditiously throughout the proceeding, and with fairness and diligence.  7. An arbitrator shall consider only those issues raised in the proceeding and necessary for a ruling and shall not delegate this duty to any other person.  8. An arbitrator shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that his/her assistant and staff are aware of, and comply with, rules 2, 3, 4, 5, 16, 17 and 18 of this Code of Conduct.  9. An arbitrator shall not engage in ex parte contacts concerning the proceeding.   Independence and impartiality of arbitrators  10. An arbitrator shall be independent and impartial, avoid creating an appearance of impropriety or bias, and shall not be influenced by self-interest, outside pressure, political considerations, public clamour, loyalty to a Party or fear of criticism.  11. An arbitrator shall not, directly or indirectly, incur any obligation or accept any benefit that would in any way interfere, or appear to interfere, with the proper performance of his/her duties.  12. An arbitrator shall not use his/her position on the arbitration panel to advance any personal or private interests. An arbitrator shall avoid actions that may create the impression that others are in a special position to influence him/her.  13. An arbitrator shall not allow financial, business, professional, personal, or social relationships or responsibilities to influence his/her conduct or judgement.  14. An arbitrator shall avoid entering into any relationship or acquiring any financial interest that is likely to affect his/her impartiality or that might reasonably create an appearance of impropriety or bias.   Obligations of former arbitrators  15. All former arbitrators shall avoid actions that may create the appearance that they were biased in carrying out their duties or derived advantage from the decision or ruling of the arbitration panel.   Confidentiality  16. No arbitrator or former arbitrator shall at any time disclose or use any non-public information concerning a proceeding or acquired during a proceeding except for the purposes of that proceeding and shall not, in any case, disclose or use any such information to gain personal advantage or advantage for others or to adversely affect the interests of others.  17. An arbitrator shall not disclose an arbitration panel ruling or parts thereof prior to its publication in accordance with Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement.  18. An arbitrator or a former arbitrator shall not disclose the deliberations of an arbitration panel, or any arbitrator's view at any time.   Expenses  19. Each arbitrator shall keep a record and render a final account of the time devoted to the procedure and of his/her expenses, as well as the time and expenses of his/assistant and staff.   Mediators  20. The disciplines described in this Code of Conduct as applying to arbitrators or former arbitrators shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to mediators. PROTOCOL I CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF ‘ORIGINATING PRODUCTS’ AND METHODS OF ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION   TITLE I  GENERAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 1  Definitions  For the purposes of this Protocol:  (a) ‘manufacture’ means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;  (b) ‘material’ means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the manufacture of a product;  (c) ‘product’ means a product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;  (d) ‘goods’ means both materials and products;  (e) ‘customs value’ means the value as determined in accordance with the Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994;  (f) ‘ex-works price’ means the price paid for the product ex works to the manufacturer in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;  (g) ‘value of materials’ means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova;  (h) ‘value of originating materials’ means the value of such materials as defined in (g) applied mutatis mutandis;   (i) ‘value added’ means the ex-works price minus the customs value of each of the materials incorporated which originate in the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 with which cumulation is applicable or, where the customs value is not known or cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova;  (j) ‘chapters’ and ‘headings’ mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes) used in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as ‘the Harmonised System’ or ‘HS’;  (k) ‘classified’ refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular heading;  (l) ‘consignment’ means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;  (m) ‘territories’ includes territorial waters;  (n) ‘Incorporated Annexes I to IV b’ mean Annexes I to IV b of Appendix I to the Regional Convention on pan-Euro-Mediterranean preferential rules of origin, as those Annexes are incorporated by Article 39 of this Protocol.     TITLE II  DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF ‘ORIGINATING PRODUCTS’   ARTICLE 2  General requirements  1. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in the United Kingdom: (a) products wholly obtained in the United Kingdom within the meaning of Article 5; (b) products obtained in the United Kingdom incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in the United Kingdom within the meaning of Article 6.    2. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in the Republic of Moldova: (a) products wholly obtained in the Republic of Moldova within the meaning of Article 5; (b) products obtained in the Republic of Moldova incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in the Republic of Moldova within the meaning of Article 6.     ARTICLE 3  Cumulation in the United Kingdom  1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(1), products shall be considered as originating in the United Kingdom, if they are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in Switzerland (including Liechtenstein)(1), Iceland, Norway, Turkey or the European Union, provided that the working or processing carried out in the United Kingdom goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing. (1) Due to the Customs Treaty between Liechtenstein and Switzerland, products originating in Liechtenstein are considered as originating in Switzerland.   2. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(1), products shall be considered as originating in the United Kingdom if they are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in the Republic of Moldova or any other country referred to in Annex A to this Protocol, provided that the working or processing carried out in the United Kingdom goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing.  3. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(1), working or processing carried out in Iceland, Norway, or the European Union, shall be considered as having been carried out in the United Kingdom when the products obtained undergo subsequent working or processing in the United Kingdom that goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7.   4. For cumulation provided in paragraphs 1 and 2, where the working or processing carried out in the United Kingdom does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the United Kingdom only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used that are originating in any of the other countries. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country which accounts for the highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in the United Kingdom.  5. For cumulation provided in paragraph 3, where the working or processing carried out in the United Kingdom does not go beyond the operation referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the United Kingdom only where the value added there is greater than the value added in any of the other countries.   6. Products originating in the countries referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, which do not undergo any working or processing in the United Kingdom retain their origin if exported into one of these countries.  7. (a)   The cumulation provided for in this Article in respect of the European Union may be applied provided that:  (i) the United Kingdom, the Republic of Moldova and the European Union have arrangements on administrative cooperation which ensure a correct implementation of this Article;  (ii) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those in this Protocol; and  (iii) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply cumulation have been published by the Parties.  (b) Except as provided for in paragraph 7(a), the cumulation provided for in this Article may be applied provided that:  (i) a preferential trade agreement in accordance with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (‘GATT 1994’) is applicable between the countries involved in the acquisition of the originating status and the country of destination;  (ii) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those in this Protocol; and  (iii) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply cumulation have been published by the Parties.  8.  The United Kingdom shall provide the Republic of Moldova with details of the agreements or arrangements including their dates of entry into force, and their corresponding rules of origin, which are applied with the other countries referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.   ARTICLE 4  Cumulation in the Republic of Moldova  1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2), products shall be considered as originating in the Republic of Moldova, if they are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in the United Kingdom, Switzerland (including Liechtenstein), Iceland, Norway, Turkey or the European Union, provided that the working or processing carried out in the Republic of Moldova goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing.  2. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2), products shall be considered as originating in the Republic of Moldova if they are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in any country referred to in Annex A to this Protocol, provided that the working or processing carried out in the Republic of Moldova goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing.  3. Where the working or processing carried out in the Republic of Moldova does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the Republic of Moldova only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used that are originating in any of the other countries referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country which accounts for the highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in the Republic of Moldova.  4. Products originating in the countries referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, which do not undergo any working or processing in the Republic of Moldova, retain their origin if exported into one of these countries.  5. (a) The cumulation provided for in this Article in respect of the European Union may be applied provided that:  (i) the United Kingdom, the Republic of Moldova and the European Union have arrangements on administrative cooperation which ensure a correct implementation of this Article;  (ii) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those in this Protocol; and  (iii) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply cumulation have been published by the Parties.  (b) Except as provided for in paragraph 5(a), the cumulation provided for in this Article may be applied provided that:  (i) a preferential trade agreement in accordance with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 is applicable between the countries involved in the acquisition of the originating status and the country of destination;  (ii) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those in this Protocol; and  (iii) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply cumulation have been published by the Parties.  6. The Republic of Moldova shall provide the United Kingdom with details of the agreements or arrangements including their dates of entry into force, and their corresponding rules of origin, which are applied with the other countries referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.   ARTICLE 5  Wholly obtained products  1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova: (a) mineral products extracted from its soil or from its seabed; (b) vegetable products harvested there; (c) live animals born and raised there; (d) products from live animals raised there; (e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there; (f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the territorial waters of the Party by its vessels; (g) products made aboard its factory ships exclusively from products referred to in (f); (h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including used tyres fit only for re-treading or for use as waste; (i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there; (j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside its territorial waters provided that it has sole rights to work that soil or subsoil; (k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in (a) to (j).             2. The terms ‘its vessels’ and ‘its factory ships’ in paragraphs 1(f) and (g) shall apply only to vessels and factory ships: (a) which are registered or recorded in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova; (b) which sail under the flag of the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova; (c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50% by nationals of the United Kingdom, a Member State of the European Union or the Republic of Moldova, or by a company with its head office in one of these States, of which the manager or managers, Chairman of the Board of Directors or the Supervisory Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are nationals of the United Kingdom, a Member State of the European Union or the Republic of Moldova and of which, in addition, in the case of partnerships or limited companies, at least half the capital belongs to those States or to public bodies or nationals of the said States; (d) of which the master and officers are nationals of the United Kingdom, a Member State of the European Union or the Republic of Moldova; and (e) of which at least 75% of the crew are nationals of the United Kingdom, a Member State of the European Union or the Republic of Moldova.          ARTICLE 6  Sufficiently worked or processed products  1. For the purposes of Article 2, products which are not wholly obtained shall be considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list in Incorporated Annex II are fulfilled.  The conditions referred to above indicate the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. It follows that if a product which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.  2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in the list in Incorporated Annex II, should not be used in the manufacture of a product may nevertheless be used, provided that: (a) their total value does not exceed 10% of the ex-works price of the product; (b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating materials are not exceeded by virtue of this paragraph.    This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised System.  3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply subject to the provisions of Article 7.   ARTICLE 7  Insufficient working or processing  1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 6 are satisfied: (a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during transport and storage; (b) breaking-up and assembly of packages; (c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings; (d) ironing or pressing of textiles;  (e) simple painting and polishing operations; (f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice; (g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps; (h) peeling, stoning and shelling of fruits, nuts and vegetables; (i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting; (j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching (including the making-up of sets of articles); (k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards and all other simple packaging operations; (l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging; (m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; (n) mixing of sugar with any material;  (o) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of products into parts; (p) a combination of two or more operations specified in (a) to (n); (q) slaughter of animals.                  2. All operations carried out in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.     ARTICLE 8  Unit of qualification  1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System. (a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonised System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification; (b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonised System, each product must be taken individually when applying the provisions of this Protocol.  It follows that:    2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonised System, packaging is included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.   ARTICLE 9  Accessories, spare parts and tools  Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.   ARTICLE 10  Sets  Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised System, shall be regarded as originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15% of the ex-works price of the set.     ARTICLE 11  Neutral elements  In order to determine whether a product is an originating product, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:  (a) energy and fuel;  (b) plant and equipment;  (c) machines and tools;  (d) goods which neither enter into the final composition of the product nor are intended to do so.     TITLE III  TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS   ARTICLE 12  Principle of territoriality  1. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4 and paragraph 3 of this Article, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Title II shall be fulfilled without interruption in the United Kingdom, or in the Republic of Moldova.  2. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4, where originating goods exported from the United Kingdom or from the Republic of Moldova to another country return, they shall be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that: (a) the returning goods are the same as those exported; and (b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.    3. The acquisition of originating status in accordance with the conditions set out in Title II shall not be affected by working or processing done outside the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova on materials exported from the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova and subsequently re-imported there, provided: (a) the said materials are wholly obtained in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova or have undergone working or processing beyond the operations referred to in Article 7 prior to being exported; and (b) it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that: (i) the re-imported goods have been obtained by working or processing the exported materials; and (ii) the total added value acquired outside the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova by applying the provisions of this Article does not exceed 10% of the ex-works price of the end product for which originating status is claimed.        4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Title II shall not apply to working or processing done outside the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova. However, where, in the list in Incorporated Annex II a rule setting a maximum value for all the non-originating materials incorporated is applied in determining the originating status of the end product, the total value of the non-originating materials incorporated in the territory of the Party concerned, taken together with the total added value acquired outside the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova by applying the provisions of this Article, shall not exceed the stated percentage.  5. For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4, ‘total added value’ means all costs arising outside the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova, including the value of the materials incorporated there.  6. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which do not fulfil the conditions set out in the list in Incorporated Annex II or which can be considered sufficiently worked or processed only if the general tolerance fixed in Article 6(2) is applied.  7. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products of Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised System.  8. Any working or processing of the kind covered by the provisions of this Article and done outside the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova shall be done under the outward processing arrangements, or similar arrangements.    ARTICLE 13  Direct transport  1. The preferential treatment provided for under this Agreement shall apply only to products satisfying the requirements of this Protocol, which are transported directly between the Parties or through the territories of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 with which cumulation is applicable. However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion arise, trans-shipment or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition.  Originating products may be transported by pipeline across a territory other than that of the Parties.   2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the customs authorities of the importing Party by the production of: (a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting Party through the country of transit; or (b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit: (i) giving an exact description of the products; (ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable, the names of the ships, or the other means of transport used; and (iii) certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or (c) failing these, any substantiating documents.         ARTICLE 14  Exhibitions  1. Originating products sent for exhibition in a country other than those referred to in Articles 3 and 4 with which cumulation is applicable, and sold after the exhibition for importation in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova, shall benefit on importation from the provisions of this Agreement, provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that: (a) an exporter has consigned these products from the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there; (b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova; (c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and  (d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.      2. A proof of origin shall be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V and submitted to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition shall be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.  3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs control.     TITLE IV  DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION   ARTICLE 15  Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties  1. Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova for which a proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V shall not be subject in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova to drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.  2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund, remission or non-payment, partial or complete, of customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect, applicable in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova to materials used in the manufacture, where such refund, remission or non-payment applies, expressly or in effect, when products obtained from the said materials are exported and not when they are retained for home use there.  3. The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit at any time, upon request from the customs authorities, all appropriate documents proving that no drawback has been obtained in respect of the non-originating materials used in the manufacture of the products concerned and that all customs duties or charges having equivalent effect applicable to such materials have actually been paid.  4. The provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging within the meaning of Article 8(2), accessories, spare parts and tools within the meaning of Article 9 and products in a set within the meaning of Article 10 when such items are non-originating.  5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials which are of the kind to which this Agreement applies.   6. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall not apply if the products are considered as originating in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova without application of cumulation with materials originating in Switzerland (including Liechtenstein), Turkey, or one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3(2) and 4(2).     TITLE V  PROOF OF ORIGIN   ARTICLE 16  General requirements  1. Products originating in one of the Parties shall, on importation into the other Party, benefit from the provisions of this Agreement upon submission of one of the following proofs of origin: (a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Incorporated Annex III a; (b) a movement certificate EUR-MED a specimen of which appears in Incorporated Annex III b; or (c) in the cases specified in Article 22(1), a declaration (the ‘origin declaration’ or the ‘origin declaration EUR-MED’) given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified. The texts of the origin declarations appear in Incorporated Annexes IV a and b.     2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 27, benefit from this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the proofs of origin referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.   3. Notwithstanding paragraph 5 of Article 17 and paragraph 3 of Article 22 below, where cumulation involves only the United Kingdom, the European Union, EFTA States, the Faroe Islands, Turkey, the Republic of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, the Republic of Serbia, the Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Moldova, the proof of origin may be a movement certificate EUR.1 or an origin declaration.   ARTICLE 17  Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED  1. A movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting Party on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter’s responsibility, by his authorised representative.   2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill in both the movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED and the application form, specimens of which appear in the Incorporated Annexes III a and b. These forms shall be completed in one of the languages in which this Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of the national law of the exporting country. If the completion of the forms is done in handwriting, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products shall be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line shall be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.  3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova where the movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED is issued, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  4. Without prejudice to paragraph 5, a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the United Kingdom or of the Republic of Moldova in the following cases: (a) if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova without application of cumulation with materials originating in Switzerland (including Liechtenstein), Turkey or one of the countries referred to in Articles 3(2) and 4(2) and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol; or (b) if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4, without application of cumulation with materials originating in one of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4, and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol, provided a certificate EUR-MED or an invoice declaration EUR-MED has been issued in the country of origin.    5. A movement certificate EUR-MED shall be issued by the customs authorities of the United Kingdom or of the Republic of Moldova, if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom, in the Republic of Moldova or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4, fulfil the requirements of this Protocol and: (a) cumulation was applied with materials originating in Switzerland (including Liechtenstein), Turkey or one of the countries referred to in Articles 3(2) and 4(2); or (b) the products may be used as materials in the context of cumulation for the manufacture of products for export to one of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4; or  (c) the products may be re-exported from the country of destination to one of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4.  (a) if origin has been obtained by application of cumulation with materials originating in one or more of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4: (b) if origin has been obtained without the application of cumulation with materials originating in one or more of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4:   6. A movement certificate EUR-MED shall contain one of the following statements in English in box 7:   ‘CUMULATION APPLIED WITH … (name of the country/countries)’   ‘NO CUMULATION APPLIED’  7. The customs authorities issuing movement certificates EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter’s accounts or any other check considered appropriate. They shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.  8. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall be indicated in Box 11 of the certificate.  9. A movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall be issued by the customs authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.   ARTICLE 18  Movement certificates EUR.1 or EUR-MED issued retrospectively  1. Notwithstanding Article 17(9), a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED may exceptionally be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if: (a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors, involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or (b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.     2. Notwithstanding Article 17(9), a movement certificate EUR-MED may be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates and for which a movement certificate EUR.1 was issued at the time of exportation, provided that it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that the conditions referred to in Article 17(5) are satisfied.  3. For the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2, the exporter shall indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED relates, and state the reasons for his request.  4. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter’s application complies with that in the corresponding file.  5. Movement certificates EUR.1 or EUR-MED issued retrospectively by application of paragraph 1 shall be endorsed with the following phrase in English:  ‘ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY’  Movement certificates EUR-MED issued retrospectively by application of paragraph 2 shall be endorsed with the following phrase in English:  ‘ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY (Original EUR.1 No … [date and place of issue])’  6. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 5 shall be inserted in Box 7 of the movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED.   ARTICLE 19  Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED  1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED, the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.  2. The duplicate issued in this way shall be endorsed with the following word in English:  ‘DUPLICATE’  3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in Box 7 of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED.  4. The duplicate, which shall bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED, shall take effect as from that date.   ARTICLE 20  Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 or EUR-MED on the basis of a proof of origin issued or made out previously  When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates EUR.1 or EUR-MED for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere within the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.   ARTICLE 21  Accounting segregation  1. Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks of originating and non-originating materials which are identical and interchangeable, the customs authorities may, at the written request of those concerned, authorise the so-called ‘accounting segregation’ method (hereinafter referred to as the ‘method’) to be used for managing such stocks.  2. The method shall ensure that, for a specific reference-period, the number of products obtained which could be considered as ‘originating’ is the same as that which would have been obtained had there been physical segregation of the stocks.  3. The customs authorities may make the grant of authorisation, referred to in paragraph 1 subject to any conditions deemed appropriate.  4. The method shall be applied and the application thereof shall be recorded on the basis of the general accounting principles applicable in the country where the product was manufactured.  5. The beneficiary of the method may make out or apply for proofs of origin, as the case may be, for the quantity of products which may be considered as originating. At the request of the customs authorities, the beneficiary shall provide a statement of how the quantities have been managed.  6. The customs authorities shall monitor the use made of the authorisation and may withdraw it whenever the beneficiary makes improper use of the authorisation in any manner whatsoever or fails to fulfil any of the other conditions laid down in this Protocol.     ARTICLE 22  Conditions for making out an origin declaration or an origin declaration EUR-MED  1. An origin declaration or an origin declaration EUR-MED as referred to in Article 16(1)(c) may be made out: (a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23; or (b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products the total value of which does not exceed EUR 6 000.    2. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, an origin declaration may be made out in the following cases: (a) if the products concerned may be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova, without application of cumulation with materials originating in Switzerland (including Liechtenstein), Turkey or one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3(2) and 4(2), and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol; or (b) if the products concerned may be considered as products originating in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 with which cumulation is applicable, without application of cumulation with materials originating in one of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4, and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol, provided a certificate EUR-MED or an invoice declaration EUR-MED has been issued in the country of origin.   3. An origin declaration EUR-MED may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom, in the Republic of Moldova or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 with which cumulation is applicable, and fulfil the requirements of this Protocol, in the following cases: (a) cumulation was applied with materials originating in Switzerland (including Liechtenstein), Turkey or one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3(2) and 4(2); or (b) the products may be used as materials in the context of cumulation for the manufacture of products for export to one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4; or (c) the products may be re-exported from the country of destination to one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4.     4. An origin declaration EUR-MED shall contain one of the following statements in English: (a) if origin has been obtained by application of cumulation with materials originating in one or more of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4: (b) if origin has been obtained without the application of cumulation with materials originating in one or more of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4:   ‘CUMULATION APPLIED WITH … (name of the country/countries)’   ‘NO CUMULATION APPLIED’  5. The exporter making out an origin declaration or an origin declaration EUR-MED shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting Party, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  6. An origin declaration or an origin declaration EUR-MED shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration, the texts of which appear in Incorporated Annexes IV a and b, using one of the linguistic versions set out in those Annexes and in accordance with the provisions of the national law of the exporting country. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed characters.  7. Origin declarations and origin declarations EUR-MED shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23 shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of the exporting Party a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any origin declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.  8. An origin declaration or an origin declaration EUR-MED may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing country at the latest two years after the importation of the products to which it relates.     ARTICLE 23  Approved exporter  1. The customs authorities of the exporting Party may authorise any exporter (hereinafter referred to as ‘approved exporter’), who makes frequent shipments of products in accordance to the provisions of this Agreement to make out origin declarations or origin declarations EUR-MED irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation shall offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.  3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation number which shall appear on the origin declaration or on the origin declaration EUR-MED.  4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved exporter.  5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, no longer fulfils the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorisation.   ARTICLE 24  Validity of proof of origin  1. A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the exporting Party, and shall be submitted within that period to the customs authorities of the importing Party.  2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.  3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing Party may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the said final date.     ARTICLE 25  Submission of proof of origin  Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing Party in accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the implementation of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 26  Importation by instalments  Where, at the request of the importer and subject to the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of the importing Party, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonised System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or headings 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonised System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.   ARTICLE 27  Exemptions from proof of origin  1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of travellers’ personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post that declaration may be made on the customs declaration CN22 / CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.  2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.  3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the case of small packages or EUR 1 200 in the case of products forming part of travellers’ personal luggage.     ARTICLE 28  Supporting documents  The documents referred to in Articles 17(3) and 22(5) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED, or an origin declaration or origin declaration EUR-MED may be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom, in the Republic of Moldova or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol may consist, inter alia, of the following:  (a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;  (b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova where these documents are used in accordance with national law;  (c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova, issued or made out in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova, where these documents are used in accordance with national law; (d) movement certificates EUR.1 or EUR-MED or origin declarations or origin declarations EUR-MED proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Moldova in accordance with this Protocol, or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4, in accordance with rules of origin which are identical to the rules in this Protocol; (e) appropriate evidence concerning working or processing undergone outside the United Kingdom, the Republic of Moldova or the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 by application of Article 12, proving that the requirements of that Article have been satisfied.     ARTICLE 29  Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents  1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall keep for at least three years the documents referred to in Article 17(3).  2. The exporter making out an origin declaration or origin declaration EUR-MED shall keep for at least three years a copy of this origin declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 22(5).  3. The customs authorities of the exporting Party issuing a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED shall keep for at least three years the application form referred to in Article 17(2).  4. The customs authorities of the importing Party shall keep for at least three years the movement certificates EUR.1 and EUR-MED and the origin declarations and origin declarations EUR-MED submitted to them.   ARTICLE 30  Discrepancies and formal errors  1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products submitted.  2. Obvious formal errors, such as typing errors, on a proof of origin shall not cause this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.   ARTICLE 31  Amounts expressed in euro  1. For the application of the provisions of Article 22(1)(b) and Article 27(3) in cases where products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the national currencies of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro shall be fixed annually by each of the countries concerned.  2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 22(1)(b) or Article 27(3) by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the Party concerned.  3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that currency of the amounts expressed in euro as at the first working day of October and shall apply from 1 January the following year. The Parties shall notify each other of the relevant amounts.   4. A Party may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its national currency of an amount expressed in euro. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5%. A country may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, prior to any rounding-off, results in an increase of less than 15% in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion were to result in a decrease in that equivalent value.  5. The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the Customs Sub-Committee at the request of any of the Parties. When carrying out this review, the Customs Sub-Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in euro.     TITLE VI  ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION   ARTICLE 32  Mutual assistance  1. The customs authorities of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Moldova shall provide each other with specimen impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of movement certificates EUR.1 and EUR-MED and with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for verifying those certificates, origin declarations and origin declarations EUR-MED.  2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Moldova shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.1 and EUR-MED, the origin declarations and the origin declarations EUR-MED, and the correctness of the information given in these documents.   ARTICLE 33  Verification of proofs of origin  1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing Party have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs authorities of the importing Party shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the origin declaration or the origin declaration EUR-MED, or a copy of these documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting Party giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the request for verification. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.  3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting Party. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.   4. If the customs authorities of the importing Party decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.  5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as possible. These results shall indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned may be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom, in the Republic of Moldova or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  6. If, in cases of reasonable doubt, there is no reply within ten months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.   ARTICLE 34  Dispute settlement  Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 33 which cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification, they shall be submitted to the Customs Sub-Committee. The provisions on the dispute settlement mechanism in Chapter 14 (Dispute Settlement) of Title V (Trade and Trade-related Matters) of this Agreement shall not apply.  In all cases, the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the importing Party shall take place under the legislation of that Party.   ARTICLE 35  Penalties  Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for products.     ARTICLE 36  Free zones  1. The United Kingdom and the Republic of Moldova shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products traded under cover of a proof of origin which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory, are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.  2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, when products originating in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova are imported into a free zone under cover of a proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned shall issue a new movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED at the exporter’s request, if the treatment or processing undergone complies with this Protocol.     TITLE VII  CEUTA AND MELILLA   ARTICLE 37  Application of the Protocol  The term ‘European Union’ used in this Protocol does not cover Ceuta and Melilla. Products originating in Ceuta and Melilla are not considered to be products originating in the European Union for the purposes of this Protocol. TITLE VIII  FINAL PROVISIONS   ARTICLE 38  Transitional Provision for Goods in Transit or Storage  The provisions of this Agreement may be applied to goods which comply with the provisions of this Protocol and which, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, are either in transit or are in the United Kingdom or in the Republic of Moldova in temporary storage, in customs warehouses or in free zones, subject to the submission to the customs authorities of the importing country, within twelve months of the said date, of a movement certificate EUR.1 or EUR-MED issued retrospectively by the customs authorities of the exporting country together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly in accordance with the provisions of Article 13.   ARTICLE 39  Annexes  1. Annexes I to IV b to Appendix I to the Regional Convention on pan-Euro-Mediterranean preferential rules of origin are incorporated into and made part of this Protocol as Incorporated Annexes I to IV b to this Protocol and shall apply, mutatis mutandis, subject to the following modifications:  (a) In Annex I:  (i) all references to “Article 5 of this Appendix” shall be understood as references to “Article 6 of this Protocol”; and  (ii) in paragraph 3.1 of Note 3, “a Contracting Party” shall be replaced by “any of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 of this Protocol with which cumulation is applicable”.  (b) In each of Annexes III a and III b, references to “the Contracting Parties” shall be understood as references to “the Parties”.   (c) In each of Annexes IV a and IV b:  (i) only the English and Romanian version of the origin declaration shall be incorporated into this Protocol; and  (ii) the second sentence of footnote 2 shall not be incorporated.  2. The Annexes to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.   ARTICLE 40  Amendments to the Protocol  The Customs Sub-Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this Protocol.     ANNEX A  LIST REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 3(2) AND 4(2)  1. The People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria 2. The Arab Republic of Egypt 3. The State of Israel 4. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan 5. The Republic of Lebanon 6. The Kingdom of Morocco 7. The Palestine Liberation Organization for the benefit of the Palestinian Authority of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip 8. The Syrian Arab Republic 9. The Republic of Tunisia 10. The Republic of Albania 11. Bosnia and Herzegovina 12. The Republic of North Macedonia 13. Montenegro 14. The Republic of Serbia 15. The Republic of Kosovo  16. The Kingdom of Denmark in respect of the Faroe Islands 17. Georgia 18. Ukraine     ANNEX B JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING THE PRINCIPALITY OF ANDORRA  1. Products originating in the Principality of Andorra meeting the conditions of Articles 3(7)(b)(ii) and 4(5)(b)(ii) of Protocol I of this Agreement, and falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonised System shall be accepted by the Parties as originating in the European Union within the meaning of this Agreement.  2. Protocol I shall apply mutatis mutandis for the purpose of defining the originating status of the abovementioned products.    JOINT DECLARATION ANNEX C CONCERNING THE REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO  1. Products originating in the Republic of San Marino, meeting the conditions of Articles 3(7)(b)(ii) and 4(5)(b)(ii) of Protocol I of this Agreement, shall be accepted by the Parties as originating in the European Union within the meaning of this Agreement.  2. Protocol I shall apply mutatis mutandis for the purpose of defining the originating status of the abovementioned products.   PROTOCOL II  ON MUTUAL ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS   ARTICLE 1  Definitions  For the purposes of this Protocol:  (a) ‘customs legislation’ means any legal or regulatory provision applicable in the territories of the Parties, governing the import, export and transit of goods and their placing under any other customs regime or procedure, including measures on prohibition, restriction and control thereof;  (b) ‘applicant authority’ means a competent administrative authority which makes a request for assistance on the basis of this Protocol and which has been designated by a Party for that purpose;  (c) ‘requested authority’ means a competent administrative authority which receives a request for assistance on the basis of this Protocol and which has been designated by a Party for that purpose;  (d) ‘personal data’ means all information relating to an identified or identifiable individual;  (e) ‘operation in breach of customs legislation’ means any violation or attempted violation of customs legislation.     ARTICLE 2  Scope  1. The Parties shall assist each other, in the areas of their competence, in the manner and under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, to ensure the correct application of their customs legislation, in particular by preventing, investigating and combating operations in breach of that legislation.  2. The assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall apply to any administrative authority of the Parties which is competent for the application of this Protocol. It shall not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in criminal matters. Nor shall it cover exchange of information obtained under powers exercised at the request of a judicial authority, except where the communication of such information is authorised by that authority.  3. The assistance to recover duties, taxes or fines is not covered by this Protocol.   ARTICLE 3  Assistance on request  1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall provide the applicant authority with all relevant information which may enable it to ensure that customs legislation is correctly applied, including information regarding noted or planned activities which are or could be operations in breach of customs legislation.  2. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall inform the former of the following:  (a) whether goods exported from the territory of one of the Parties have been properly imported into the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the goods;  (b) whether goods imported into the territory of one of the Parties have been properly exported from the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the goods.  3. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, within the framework of its legal or regulatory provisions, take the necessary steps to ensure special surveillance of:  (a) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (b) places where stocks of goods have been or may be assembled in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that these goods are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (c) goods that are or may be transported in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (d) means of transport that are or may be used in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.   ARTICLE 4  Spontaneous assistance  The Parties shall assist each other, on their own initiative and in accordance with their legal or regulatory provisions, if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs legislation, in particular by providing information pertaining to:  (a) activities which are or appear to be operations in breach of customs legislation and which may be of interest to the other Party;  (b) new means or methods employed in carrying out operations in breach of customs legislation;  (c) goods known to be subject to operations in breach of customs legislation;  (d) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (e) means of transport in respect of which there are reasonable grounds for believing that they have been, are, or may be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.   ARTICLE 5  Delivery and notification  1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, in accordance with legal or regulatory provisions applicable to that authority, take all necessary measures in order to deliver any documents or to notify any decisions originating from the applicant authority and falling within the scope of this Protocol, to an addressee residing or established in the territory of the requested authority.  2. Requests for delivery of documents or notification of decisions shall be made in writing in an official language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to that authority.   ARTICLE 6  Form and substance of requests for assistance  1. Requests pursuant to this Protocol shall be made in writing. They shall be accompanied by the documents necessary to enable compliance with the request. When required because of the urgency of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in writing immediately.  2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include the following information:  (a) the applicant authority;  (b) the requested measure;  (c) the object of and the reason for the request;  (d) the legal or regulatory provisions and other legal elements involved;  (e) indications, as exact and comprehensive as possible, regarding the natural or legal persons who are the target of the investigations;  (f) a summary of the relevant facts and of the enquiries already carried out.  3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to that authority. This requirement shall not apply to any documents that accompany a request under paragraph 1.  4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements set out in this Article, its correction or completion may be requested and precautionary measures may be ordered in the meantime.   ARTICLE 7  Execution of requests  1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority shall proceed, within the limits of its competence and available resources, as though it were acting on its own account or at the request of other authorities of that same Party, by supplying information already in the requested authority's possession, by carrying out appropriate enquiries or by arranging for them to be carried out. This provision shall also apply to any other authority to which the request has been addressed by the requested authority when the latter cannot act on its own.  2. Requests for assistance shall be executed without delay in accordance with the legal or regulatory provisions of the requested Party.  3. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present in the offices of the requested authority, or any other concerned authority in accordance with paragraph 1, to obtain information relating to activities that are or may be operations in breach of customs legislation which the applicant authority needs for the purposes of this Protocol.  4. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present at enquiries carried out in the latter's territory.   ARTICLE 8  Form in which information is to be communicated  1. The requested authority shall communicate the results of enquiries to the applicant authority in writing together with relevant documents, certified copies or other items.  2. That information may be in a computerised form.  3. Original documents shall be transmitted only upon request in cases where certified copies would be insufficient. Those originals shall be returned at the earliest opportunity.   ARTICLE 9  Exceptions to the obligation to provide assistance  1. Assistance may be refused or may be subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions or requirements, in cases where a Party is of the opinion that assistance under this Protocol would:  (a) be likely to prejudice the sovereignty of the Republic of Moldova or that of the UK;  (b) be likely to prejudice public policy, security or other essential interests, in particular in the cases referred to under Article 10(2) of this Protocol; or  (c) violate an industrial, commercial or professional secret.  2. Assistance may be postponed by the requested authority on the ground that it will interfere with an on-going investigation, prosecution or proceeding. In such a case, the requested authority shall consult with the applicant authority to determine if assistance can be given subject to such terms or conditions as the requested authority may require.  3. Where the applicant authority seeks assistance which it would itself be unable to provide if so requested, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. It shall then be for the requested authority to decide how to respond to such a request.  4. For the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the decision of the requested authority and the reasons therefore must be communicated to the applicant authority without delay.    ARTICLE 10  Information exchange and confidentiality  1. Any information communicated in whatsoever form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of a confidential or restricted nature, depending on the rules applicable in each of the Parties. It shall be covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shall enjoy the protection extended to similar information under the relevant laws of the Party that received it.  2. Personal data may be exchanged only where the Party which may receive it undertakes to protect such data in a manner that is considered adequate by the Party that may supply them.  3. The use, in administrative or judicial proceedings instituted in respect of operations in breach of customs legislation, of information obtained under this Protocol shall be considered to be for the purposes of this Protocol. Therefore, the Parties may, in their records of evidence, reports and testimonies and in proceedings and charges brought before the courts, use as evidence information obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. The competent authority which supplied that information or gave access to those documents shall be notified of such use.  4. The information obtained under this Protocol shall be used solely for the purposes of this Protocol. Where one of the Parties wishes to use such information for other purposes, it shall obtain the prior written consent of the authority which provided the information. Such use shall then be subject to any restrictions laid down by that authority.     ARTICLE 11  Experts and witnesses  An official of a requested authority may be authorised to appear, within the limitations of the authorisation granted, as an expert or a witness in administrative or judicial proceedings regarding the matters covered by this Protocol, and may produce such objects, documents or certified copies thereof, as may be needed for the proceedings. The request to the official is made by the applicant authority and must indicate specifically before which administrative or judicial authority the official will have to appear, on which matters and in which capacity (title or qualification).   ARTICLE 12  Assistance expenses  The Parties shall waive all claims against each other for the reimbursement of expenses incurred pursuant to this Protocol, except, as appropriate, for expenses related to experts and witnesses, and those related to interpreters and translators who are not public service employees.   ARTICLE 13  Implementation  1. The implementation of this Protocol shall be entrusted on the one hand to the customs authorities of the Republic of Moldova, and on the other hand to the customs authorities of the UK. They shall decide on all practical measures and arrangements necessary for its application, taking into consideration the rules in force, in particular in the field of data protection. They may recommend to the competent administrative authority amendments which they consider should be made to this Protocol.  2. The Parties shall consult each other and subsequently keep each other informed of the detailed rules of implementation which are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.   ARTICLE 14  Other agreements  1. The provisions of this Protocol shall not affect the obligations of the Parties under any other international agreement or convention.    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the provisions of this Protocol shall take precedence over the provisions of any bilateral agreement on mutual assistance which has been concluded between the UK and the Republic of Moldova, prior to the date this agreement is signed, in so far as the provisions of such a bilateral agreement are incompatible with those of this Protocol.   ARTICLE 15  Consultations  In respect of questions relating to the applicability of this Protocol, the Parties shall consult each other to resolve the matter in the framework of the Customs Sub-Committee set up under Article 176 of this Agreement.   PROTOCOL III   DEFINITIONS  For the purposes of this Agreement:  1. ‘Irregularity’ means any infringement of a provision of the law of the Parties, of this Agreement or ensuing agreements and contracts, resulting from an act or omission by an economic operator, which has, or would have, the effect of prejudicing the budget of the Parties, either by reducing or losing revenue accruing from own resources or by an unjustified item of expenditure.  2. ‘Fraud’ means (a) in respect of expenditure, any intentional act or omission relating to: — the use or presentation of false, incorrect or incomplete statements or documents, which has as its effect the misappropriation or wrongful retention of funds from the budget of the Parties; — the non-disclosure of information in violation of a specific obligation, with the same effect as described in the first indent of this point; — the misapplication of funds referred to in the first indent of this point for purposes other than those for which they were originally granted; (b) in respect of revenue, any intentional act or omission relating to: — the use or presentation of false, incorrect or incomplete statements or documents, which has as its effect the illegal diminution of the resources of the budget of the Parties; — the non-disclosure of information in violation of a specific obligation, with the same effect as described in the first indent of this point; — the misapplication of a legally obtained benefit, with the same effect as described in the first indent of this point.          CCS1220795432 978-1-5286-2357-5 