FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
AND
GEORGIA 
1
Free Trade Agreement Between
the Republic of Turkey and Georgia
PREAMBLE
The Republic of Turkey and Georgia (hereinafter referred to as “the Parties” or
“Turkey” and "Georgia" where appropriate.)
DESIROUS to develop and strengthen the existing friendly relations, especially in the
fields of economic co-operation and trade, with an aim to contribute to the progress of
economic co-operation between the two countries and to increase the scope of mutual
trade exchanges,
CONSCIOUS of the need to associate their efforts to strengthen political stability and
economic development in the region through the encouragement of regional
co-operation,
REFERRING to the mutual interest of the Parties in the continual reinforcement of
the multilateral trading system and considering that the provisions and instruments of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (hereinafter referred to as “GATT
1994”) and the World Trade Organization (hereinafter referred to as “WTO”)
constitute a basis for their foreign trade policy,
TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION the Agreement Establishing an Association
between Turkey and the European Economic Community and the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Georgia,
DECLARING their readiness to undertake measures with a view to promoting
harmonious development of their trade as well as to expanding and diversifying their
mutual co-operation in the fields of joint interest, including fields not covered by this
Agreement, thus creating a framework and supportive environment based on equality,
non discrimination, and a balance of rights and obligations,
CONSIDERING the rights and obligations of the Parties stemming from the GATT
1994 and the WTO,
RESOLVED to lay down for this purpose provisions aimed at abolition of the
obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement, in particular those concerning the establishment of free trade area,
BELIEVING that development of trade and cooperation in the economic and technical
fields is one of the main elements of rapid development strategies of both countries,
2
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the following
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “this Agreement”).
3
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. The Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area between them starting from
the entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement and in conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the other
multilateral agreements on trade in goods annexed to the Agreement establishing
the WTO.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
a) to increase and enhance the economic co-operation between the Parties to raise
the living standards of the population of the two countries;
b) to eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods;
c) to promote, through the expansion of reciprocal trade, the harmonious
development of the economic relations between the Parties;
d) to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Parties;
e) to create conditions for further encouragement of investments particularly for
the development of joint investments in both countries;
f) to promote trade and co-operation between the Parties in third country markets;
g) to contribute by the removal of barriers to trade to the harmonious development
and expansion of world trade.
ARTICLE 2
Basic Duties and Classification of Goods
1. In trade between the Parties covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall apply their
respective customs tariff nomenclature on the classification of goods for imports
into them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which successive reductions set out in this
Agreement are to be applied shall be the Most Favored Nation (MFN) duty that is
in force in the Parties on 1 January 2007.
3. If after 1 January 2007, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes basis, in
particular, reductions resulting from the tariff negotiations in the WTO, such
reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 2 as from that
date when such reductions are applied.
4
4. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective basic duties.
CHAPTER I
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 3
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products originating in the territory of
each Party falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized Commodity Description
and Coding System with the exception of the products listed in Annex I of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 4
Customs Duties on Imports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. The Parties shall abolish on the date of entry into force of this Agreement all
customs duties on imports and any charges having equivalent effect on products
originating in the Republic of Turkey or Georgia.
2. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties on
imports or charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the
Parties.
ARTICLE 5
Customs Duties of a Fiscal Nature
The provisions concerning the abolition of customs duties on imports shall also apply
to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
ARTICLE 6
Customs Duties on Exports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. All customs duties on exports and any charges having equivalent effect shall be
abolished between the Parties upon entry into force of this Agreement.
2. No new customs duties on exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Parties from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
5
ARTICLE 7
Quantitative Restrictions on Exports and Imports and Measures Having
Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of the entry into force of this Agreement no new quantitative
restrictions on exports and imports or measures having equivalent effect shall be
introduced.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and imports in the Parties and measures
having equivalent effect shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
CHAPTER II
BASIC AGRICULTURAL, PROCESSED AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERY
PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 8
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to basic agricultural, processed
agricultural and fishery products originating in the territory of each Party.
2. The term "basic agricultural, processed agricultural and fishery products"
(hereinafter referred to as agricultural products) means, for the purpose of this
Agreement, the products falling within Chapters 01 to 24 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System and the products listed in Annex I of
this Agreement.
ARTICLE 9
Exchange of Concessions
1. The Parties to this Agreement declare their readiness to foster, in so far as their
agricultural policies allow, the harmonious development of trade in agricultural
products and to discuss this issue periodically in the Joint Committee.
2. In pursuance of this objective Protocol I providing the reciprocal concessions
granted under this Agreement to facilitate trade in agricultural products has been
concluded between the Parties.
6
3. Taking into account the role of agriculture in their respective economies, the
development of trade in agricultural products, the high sensitivity of agricultural
products, the rules of their respective agricultural policy and the development of the
liberalization of trade in agricultural products under the WTO, the Parties shall
examine in the Joint Committee meetings the possibilities of granting further
concessions to each other in trade in agricultural products.
4. The Parties shall communicate each other of the changes in their respective
agricultural policies pursued or measures applied, which may affect the conditions
of agricultural trade between the Parties as provided for in this Agreement. On the
request of a Party prompt consultations within the Joint Committee shall be held to
examine the situation.
ARTICLE 10
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
The Parties shall not apply their regulations in sanitary and phytosanitary matters as an
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between
them. The Parties shall apply their sanitary and phytosanitary measures within the rules
and procedures of the GATT 1994 and the other relevant WTO agreements.
CHAPTER III
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 11
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties commit themselves to apply any internal taxes and other charges and
regulations in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994 and other relevant
WTO Agreements.
2. Exporters shall not benefit from refunds of internal indirect taxation, which exceeds
the amount of indirect taxation that has been directly or indirectly imposed on
products exported to the territory of one of the Parties.
ARTICLE 12
Trade Relations Governed by Other Agreements
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs
unions, free trade areas or arrangements for cross-border trade of the Parties with
third countries to the extent that these do not negatively affect the trade regime and
in particular the provisions concerning rules of origin provided for in this
Agreement.
7
2. Exchange of information between the Parties shall take place within the Joint
Committee concerning agreements establishing customs unions or free trade areas
and, where appropriate, on other major issues related to their respective trade
policies with third countries. Such an exchange of information shall take place so as
to ensure that account is taken of the mutual interests of the Parties stated in this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 13
Dumping
If a Party finds that dumping, within the meaning of Article VI of GATT 1994 is taking
place in trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures
against that practice in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the rules
established by agreements related to that Article.
ARTICLE 14
Safeguard Measures
1. Where any product is being imported into either of the Parties in such increased
quantities, each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT
1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguard Measures. This Agreement does not
confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to safeguard
measures.
2. The provisions of Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on
Safeguards shall apply between the Parties.
ARTICLE 15
Re-export and Serious Shortage
1. Where compliance with the provisions of Article 6 and 7 leads to:
a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party maintains,
for the product concerned, quantitative export restrictions, export duties or
measures or charges having equivalent effect; or
b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting
Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to
major difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures
according to the procedures laid down in paragraph 2.
8
2. The difficulties arising from the situations referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
submitted for examination to the Joint Committee. The Committee may take any
decision needed to put an end to the difficulties. If it has not taken such a decision
within thirty days of the matter being referred to it, the exporting Party may apply
appropriate measures on the exportation of the product concerned. The measures
shall be nondiscriminatory and be eliminated when conditions no longer justify
their maintenance.
ARTICLE 16
General Exceptions
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or
goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public
security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants and
environment; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or
archaeological value; the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property.
Such prohibitions or restrictions must not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 17
Balance of Payments Difficulties
Where either Party is in a serious balance of payments difficulties or under threat
thereof, the Party concerned may in accordance with the conditions laid down within
the framework of WTO Agreement, adopt restrictive measures, which shall be of
limited duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of
payments situation. The Party concerned shall inform the other Party forthwith of their
introduction and present to the other Party, as soon as possible, a time schedule of their
removal.
ARTICLE 18
Rules of Origin and Cooperation between the Customs Administrations
1. The Parties agreed to apply the preferential rules of origin in trade between them.
2. Protocol II to this Agreement lays down the preferential rules of origin and related
methods of administrative co-operation.
3. In case these rules of origin are amended, the Joint Committee shall initiate
procedure of amending rules of origin. 
9
CHAPTER IV
STATE MONOPOLIES, COMPETITION RULES, PAYMENTS AND OTHER
ECONOMIC PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 19
Payments and Transfers
The Parties undertake to authorise, in freely convertible currency, in accordance with
the provisions of Article VIII of the Articles of the Agreement of the International
Monetary Fund, any payments and transfers on the current account of balance of
payments between Turkey and Georgia.
ARTICLE 20
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement,
insofar as they may affect trade between the Parties:
a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings
and concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or
effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
b) abuse by one or more undertakings of dominant position in the territories of the
Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof;
c) any state aid which distorts, or threatens to distort, competition by favoring
certain undertakings or the production of certain goods.
2. The Joint Committee shall, within five years of the entry into force of this
Agreement, adopt by decision the necessary rules for the implementation of
paragraph 1. Until these rules are adopted, the provisions of Article 21 shall be
applied as regard the implementation of paragraph 1.c).
3. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid, inter alia by reporting
annually to the other Party on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given
and by providing, upon request, information on aid schemes. Upon request by one
Party, the other Party shall provide information on particular individual cases of
state aid.
4. If any Party considers that a particular practice is incompatible with the terms of the
first paragraph of this Article, and:
10
a) is not adequately dealt with under the implementing rules referred to in
paragraph 2, or
b) in the absence of such rules, and if such practice causes or threatens to cause
serious prejudice to the interest of the other Party or material injury to its
domestic industry, including its services industry,
it may take appropriate measures after consultation within the Joint Committee
or after thirty working days following referral for such consultation.
With reference to practices incompatible with paragraph 1.c), such appropriate
measures, when the WTO rules are applicable to them, may only be adopted in
accordance with the procedures and under the conditions laid down by the WTO
or by any other relevant instrument negotiated under its auspices and applicable
to the Parties.
5. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary adopted in conformity with this
Article, the Parties shall exchange information taking into account the limitations
imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy.
ARTICLE 21
Subsidies
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of subsidies shall be governed by
Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures and the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.
2. If a Party finds that subsidies are granted which affect bilateral trade, the Party
concerned may take appropriate measures in accordance with the above-mentioned
Agreements.
ARTICLE 22
Intellectual Property Rights
1. The Parties to this Agreement shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and nondiscriminatory protection of intellectual property rights, including measures for the
enforcement of such rights against infringement thereof, counterfeiting and piracy,
in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the relevant international
agreements.
2. The Parties to this Agreement shall accord to each other’s nationals treatment no
less favorable than that they accord to their own nationals. Exemption from this
obligation must be in accordance with the substantive provisions of Article 3 of the
TRIPS Agreement.
11
3. The Parties to this Agreement shall grant to each other’s nationals treatment no less
favorable than that accorded to nationals of any other country. Exemptions from
this obligation must be in accordance with the substantive provisions of the TRIPS
Agreement, in particular Articles 4 and 5 thereof.
4. The implementation of this Article shall be regularly reviewed by the Parties. If
problems in the area of intellectual property affecting trading conditions were to
occur, urgent consultations shall be undertaken, at the request of either Party, with a
view to reaching mutually satisfactory solutions.
ARTICLE 23
State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall progressively adjust any state monopoly of a commercial character
so as to ensure that by the end of the fourth year following the entry into force of
this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are
procured and marketed will exist between nationals of the Parties.
2. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to implement
this objective.
ARTICLE 24
Public Procurement
The Parties agree on the objective of a progressive liberalization of public
procurement. The Joint Committee will hold consultations on the implementation of
this objective.
ARTICLE 25
Technical Barriers to Trade
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of technical regulations,
standards, conformity assessment and related measures shall be governed by the
WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Parties shall strengthen their co-operation in the field of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment, with a view to increasing the mutual
understanding of their respective systems, facilitating access to their respective
markets and eliminating technical barriers to trade. The Parties shall consult each
other in the Joint Committee in view of the implementation of the objective set out
in this Article.
12
3. Each Party, upon a request from the other Party, shall submit information on
particular individual cases of standards, technical rules or similar measures.
4. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the Parties agree to hold immediate consultations
in the framework of the Joint Committee where either Party has taken measures
which are likely to create, or have created an obstacle to trade, in order to find an
appropriate solution in conformity with the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers
to Trade.
ARTICLE 26
Trade in Services
1. The Parties shall aim at achieving gradual liberalization and the opening of their
markets for trade in services in accordance with the provisions of the WTO General
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), taking into account ongoing work under
the auspices of the WTO.
2. The Parties shall, at regular intervals in the Joint Committee, review relevant
services sectors and consider further liberalization of trade in services, taking into
account international developments.
CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 27
Establishment of the Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Party shall be represented.
The Joint Committee shall be responsible for the administration of this Agreement
and shall ensure its proper implementation.
2. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall
exchange information and, at the request of any Party, shall hold consultations
within the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep under review the
possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Parties.
3. The Joint Committee may, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of
Article 28, take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement. On other
matters the Joint Committee may make recommendations.
13
ARTICLE 28
Procedures of the Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet at
an appropriate level whenever necessary upon request but at least once a year.
Either Party may request a meeting to be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall act by consensus.
3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Party to this Agreement has accepted
a decision subject to reservation of the fulfillment of constitutional requirements the
decision shall enter into force, if no later date is contained therein, on the date of the
receipt of the written notification stating that such requirements have been fulfilled.
4. The Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure, which shall, inter-alia,
contain provisions for convening meetings, and for the designation of the
Chairperson and his/her term of office.
5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
groups, as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
ARTICLE 29
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures:
a) which it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to
its essential security interests;
b) which relate to the production of, or trade in, arms, munitions or war materials
or to research, development or production indispensable for defense purposes,
provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in
respect of products not intended for specifically military purposes;
c) which it considers essential to its own security in the event of serious internal
disturbances affecting the maintenance of law and order, in time of war or
serious international tension constituting threat of war or in order to carry out
obligations it has accepted for the purpose of maintaining peace and
international security.
14
ARTICLE 30
Fulfillment of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the
objectives of this Agreement and the fulfillment of their obligations under this
Agreement. Should any divergence with respect to the interpretation and application
of this Agreement arise, the Parties shall make every effort through cooperation and
consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory solution.
2. Either Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any actual or
proposed measure or any other matter that it considers might affect the operation of
this Agreement. The Party requesting consultations shall at the same time notify the
other Party in writing thereof and supply all relevant information.
3. The consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee, if any of the Parties so
request, within 10 days from the receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph
2, with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
ARTICLE 31
Notifications and Consultations Procedure
for the Application of Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of any measures set out in
Articles 14, 15, 20, and 30, the Parties to this Agreement shall endeavour to solve
any differences between themselves through direct consultations, and shall inform
the other Party thereof.
2. A Party which is considering to resort to measures shall promptly notify the Joint
Committee thereof. The Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with all
relevant information and give it the assistance required to examine the case.
Consultations between the Parties shall take place without delay in the Joint
Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
3. If, within one month of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the Party
in question fails to put an end to the practice objected to or to the difficulties
notified and in the absence of a decision by the Joint Committee in the matter, the
concerned Party may adopt the measures it considers necessary to remedy the
situation.
4. The measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee. They
shall be restricted, with regard to their extent and to their duration, to what is
strictly necessary in order to rectify the situation, giving rise to their application and
shall not be in excess of the damage caused by the practice or the difficulty in
question. Priority shall be given to such measures that will least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement. 
15
5. The measures taken shall be the subject of regular consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view to their relaxation, or abolition when conditions no longer
justify their maintenance.
6. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior
examination impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 14, 15,
20, and 30 apply forthwith the precautionary measures strictly necessary to remedy
the situation. The measures shall be notified without delay to the Joint Committee
and consultations between the Parties to this Agreement shall take place within the
Joint Committee.
Article 32
Dispute Settlement
1. Either Party may refer to the Joint Committee any dispute relating to the application
or interpretation of this Agreement.
2. The Joint Committee may settle the dispute by means of a decision.
3. Each Party shall be bound to take measures involved in carrying out the decision
referred to in paragraph 2.
4. In the event of it not being possible to settle the dispute in accordance with
paragraph 2, either Party may notify the other of the appointment of an arbitrator;
the other Party must then appoint a second arbitrator within two months.
5. The two arbitrators shall agree on a third arbitrator being a citizen of a third country
of which both Parties have diplomatic relations. In case of failure to agree on the
third arbitrator within two months, the necessary appointment shall be made by the
Joint Committee.
6. The arbitrators’ decisions shall be taken by majority vote.
7. Each Party to the dispute must take the steps required to implement the decision of
the arbitrator.
ARTICLE 33
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where either Party considers that it would be useful and in the interest of the
economies of the Parties to develop the relations established by this Agreement by
extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a request to the other
Party. The Joint Committee shall examine this request and, where appropriate, to
make recommendations, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
16
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be subject
to ratification or approval by the Parties to this Agreement in accordance with their
national legislation.
ARTICLE 34
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement, as well as to its Annexes and Protocols, shall enter
into force on the date of receipt of the latter written notification through diplomatic
channels, by which the Parties inform each other that all necessary requirements
foreseen by their national legislation for the entry into force of this Agreement have
been fulfilled.
ARTICLE 35
Protocols and Annexes
Protocols and Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. The Joint
Committee may decide to amend the Protocols and Annexes in accordance with the
national legislation of the Parties.
ARTICLE 36
Validity and Termination
1. This Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period.
2. Either party may denounce this Agreement by a written notification to the other
Party. The Agreement shall terminate on the first day of the sixth month following
the date when the other Party received the denunciation notice.
ARTICLE 37
Entry into Force
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month, following
the date of the receipt of the latter written notification through diplomatic channels, by
which the Parties inform each other that all necessary requirements foreseen by their
national legislation for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.
17
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized
thereto, have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Tbilisi, this 21st day of November 2007, in two originals each in the Turkish,
Georgian and English languages, all texts being equally authentic. In case of any
divergence in the interpretation of this Agreement, the English text shall prevail.
For the Republic of Turkey For Georgia