MAIN TEXT: 

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA
ON FREE TRADE
 
(Tbilisi, February 3, 1994)
 
        	The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Georgia
        	striving for development of trade and economic cooperation between the Government of Georgia and the Government of the Russian Federation on the basis of equality and mutual advantage;
        	proceeding from the sovereign rights of each Side to the agreement to carry out independent foreign economic policy, to ensure implementation of relevant international obligations and realization of declared intentions;
        	aiming to promote establishment of the common market of commodity, service, capital and labour;
        	striving for creation of appropriate conditions for formation of the customs union between both countries;
        	agreed on the following:
 
Article 1
 
        	1.     	The Contracting Parties shall not apply the customs duties, taxes and charges having equivalent effect on export and import of commodity originated from the customs area of one of the Contracting Parties and designated for delivery to the customs area of another Contracting Party.  According to the agreed commodity nomenclature, peculiarities of application of trade regime are generally drawn up between both countries through annual protocols that are inherent parts of the present agreement.
        	2.     	For objectives and operating period of the present agreement following goods are considered to be originated from the territory of the Contracting Parties:
(a)        	goods, fully produced on the territory of the Contracting Parties;
(b)       	goods, processed on the territory of the Contracting Parties through utilization of raw materials and accessory items originated from third countries, and relatively having changed the identity according to the classification of commodity nomenclature of foreign economic activity based on the harmonized system of description and coding of goods and on combined tariff and statistic nomenclature of European Economic Community, proceeded from the first four marks;
(c)        	goods, produced through utilization of raw materials and accessory items noted in paragraph (b), provided that their aggregate cost does not exceed the fixed share of export part of realized goods.
        	Detailed rules of the origin of goods will be drawn up by the Contracting Parties through the separate document, which will be the inherent part of the present agreement.
 
Article 2
 
        	The Contracting Parties will not impose local taxes or charges directly or indirectly on goods, covered by the present agreement, at the rate that exceeds the level of relevant taxes or charges imposed on analogous goods of the local production or those produced in third countries;
        	The Contracting Parties will not introduce special restrictions or demands towards export and/or import of goods, covered by the present agreement, that in similar cases are not used towards analogous goods of the local production or those produced in third countries;
        	The Contracting Parties will not use different rules towards warehousing, transportation, storage, shipment of goods originated from another country to the agreement as well as towards repayments and remittances, with the exception of rules that in similar cases are used towards domestic goods or those produced in third countries.
 
Article 3
 
        	1.     	The Contracting Parties will refrain from carrying out quantitative restrictions or equivalent measures on export and/or import of goods within the framework of the present agreement.
        	2.     	Quantitative restrictions, noted in paragraph 1 of this Article, may be ascertained unilaterally within reason and in strictly determined terms in the following cases only:
        	in case of sharp commodity deficiency at the domestic market – until stabilization of situation at the market;
        	in case of balance-of-payments deficit – until stabilization of balance‑of‑payments;
        	in case, where any kind of commodity is imported to the territory of one of the Contracting Parties by such an increased quantity or in conditions that cause the damage or threaten to inflict damage on domestic procedures of similar or directly competitive goods;
        	in order to implement measures determined in Article 4 of the present agreement.
        	3.     	Quantitative restrictions noted in paragraph 1 of this Article may be ascertained through mutual agreement between the Contracting Parties and may be included in annual protocols, noted in Article 1 of the present agreement.
        	4.     	The Contracting Parties, which applies quantitative restrictions in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, provides another Contracting Party with necessary information about reasons for establishment, forms and possible terms of application of mentioned restrictions.
        	5.     	The Contracting Parties will strive for settlement, through consultations, of all questions, related to the application of quantitative restrictions arising in accordance with paragraph 2 of the present Article.
 
Article 4
 
        	Each Contracting Parties will not permit the re-export of goods, in regard to the export of which another Side, producing these goods, applies tariff and/or non-tariff regulation measures.
        	The Contracting Parties exchange lists of goods to which tariff or non-tariff regulation measures are used.  Re‑export of such to third countries may be implemented only through the letter of consent and in terms, defined by the authorized body of the producer country.  In case of non-compliance with this provision, the Contracting Party, whose interests are violated, has the right to introduce unilaterally measures of regulation of exportation of commodity at the territory of the Contracting Party, which has committed unauthorized re‑export.  In case of unauthorized re-export, incomes from such re-export are returned to the producer country.
        	The Contracting Parties will annually coordinate terms, nomenclature and volume of the products sanctioned for re-export.
        	For objectives of this Article, under re-export is considered the export of commodity originated from the customs territory of one of the Contracting Parties, by another one out of its customs area with the purpose of the commodity's exportation to the third country.
 
Article 5
 
        	The Contracting Parties will exchange, on regular basis, an information concerning customs issues, including customs statistics.  Authorized bodies to the Contracting Parties will draw up the regulation of exchange of such information through an appropriate document.
 
Article 6
 
        	The Contracting Parties will take measures for approaching the rate of customs duties applied during trade with third countries and to this end they will hold regular consultations.
        	The Contracting Parties will inform each other about all exclusions from customs tariffs effecting in their countries.
Article 7
 
        	In accordance with the legislation operating on their territories, the Contracting Parties will promote the extension and deepening of equal and mutually advantageous economic, scientific and technical cooperation of economic entities of all levels and forms of property, establishment of joint ventures, international companies, with participation of third countries with the aim to use their potential for formation of effective economic space.
 
Article 8
 
        	The Contracting Parties consider that unfair business practice is incompatible with the agreement's objectives, expressed in the following:
        	in concluding agreements between enterprises, their associations that aim to prevent or restrict competition or violate its conditions at the territories of the Contracting Parties;
        	in making actions, through which one or several enterprises, using their dominant condition, restrict competition on the whole territories or on the substantial part of the territory of the Contracting Parties.
 
Article 9
 
        	The Contracting Parties will not use governmental assistance through subsidization or through any other form to the enterprises if such governmental assistance causes violation of normal economic conditions on the territory of another Contracting Party.
 
Article 10
 
        	During the implementation of tariff and non-tariff regulation of bilateral economic relations, for exchange of statistics and for implementation of customs procedures the Contracting Parties agreed to apply common nine-digital commodity nomenclature of foreign economic activity based on the harmonized system of description and coding of goods.  Herewith, for their governmental needs, in case of necessity, the Contracting Parties implement the development of commodity nomenclature beyond the bounds of nine‑digits.
        	Russian Federation implements the conduction of standard pattern of the commodity nomenclature through representatives in relevant international organizations, until the Republic of Georgia will declare independent conduction of the standard copy.
 
Article 11
 
        	The Contracting Parties are agreed that the maintenance of the principle of the freedom of transit is the most significant term for achieving the objectives of the present agreement, and an essential element of the process of their linking up in the system of cooperation and international division of labour.
        	In this regard, each Contracting Party will insure free transit, through its territory, of goods originated from the territory of another Contracting Party and/or of third countries and designated for the customs territory of another Contracting Party or of any other third country. Each Contracting Party will provide exporters and importers with facilities and services for transit security in terms not worse than the ones with facilities and services that are given to own exporters and importers or those of any other third country.
        	The Contracting Party will not request remuneration for warehousing, unloading, storage and shipment services in the currency of any other third State.
 
Article 12
 
        	Nothing in the present agreement shall prevent any Contracting Party from implementing measures that are considered to be necessary for protection of the Contracting Parties’ fundamental interests and that are unconditionally essential for fulfilment of international agreements, participant of which the Contracting Party is, if these measures concern the following:
        	information concerning interests of national security;
        	trade in weapon, ammunitions, military equipment;
        	investigations and production concerning defensive needs;
        	supply with materials and equipment applied in nuclear industry;
        	protection of the public moral and public order;
        	protection of industrial or intellectual property;
        	gold, silver or other precious stones and metals;
        	protection of human health, animals and plants.
 
Article 13
 
        	In order to develop trade between two countries, the Contracting Parties will provide each other with assistance in participating in trade fairs and exhibitions, held in one of the two countries.
 
Article 14
 
        	This agreement does not affect the operation of other agreements, concluded earlier between the Contracting Parties and third countries.
 
Article 15
 
        	Nothing in this agreement prevents the Contracting Parties from establishing relations, without violating objectives and terms of the agreement, with third countries as well as with their associations and international organizations.  However, the Contracting Parties shall hold consultations in such cases, where the mentioned relations may affect the interests of one of the Contracting Parties.
 
Article 16
 
        	Disputes, concerning interpretation and application of the agreement's provisions, shall be settled through negotiations.
 
Article 17
 
        	In order to implement the present agreement and to elaborate recommendations for improvement of trade and economic cooperation between two countries, the Contracting Parties agreed to establish the joint Russian‑Georgian Commission.
 
Article 18
 
        	Sides agreed that the Russian Federation may establish its trade representation in the Republic of Georgia, and the Republic of Georgia may establish its trade representation in the Russian Federation. The legal status, functions and location of trade representations are determined through separate agreements.
 
Article 19
 
        	In the case of the Contracting Parties’ approval, any country may join the present agreement in terms that will be coordinated between this country and the Contracting Parties.
 
Article 20
 
        	Protocol on exclusions from the free trade regime is the inherent part of the present agreement.  Sides undertake to sign this protocol until 15 March 1994.
 
Article 21
 
        	The present agreement may be completed or changed according to preliminary negotiations between the Contracting Parties.  Indicated changes and complements must be fulfilled through the written form.
 
Article 22
 
        	The present agreement comes into effect from the date of exchange of notifications on implementation of intergovernmental procedures that are necessary for the agreement's coming into force, and will be in force within twelve months after the date, when one of the Sides sends the written notification to another one with the purpose of its operation.
 
        	DONE on Tbilisi, on 3 February 1994, in two copies, each in Russian and Georgian languages.  Both texts are equally authentic.

ANNEX TEXT: 

Annex 1
 
PROTOCOL
ON EXCEPTIONS TO FREE TRADE REGIME
TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA
ON FREE TRADE OF FEBRUARY 3, 1994
 
(Moscow, May 7, 1994)
 
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government the Republic of Georgia hereinafter referred to as the Parties have agreed on the following.
 
Article 1
         
      	The exceptions stipulated in Article 1 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Republic of Georgia on Free Trade of February 3, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the Agreement on Free Trade) shall apply on the following:
      	goods within the purview of Russian legislation on export tariffs , licensing and quotas on exports of goods (works, services), effective at the moment of customs declaration of goods, during their export from the Russian Federation to the Republic of Georgia (at the date of signing the present Protocol in force are the following legislation: the Cabinet of Ministers - the Government of the Russian Federation Regulation No.1103 of October 30, 1993 “On fixing rates of the import customs duties and list of goods they apply on”; the Government of the Russian Federation Regulation No.854 of November 6, 1992 “On quotas and licensing of export and import of goods (works, services) in the territory of the Russian Federation”, and the Cabinet of Ministers - the Government of the Russian Federation Regulation No. 1102 of November 2, 1993 “On measures for liberalization of external economic activity” with amendments);
      	goods within the purview of Georgian legislation on export tariffs as well as legislation on licensing and quotas on exports of goods (works, services), effective at the moment of customs declaration of goods, during their export from the Republic of Georgia to the Russian Federation (at the date of signing the present Protocol the Government of the Republic of Georgia Regulation No.267 of March 31, 1993 is in force).
        	The Parties shall immediately notify each other of all the changes of domestic legislation on the above stated issues.
Article 2
 
In respect of the goods subject to tariff and non tariff export restrictions in accordance with Article 1 of this Protocol, Parties shall provide each other most favoured nation regime in regard to:
customs duties, taxes and charges payable upon export, including methods of levying such duties, taxes and fees;
procedures and rules regarding export (import) of the goods, including those that are related to its customs declaration, transit, storage and reloading;
taxes and other domestic charges of any kind directly or indirectly connected with exporting (importing) goods;
rules relating to sale, purchase, transportation, distribution and use of goods on domestic market;
methods of payment and transfer of payments.
 
Article 3
 
The provisions of Article 2 of this Protocol shall not apply to advantages and benefits granted by each of the Parties to:
third countries with the aim of creating a customs union or free trade area or as a result of the establishment of such a union or area;
developing countries, in accordance with international agreements.
 
Article 4
 
The Parties shall not to apply customs export duties on goods, supplied for State needs and clearing or mutual basis in accordance with the Intergovernmental Agreement on Trade-Economic Cooperation as of 1994.
 
Article 5
 
This Protocol is an integral part of the Agreement on Free Trade.
 
Article 6
 
This Protocol becomes effective upon the date of its signing and will be valid until the entry into force of a new Protocol in accordance with Article 1 of the Agreement on Free Trade.
 
        	Done in the City of Moscow, on May 11, 1994 in two originals, each in Russian and Georgian, both texts being equally authentic.
 
(Signatures) 
 
 
Annex 2
 
PROTOCOL
OF AMMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA
ON FREE TRADE AS OF FEBRUARY 3, 1994, SIGNED MAY 11, 1994
 
(Moscow, July 10, 2001)
 
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government the Republic of Georgia hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
taking into account that since the signing of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Georgia on Free Trade as of February 3, 1994, hereinafter – the Agreement, and the Protocol of May 11, 1994 to the Agreement, hereinafter – the Protocol, structural changes have occurred in the national economies as well as in the legislation of the states Parties on tariff and nontariff regulation of foreign economic activity,
taking guidance from the provisions of the Agreement on the Establishment of the Free Trade Area as of April 15, 1994 and the Protocol on Amendments and Additions to the Agreement on the Establishment of the Free Trade Area of April 15, 1994, signed on April 2, 1999,
 have agreed on the following.
 
Article 1
 
To introduce to the Protocol to the Agreement the following amendments:
Article 1 shall read as follows:
 	“The exceptions to free trade regime, stipulated in Article 1 of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Republic of Georgia on Free Trade of February 3, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the Agreement) shall apply on the following:
 	goods within the purview of Russian legislation on export tariffs , licensing and quotas on exports of goods (works, services), effective at the moment of customs declaration of goods, during their export from the Russian Federation to the Republic of Georgia;
 	goods within the purview of Georgian legislation on export tariffs as well as legislation on licensing and quotas on exports of goods (works, services), effective at the moment of customs declaration of goods, during their export from the Republic of Georgia to the Russian Federation.
The exceptions to free trade regime, stipulated in Article 1 of the Agreement in which regard exclusion from application of measures of tariff regulation are not into force, are applied on goods, imported on the territory of the Russian Federation from Georgia, as specified in Annex No.1, and goods, imported on the territory of Georgia from the Russian Federation, as specified in Annex No.2, to this Protocol, are included in tariff exceptions.  
 The exceptions to free trade regime, stipulated in Article 1 of the Agreement in which regard exclusion from application of measures of non-tariff regulation are not into force, are applied on goods, which are subject to the legislation of the Parties on licensing and quotas on import of goods (services, works), effective on the moment of the customs declaration.
        	The Parties shall immediately notify each other of all the changes of domestic legislation on the above stated issues.
The Parties shall notify each other on the introduction of exclusions from the free trade regime on goods, as specified in Annexes No.1 and No.2 to this Protocol, not later than 2 months prior to their introduction”;
in Article 2 the words “during the export; export” shall be replaced by the words “during the export and/or import.”
Article 6 shall be deleted.
 
Article  2
 
This Protocol shall come into force from the date of the last notification about the Parties having performed the inter-state procedures required for the Agreement to become effective, and shall be an inseparable part of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Georgia on Free Trade as of February 3, 1994.
 
Done in the City of Moscow, on July 10, 2001 in two originals, each in Russian and Georgian, both texts being equally authentic.
 
(Signatures)

