AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
KINGDOM OF THAILAND, THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA CONCERNING THE DETER
MINATION OF THE TRIJUNCTION POINT AND THE DE
LIMITATION OF THE RELATED BOUNDARIES OF THE
THREE COUNTRIES IN THE ANDAMAN SEA
The Government of the Kingdom of Thailand,
The Government of the Republic of India, and
The Government of the Republic of Indonesia,
Desiring to strengthen the existing historical bonds of friendship among
the three countries,
And desiring to determine the Injunction point and to delimit the related
boundaries of the three countries in the Andaman Sea,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. For the purposes of this article:
1. The Injunction point of Thailand, India and Indonesia in the Anda
man Sea shall be a point whose co-ordinates are latitude 07&#186;47'00" north,
longitude 95&#186;31'48" east.
2. The boundary of the continental shelves of India and Indonesia shall
be formed by a straight line drawn from the injunction point in the south
westerly direction to point number 0 mentioned in article I of the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Indonesia on the extension of the 1974 continental shelf boundary
between the two countries in the Andaman Sea and the Indian Ocean, signed
at New Delhi on 14th of January 1977, the co-ordinates of which are latitude
07&#186;46'06" north, longitude 95&#186;31'12" east.
3. The seabed boundary of Thailand and India shall be formed by
a straight line drawn from the trijunction point in the north-easterly direction
to point number 1 mentioned in article I of the Agreement between the
Government of the Kingdom of Thailand and the Government of the Republic
of India on the delimitation of the sea-bed boundary between the two countries
in the Andaman Sea, signed in New Delhi on the 22nd of June 1978, 3 the
co-ordinates of which are latitude 07&#186;48'00" north, longitude 95&#186;32'48" east.
4. The seabed boundary of Thailand and Indonesia shall be formed by
a straight line drawn from the trijunction point in the south-easterly direction
to point number L mentioned in article I of the Agreement Between the
Government of the Kingdom of Thailand and the Government of the Republic
of Indonesia relating to the delimitation of the sea-bed boundary between the
two countries in the Andaman Sea, signed at Jakarta on the llth of December
1975,the co-ordinates of which are latitude 07&#186;46'.1 north, longitude
95&#186;33'.1 east.
5. The co-ordinates of the points specified above are geographical co
ordinates derived from the British Admiralty Chart No. 830, published on 3rd
January 1975 and the straight lines connecting them are indicated on chart
attached as annexure A to this Agreement.
6. The actual location of the above-mentioned points at sea shall be
determined by a method to be mutually agreed upon by the competent
authorities of the three respective Governments concerned.
7. For the purposes of paragraph 6, "competent authorities" in relation
to the Kingdom of Thailand shall be Director of the Hydrographie Depart
ment, Thailand, and includes any person authorized by him; in relation to the
Republic of India means the Chief Hydrographer to the Government of India,
and includes any person authorized by him; and in relation to the Republic of
Indonesia shall be the Chief of the Co-ordinating Body for National Survey
and Mapping, Republic of Indonesia, and includes any person authorized by
him.
Article II. The Government of the Kingdom of Thailand, the Govern
ment of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of
Indonesia recognise and acknowledge the sovereign rights of the respective
Governments over the seabed, including the subsoil thereof, within the limits
established by this Agreement.
Article III. If any single geological petroleum or natural gas structure
or field, or other mineral deposit of whatever character, extends across the
boundary lines referred to in article I, the three Governments shall communi
cate to one another all information in this regard and shall seek to reach
agreement as to the manner in which the structure, field or deposit will be most
effectively exploited and the benefits arising from such exploitation will be
equitably shared.
Article IV. Any dispute between the three Governments relating to the
interpretation or implementation of this Agreement shall be settled peacefully
by consultation or negotiation.
Article V. This Agreement shall be ratified in accordance with the
constitutional requirements of each country. It shall enter into force on the
date of the exchange of the instruments of ratification which will take place at
Bangkok as soon as possible.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized by their
respective Governments,have signed this Agreement.
DONE in triplicate at New Delhi on the twenty-second day of June, one
thousand nine hundred and seventy-eight, in the Thai, Hindi, Indonesian and
English languages. In the event of any conflict between the texts, the English
text shall prevail.
For the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand:
Dr. Upadit Pachartyangkun
Minister of Foreign Affairs
For the Government of the Republic of India:
Mr. Atal Bihari Vajpayee
Minister of External Affairs
For the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
Dr. Mochtar Kusumaatmadja
Minister for Foreign Affairs

