
 Republic of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Republic of Tajikistan, and Republic 
of Uzbekistan 
Interstate Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, and the 
Republic of Uzbekistan 
COUNCIL OF PRIME MINISTERS 
AGREEMENT 
between the Governments of the Republics of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz 
Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, and the Republic of Uzbekistan on the 
Parallel Operation of the Energy Systems of Central Asia 
The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, and the Government of the 
Republic of Uzbekistan hereinafter referred to as the Parties, 
Proceeding from multiyear commonality of the historical development, traditional 
economic, scientific and research links, firmly resolving to establish their own 
international relations on the basis of mutual understanding, equity and equality; 
Recognizing that strengthening friendly and good neighborly relations, establishing 
cooperation and mutual support between the Parties meet the traditional interests of 
the CA nations; 
Admitting that the CA energy complexes have been functioning during decades as a 
power grid; 
Considering it important to set favorable conditions for the development of market 
relations between the economic entities, and create an integrated electricity market in 
the future ; 
Trying to set the most reliable and economical power supply regimes for the 
consumers; 
Observing the principles of the European Energy Charter, approved in Hague, 17 
December 1991, 
the Parties agree on the following: 
Article 1 
The Parties, proceeding from the necessity and economic purposefulness to provide 
efficient operation of their own energy systems, using the current electricity 
transmission lines, assume the responsibility to create favorable conditions to develop 
and implement the advantages of a parallel operation of energy systems and restrain 
from actions that may damage the interests of the other Party. 
Article 2 
To form an integrated electricity and capacity market the Parties deem it expedient to 
consider the issue of establishing the regional Electric Power Pool of Central Asia 
(EPP CA). 
Article 3 
The Parties agree that: 
- The parallel operation will ensure a reliable and efficient work of the 
energy systems within the EPP CA; 
- The electric power pool means an aggregate of energy systems of the 
countries, energy producers, and electricity networks, that have been 
united on a voluntary basis to provide conditions for efficient and 
reliable electricity supplies to consumers, gaining maximum 
advantages of the energy systems parallel operation; 
- Each Party shall independently make the layout and identify the 
amount of their own electricity networks for the parallel operation with 
the EPP CA, proceeding from their own national interests. 
Article 4 
The Parties, while considering the issue of the EPP CA use, recognize that the reliable 
and economic electricity supply, and the creation of the electricity and capacity 
market is ensured through mutually coordinated technical and economic policies. 
Article 5 
The parallel operation of the CA energy systems shall be achieved through currently 
operating and newly constructed 500 -220 kV intersystem electricity transmission 
lines. 
The indispensable requirement for the energy systems parallel operation shall be 
based on the principle of electric power and capacity self balance for each EPP CA 
energy system with regard to the concluded agreements. 
Given the recognition of the transmission lines capability, the energy system 
operation mode shall be implemented through the stipulated mutual electricity and 
capacity deliveries 
Article 6 
The Parties use and serve the international transmission lines according to the 
ownership of the property referred to in the balance sheet. 
Article 7 
The Parties agree to undertake concerted actions to implement energy transfers and 
the agreements on electricity transits, and avoid unauthorized electric power seizures 
by consumers. 
Article 8 
The Parties engage themselves to rendering mutual assistance under emergent 
conditions to remove accidents/breakdowns at energy facilities and restore normal 
energy supply for consumers. 
Article 9 
The Parties agree to take a coordinated decision on the unimpeded and duty-free 
passing treatments for the operating and repair personnel, equipment, and materials of 
the other Party to serve the power transmission lines. 
Article 10 
The Parties agree to take a coordinated decision not to impose custom duties, taxes 
and other collections, to be paid into the budget, on power transfers and transits 
through the international power transmission lines, and also on the frequency 
regulation services. 
Article 11 
Any disputes concerning interpretation and application of the Agreement will 
be resolved through mutual consultations and negotiations. 
Article 12 
Given the mutual consent of the Parties, amendments and addenda can be introduced 
in the Agreement. The amendments shall be formalized by separate protocols, and 
will become integral parts of the Agreement. 
Article 13 
The Agreement is open to enter for other countries that share these goals and 
principles. 
Article 14 
The Agreement is valid for a period of five years and will be automatically renewed 
for additional five-year periods in case the Parties do not take any other decision. 
Any Party may cancel the participation in the Agreement through a written 
notification of the depository not less than one month in advance before termination. 
The Agreement shall come into force upon the signatures. 
Done in Bishkek 17 June 1999 in one original copy in Russian. 
The original copy remains in the ICKKTU Executive Committee, which will submit 
certified copies to each member country that, have signed the Agreement. 
For the Republic of 
Kazakhstan 
For the Kyrgyz 
Republic 
For the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
For the Republic of 
Uzbekistan 
N. Balgimbaev A. Muraliev A. Azimov U. Sultanov

