FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA (TAIWAN)


PREAMBLE

The Government of the Republic of Guatemala and the Government of the Republic of China (Taiwan), determined to:

STRENGTHEN the traditional bonds of friendship and the spirit of cooperation between their peoples;

RECOGNIZE the strategic and geographical position of each nation in its respective regional market;

ACHIEVE a better balance in your business relationships;

CREATE a broader and more secure market for goods and services produced in their own territories;

RECOGNIZE the differences in the levels of development and in the size of their economies and the need to create opportunities for economic development;

AVOID distortions in their reciprocal trade;

ESTABLISH clear and mutually beneficial rules for the commercial exchange of their goods and services, as well as for the promotion and protection of investments in their territories;

RESPECT their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakech Treaty establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO), as well as other bilateral and multilateral cooperation instruments;

STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their companies in world markets;

CREATE employment opportunities and improve the living standards of their peoples in their respective territories;

PROMOTE economic development consistent with the protection and conservation of the environment, as well as sustainable development;

PRESERVE its ability to safeguard the public welfare; and

PROMOTE the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening trade relations between both nations;

HAVE AGREED as follows:

PART ONE

GENERAL FEATURES

CHAPTER 1

INITIAL PROVISIONS


Article 1.01Establishment of a free trade zone

The Parties to this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services, establish a free trade area.

Article 1.02Goals

The present Treaty has as objectives:

a) promote the expansion and diversification of trade in goods and services between the Parties;

b) eliminate barriers to trade and facilitate the cross-border movement of goods and services between the territories of the Parties;

c) promote conditions of fair competition between the Parties;

d) promote, protect and substantially increase investments in each Party;

e) create effective procedures for the execution and fulfillment of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of controversies; and

f) Establish guidelines for bilateral cooperation aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement.

Article 1.03Relationship with other international agreements

1. The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them under the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which they are party.

2. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the provisions of the agreements referred to in paragraph 1, the provisions of this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.

Article 1.04 Observance

Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional provisions, the adoption of all necessary measures to comply with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory and at all levels of government.

Article 1.05Succession of Agreements

Any reference in this Agreement to any other Agreement or international agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms to a successor Agreement or international agreement to which the Parties are party.

 

EPISODE 2

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Article 2.01General Application Definitions

For purposes of this Agreement, except as otherwise provided:

Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994, included in interpretative notes, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, dated April 15, 1994;

TRIPS means the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

customs duty means any tax, duty or import duty or other charge of any kind imposed in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge in connection with such importation, except:

a) any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article III of the GATT 1994;

b) any duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered;

c) any premium offered or collected on or in relation to Imported merchandise, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariff-quota or tariff preference quotas; and

d) countervailing or antidumping duties that are applied in accordance with the national legislation in force of a Party and applied in accordance with Chapter 7 (Unfair Trade Practices);

chapter means the first two digits of the Harmonized System ;

Commission means the Agreement Administrative Commission established pursuant to Article 17.01 (Agreement Administrative Commission ) ;

days means calendar days, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays;

enterprise means any legal entity incorporated or organized under the applicable laws of a Party, whether or not for profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned, including companies, partnerships, foundations, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures or other associations;

State enterprise means an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party, through domain rights;

existing means in force as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

measure means any law, regulation, procedure, requirement, provision or practice, among others;

merchandise means any material, substance, product or part;

good of a Party means a national product as understood in the GATT 1994, or that good that (the Parties agree to attribute that character, and includes a good originating from that Party. A good of a Party may incorporate materials from other countries;

originating good means a good that qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

national means a natural person of a Party under Annex 2.01;

Party means the Republic of Guatemala or the Republic of China (Taiwan);

heading means the first four digits of the Harmonized System;

person means a natural person or a company;

person of a Party means a national or company of a Party;

producer means a person who manufactures, produces, processes, or assembles a good, or who grows, develops, raises, mines, extracts, harvests, fishes, hunts, gathers, gathers, hunts, or captures a good;

Tariff Elimination Program means "Tariff Elimination Program", as set forth in Exhibit 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program);

Uniform Regulations means "Uniform Regulations", established pursuant to Article 5.11 (Uniform Regulations);

Secretariat means "Secretariat", established pursuant to Article 17.03 (Secretariat);

Harmonized System means the "Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System", including its general rules of interpretation and its section, chapter, heading and subheading legal notes, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied it in their respective laws. customs duties;

subheading means the first six digits of the Harmonized System; and

territory means the terrestrial, maritime and air space of each Party, as well as its exclusive economic zone and its continental shelf, over which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction, in accordance with its national legislation and international law.

ANNEX 2.01

COUNTRY SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS in pdf format

 

SECOND PART

MERCHANDISE TRADE

CHAPTER 3

NATIONAL TREATMENT AND ACCESS OF GOODS TO THE MARKET

Section I - Definitions and Scope of Application


Article 3.01 Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, it shall be understood as:

samples without commercial value:

a) raw materials and merchandise whose dimensions, quantities, weight, volume or presentation are such as to indicate, without a doubt, that they are not usable for anything other than demonstration or proof;

b) the objects of common materials fixed on cards, supports or clearly presented as samples in accordance with the uses of the trade;

c) raw materials and merchandise, as well as the leftovers in these raw materials or merchandise, which have been rendered useless for anything other than demonstration, by laceration, perforation, placement of indelible marks or any other effective means to avoid any possibility to be commercialized; and

d) Goods that are not subject to the conditions established in subparagraphs a) to c), consisting of:

i) non-consumable merchandise, with a unit value of no more than ten (10 US$) United States dollars, which are made up of unique specimens of each series or quality; and

ii) consumable merchandise with a unit value of not more than ten (10 US$) United States dollars, including those wholly or partially made up of specimens of the same type or quality, provided that the quantity and manner of presentation of such samples exclude any possibility of commercialization.

printed advertising material: products classified in chapter 49 of the harmonized system, including brochures, pamphlets, flyers, trade catalogues, yearbooks published by trade associations, as well as tourist promotional material and posters used to promote, advertise or advertise an originating good or service, and that they are supplied free of charge.

agricultural products or agricultural merchandise : the products listed in Annex I of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture, and any subsequent modifications agreed in the WTO.

Article 3.02 Area of ​​application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties.

 

Section II- National Treatment

Article 3.03 National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of another Party, in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to that end Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement. and are an integral part of it.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 relating to national treatment shall mean, with respect to a Party, including its departments, municipalities or provinces, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that Party accords to any directly competitive or substitutable originating goods of origin. national.

Section III _ _- Tariffs

Article 3.04 Tariff Reduction Program

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party may increase an existing customs duty or adopt a new customs duty on originating goods.

2. The Parties agree to establish the tariff reduction program in Annex 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program) for originating goods.

3. Paragraph 1 is not intended to prevent a Party from creating a new tariff item, as long as the customs duty applicable to the corresponding goods is not greater than that applicable to the item item itemized.

4. At the request of either Party, the Parties shall hold consultations to examine the possibility of improving the tariff treatment provided for in Annex 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program). An agreement between the Parties to improve the tariff treatment of a good will prevail over any customs duty or preference established in their programs for that specific good once approved by each Party, in accordance with the applicable legal procedures.

5. Paragraph 1 of this article does not prohibit a Party from increasing a customs duty to a level no higher than that established in Annex 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program), when said customs duty had previously been unilaterally reduced to a lower level. to that established in Annex 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program).

6. During the tariff reduction process, the Parties undertake to apply in their reciprocal trade of originating goods, the lower of the tariffs resulting from the comparison between the one established in accordance with the respective Tariff Elimination Program and the current one of accordance with Article I of the GATT 1994 (MFN).

Article 3.05 Temporary admission of goods

1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary admission free of customs duties for the following goods, regardless of their origin:

a) professional equipment, including press and television equipment, radio broadcasting and cinematography equipment, necessary for the exercise of business, trade or professional activities;

b) merchandise intended for display or demonstration; c) commercial samples, advertising films and recordings; and d) merchandise admitted for sporting purposes.

2. Each Party, upon request of the person concerned and for reasons that its customs authority considers valid, shall extend the term for temporary admission beyond the period initially set, in accordance with its national legislation,

3. Neither Party shall condition the temporary admission free of customs duties to a good indicated in paragraph 1, to conditions other than that the good:

a) is not subject to sale or lease while remaining in its territory;

b) It is accompanied by a bond in an amount that does not exceed the charges that would be owed in its case for the final entry or import, refundable at the time of export of the merchandise;

c) is susceptible to identification at the time of export;

d) is exported within the period established in the current legislation of each Party

e) is admitted in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use; and

f) is otherwise admissible into the territory of the Party in accordance with its law.

4. If any of the conditions imposed by a Party under paragraph 3 have not been met, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charges that would normally be due for the good plus any other charges or penalties established under its law. .

5. Each Party shall adopt, through its customs authority, procedures that facilitate the expeditious dispatch of the merchandise admitted in accordance with this Article.

6. Each Party shall allow goods temporarily admitted under this Article to be exported through a customs port other than the port through which they were admitted.

7. Each Party, through its competent customs authority, in accordance with its national legislation, shall exempt the importer or other person responsible for a good admitted in accordance with this Article, from any responsibility for the impossibility of exporting the good by presenting evidence satisfactory to the customs authority that the merchandise has been destroyed within the original term set for temporary admission.

8. Subject to Chapters 10 (Investment) and 11 (Cross-Border Trade in Services):

a) each Party shall allow a container used in international transport that has entered its territory from the territory of the other Party, to leave its territory by any route that is reasonably related to the prompt and economic departure of such container;

b) no Party shall require a bond, nor impose any penalty or charge, solely because the port of entry of the container is different from the port of exit;

c) no Party shall condition the release of any obligation, including any bond, that it has applied to the entry of a container into its territory, on its departure through a particular port; and 3-4

d) no Party shall require that the carrier that brings a container to its territory from the territory of another Party be the same carrier that brings it to the territory of another Party.


Article 3.06 Duty Free Import for Samples without Commercial Value and Printed Advertising Material

Each Party shall grant duty-free entry to samples of no commercial value and printed advertising material imported from the territory of the other Party,

Article 3.07 Customs Valuation

As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the customs valuation principles applied to trade between the Parties shall be those established in the Customs Valuation Agreement, including its annexes. Additionally, the Parties will not determine the customs value of the goods based on the officially established minimum prices.

Section IV- Non-tariff measures


Article 3.08 Internal Supports

1. The Parties recognize that domestic support measures can be important for their agricultural sectors, but that they can also distort trade and affect production. In this sense, the Parties will apply domestic aid in accordance with the provisions of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture or its successor, and when a Party decides to support its agricultural producers, it will guarantee that the benefits of these programs, in accordance with the instruments relevant laws, do not distort the internal trade of the other Party, nor diminish the opportunity for the goods of the other Party to have access to the market of the other Party

2. To guarantee transparency, the Parties agree that the Market Access Committee, established in Article 3.15, will continuously and permanently analyze the status of all domestic support measures, seeking to assess compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1. Likewise, the Parties will exchange information in a timely manner or, at the request of a Party, will carry out consultations in relation to this matter at any time.


Article 3.09 Import and Export Restrictions

1. The Parties agree to immediately eliminate non-tariff barriers, with the exception of the rights of the Parties in accordance with Articles XX and XXI of the GATT 1994, and those regulated in Chapter 8 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 9 (Standardization Measures, Metrology and Authorization Procedures).

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the import of any good of another Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of another Party, except the provisions of Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof.

3. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations in accordance with the GATT of 1994, which prohibits in any circumstance, any type of restriction, price requirements for exports and, except as permitted in the execution of resolutions and commitments regarding countervailing duties. and antidumping, price requirements for imports, including minimum and reference prices.

4. In the event that one of the Parties maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import or export of goods originating from the other Party, the first Party must establish, if required, that the measure is compatible with this Agreement and with the WTO agreements.

5. The Parties establish Annex 3.09 (Import and Export Restrictions). Paragraphs 1 to 3 shall not apply to the measures established in said Annex.

6. If a Party owns state trading enterprises, such Party shall ensure that its activities will be conducted solely on the basis of commercial considerations, such as price, quality, availability, marketability, transportation, and all conditions of purchase and sale. Said Party shall consider a fair and equitable treatment of the trade of the other Party, so that the activities of these companies do not become obstacles to trade, in accordance with Article XVII of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and for that purpose this Article and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.


Article 3.10 Consular Rights

As of the entry into force of this Treaty, neither Party will require consular fees or charges, nor will it require consular formalities on goods originating from the other Party.


Article 3.11 Country of Origin Marking

1. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under Article IX of the GATT 1994 and any successor agreement.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the establishment and application of the respective legislation on country of origin marking shall not have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 3.12 Export Taxes

Except as provided in Annex 3.09 (Import and Export Restrictions), upon the entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, levy or charge on the export of goods to the territory of the other Party.

Article 3.13 Special Safeguard Measures

1. The Parties may apply a special safeguard measure (SGE) at any time in a calendar year, to the products listed in Annex 3.13 (Products subject to Special Safeguard Measures), when imports of a product from the other Party exceed the levels established in Annex 3.13. The established levels will be a percentage of the average annual growth of imports made during the last 3 calendar years; as long as there have been consecutive imports in those years.

2. The application of the SGE will consist of an increase to the MFN tariff established either at the time of importation or on July 31, 2005, whichever is lower.

3. The application of the SGE will not be subject to any compensation.

4. The duration of the SGE will be up to eighteen (18) months, to be extended for up to an equal period. The Party shall notify the other Party of its intention to extend said measure at least thirty (30) days prior to its expiration, if the conditions that originated it persist.

5. The adopted SGE will take effect from the day the measure is published in the dissemination body provided for in the Party's legislation, incorporating the pertinent information that justifies its implementation. The Party that imposes the measures shall notify the other Party thereof at least fifteen (15) days before their entry into force. 3-7

6. Notwithstanding the application of the SGE, the Parties may hold consultations at any time to exchange information and to try to reach mutually beneficial agreements.

7. When new products are incorporated into the Tariff Elimination Program included in Annex 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program) the Parties may include them in Annex 3.13 (Products subject to Special Safeguard Measures).

8. The SGE may not be applied to those products listed under the exclusion category or subject to the tariff quota system.

Article 3.14 Distinctive Products

1. For labeling purposes, the Government of Taiwan recognizes coffee as a distinctive Guatemalan product, especially coffee from the regions of Antigua, Huehuetenango, Cobán, San Marcos, Oriente, Atitlán and Arraijanes. Therefore, Taiwan will not allow the commercialization and sale of any product such as Café de Guatemala, Café Antigua, Café Huehuetenango, Café Cobán, Café San Marcos, Café Oriente, Café Atitlán and Café Fraijanes, unless it has been made with coffee originating from Guatemala or, where appropriate, the aforementioned regions.

2. The Parties may recognize other regions as well as other distinctive products after the entry into force of this Agreement. For such purposes, the Parties will hold consultations in the Market Access Committee.

Article 3.15 Market Access Committee

1. The Parties establish the Market Access Committee, the composition of which is indicated in Annex 3.15. (Market Access Committee).

2. The Market Access Committee will meet periodically, and at the request of a Party or the Commission, to ensure the effective implementation and administration of Chapter 3 (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods).

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 17.05(2) (Committees), the Committee shall have the following functions:

a) supervise the execution and administration of this Chapter by the Parties;

b) at the request of either Party, review any proposed modification or addition;

c) make recommendations to the Commission for any modification or addition;

d) consider any other matter related to the execution and administration of this Agreement

e) recommend to the Treaty Commission the establishment of sub-committees or technical groups, when appropriate;

f) The committee will continuously or permanently analyze the status of all domestic support measures of the Parties, as well as any modification to these measures, seeking to assess compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 3.08.

ANNEX 3.04

TARIFF RELIEF PROGRAM in pdf format

APPENDIX TO ANNEX 3.04

PROCEDURE FOR THE TAIWAN-GUATEMALA SUGAR QUOTA in pdf format

ANNEX 3.09

IMPORT AND EXPORT RESTRICTIONS in pdf format

ANNEX 3.13

PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO SPECIAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES in pdf format

ANNEX 3.15

MARKET ACCESS COMMITTEE in pdf format

OFFER LIST FOR THE TRADE AGREEMENT WITH GUATEMALA - TAIWAN in pdf format

TAIWAN AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY LIST in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 4

RULES OF ORIGIN


Article 4.01 Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms are known by:

CIF : the value of the imported merchandise that includes insurance and freight costs to the port or place of introduction in the importing country;

FOB : free on board, regardless of the means of transport, at the point of direct shipment from the seller to the buyer;

material: a good that is used in the production of another good and includes ingredients, parts, components, and goods that were physically incorporated into another good or were subjected to a process in the production of another good;

indirect material: a good used in the production, verification or inspection of another good, but that is not physically incorporated into it; or a good that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of other good, including:

a) fuel, power, solvents and catalysts;

b) equipment, apparatus and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;

c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;

d) tools, dies and molds;

e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

f) lubricants, greases, composite materials and other materials used in the production, operation of equipment or maintenance of buildings; and

g) any other goods that are not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be part of said production;

fungible goods or materials : interchangeable goods or materials for commercial purposes whose properties are essentially identical and that it is not possible to differentiate one from the other, by a simple visual examination;

goods obtained or produced in their entirety, in the territory of one of the Parties:

a) minerals extracted or obtained in the territory of that Party;

b) plants and plant products harvested, picked or gathered in the territory of that Party;

c) live animals, born and raised in the territory of that Party;

d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, aquaculture, gathering or capture in the territory of that Party;

e) goods obtained from live animals in the territory of that Party;

f) fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained outside the territorial sea of ​​the Parties by fishing vessels registered or registered by that Party and flying the flag of that Party or by fishing vessels leased by companies established in the territory of that Party;

g) Goods obtained or produced on board factory ships, from the goods identified in subparagraph f), provided that the factory ships are registered or enrolled in that Party and fly the flag of that Party or are leased by companies established in the territory of that Party;

h) goods obtained from the seabed or subsoil outside the territorial sea of ​​a Party, by a Party or a person of a Party, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;

i) waste and scrap from manufacturing or processing operations in the territory of the shower Party and which are suitable only for disposal of waste and scrap or for the recovery of raw materials; either

j) Goods produced in the territory of that Party, exclusively from the goods mentioned in paragraphs a) to i) above;

generally accepted accounting principles : consensually recognized or substantially authorized support given in the territory of one of the Parties with respect to the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, the disclosure of information and the preparation of financial statements. The generally accepted accounting principles can be constituted in broad guidelines for general application, as well as detailed standards, practices and procedures;

producer; a "producer" as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions);

production : methods of obtaining goods including manufacturing, producing, growing, assembling, processing, harvesting, raising, birthing, mining, extracting, hunting, gathering, collecting, fishing, trapping, and capturing;

value : the value of a merchandise or material for the purposes of calculating the customs tariff or for the application of the norms of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

transaction value of a material: the actual price to be paid or payable for a good related to the transaction made by the producer of the material, in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusted in accordance with the principles of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Article 8 thereof, regardless of whether the merchandise is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the producer of the > material; and

transaction value of a good: the actual price to be paid or payable for a good related to the transaction made by the producer of the good, in accordance with the principles of Article 1 of the Customs Valuation Agreement, adjusting in accordance with the principles of paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Article 8 thereof, regardless of whether the merchandise is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Agreement will be the producer of the merchandise.

Article 4.02 Instruments of Application and Interpretation

1. For the purposes of this Chapter:

a) the tariff classification of the goods will be based on the Harmonized System; and

b) The principles and rules of the Customs Valuation Agreement will be used to determine the value of a merchandise or a material.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Customs Valuation Agreement will be applied to determine the origin of a merchandise, as follows:

a) the principles and rules of the Customs Valuation Agreement will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications that circumstances require, as they would be applied to international transactions; and

b) the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail over those of the Customs Valuation Agreement, when there is incompatibility,

Article 4.03 Originating Merchandise

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a good shall be considered as originating in the territory of a Party, when:

a) is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of that Party;

b) is produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;

c) is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification, a regional value content or other requirements, as specified in Annex 4.03 and the good complies with the other provisions applicable in this Chapter;

d) is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from one or more non-originating materials is considered as parts, according to the Harmonized System used in the production of the good that does not comply with a change in tariff classification because :

Yo. the good was imported into the territory of one or both Parties without assembly or disassembly, and has been classified as an assembled good in accordance with rule 2 (a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System;

ii. the heading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and specifically describes them, and that heading is not divided into subheadings; either

iii. the subheading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and specifically describes them; provided that the regional content value of the merchandise, determined in accordance with Article 4.07, is not less than thirty-five percent (35%), and the merchandise complies with the other applicable provisions of this Chapter, unless the merchandise specific applicable rule of origin from Annex 4.03 under which the good is classified, specify a different regional heat content requirement, in which case that requirement shall apply. The rules set forth in this literal do not apply to merchandise included in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System.

2. If a good of a Party complies with the specific rule of origin established in Annex 4.03, it shall not be additionally required to comply with the regional content value requirement established in paragraph 1 (d).

3. For the purposes of this Chapter, the production of a good from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in Annex 4.03, must be made entirely in the territory of one or both Parties, and the merchandise must satisfy all the applicable requirements of this Chapter.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, goods that are the result, exclusively, of the minimum operations established in Article 4.04 and carried out in the territory of one or both Parties, shall not be considered originating, unless the rules of specific origin in Annex 4.03 indicate otherwise.

Article 4.04 Minimum Operations or Processes

The minimum operations or processes that individually or combined with each other, do not confer origin to a merchandise, are the following;

a) operations necessary for the preservation of the goods during transport or storage, including aeration, ventilation, drying, refrigeration, freezing, removal of damaged parts, application of oil, anticorrosive paint or protective coatings, placement of salt, sulfur dioxide or some other aqueous solution;

b) simple operations that consist of cleaning, washing, screening, sifting or shaking, selection, classification or grading, thinning; peeling, shelling or chipping, shelling, pitting, crushing or squeezing, rinsing, removal of dust or damaged or damaged parts, classification, division of bulk shipments, grouping of packages, affixing of marks, labels or distinguishing signs on the products and its packaging, packaging, unpacking or repackaging;

c) combination or combined operations of goods that have not resulted in a significant difference in the characteristics of the goods before and after that combination or mixture was produced;

d) the simple gathering or assembling of parts of products to constitute a complete merchandise, formation of sets or assortments of merchandise;

e) operations of simple dilution in water or ionization and salting, which have not changed the nature of the goods; and

f) slaughter of animals.

Article 4.05 Indirect Materials

Indirect materials will be considered as originating regardless of their place of production or elaboration, and the value of those materials will be included in the costs as indicated in the accounting records of the producer of the good.

Article 4.06 Accumulation

1. A Party may only accumulate origin with goods originating in the territory of the other Party.

2. Originating materials or goods originating in the territory of a Party, incorporated into a good in the territory of the other Party, shall be considered as originating in the territory of the latter.

3. A good is originating when it is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, by one or more producers, as long as the goods comply with the requirements established in Article 4.03 and with the other requirements applicable to this Chapter. .

Article 4.07 Regional Value Content

1. The regional content value of the goods will be calculated according to the following formula:

VCR = [(VM- VMN / MV] * 100

where:

RVC is the regional value content, expressed as a percentage;

VR/I is the transaction value of the merchandise adjusted on an FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 2. In the event that such value does not exist or cannot be determined in accordance with the principles and standards of Article 1 of the Valuation Agreement Customs, it will be calculated according to the principles and rules of Articles 2 to 7 of said Agreement; and

VNM is the transaction value of non-originating materials adjusted on a CIF basis, except as provided in paragraph 5, in the event that such value does not exist or cannot be determined in accordance with the principles and rules of Article 1 of the Valuation Agreement Customs, it will be calculated in accordance with the principles and rules of Articles 2 to 7 of said Agreement.

2. When a merchandise is not exported directly by its producer, the value will be adjusted up to the point in which the buyer receives the merchandise within the territory where the producer is located.

3. When the origin is determined by the regional content value method, the required percentage will be specified in Annex 4.03 in the corresponding specific rule of origin.

4. All the records of the costs considered for the calculation of the regional content value will be recorded and maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles, applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.

5. When the producer of a good acquires a non-originating material within the territory of a Party where it is located, the value of the non-originating material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the product. material from the supplier's warehouse to the producer's location.

6. For regional value content calculation purposes, the value of non-originating materials used in the production of a good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used in the production of an originating material acquired and used in the production of said merchandise.

Article 4.08 de minimis

1. A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of this good that does not comply with the change in tariff classification requirement established in Annex 4.03 does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the transaction value of the merchandise determined in accordance with Article 4.07,

2. In the case of merchandise that is classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the percentage indicated in paragraph 1 will refer to the weight of the fibers or yarns with respect to the weight of the merchandise produced.

3. Paragraph 1 does not apply to a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 1 through 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading from that of the good. for which the origin is being determined in accordance with this Article.


Article 4.09 Goods and Fungible Materials

1. When originating and non-originating fungible goods or materials are used in the production of an originating fungible good or materials, the origin of these fungible goods or materials may be determined, either by physical segregation of each good or material, or by applying one of the following inventory management methods, at the producer's choice:

a) first-in, first-out (FIFO) method;

b) last in, first out (LIFO) method; either

c) method of averages.

2. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in the warehouse, and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of the other Party, the origin of the goods shall be determined based on one of the inventory management methods mentioned in the previous paragraph.

3. Once selected by the producer, the inventory management method mentioned in the previous paragraph will be used throughout the period or fiscal year of said producer,

Article 4.10 Games or Assortments of Merchandise

1. A set or assortment of merchandise that is classified in accordance with rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, as well as merchandise whose description according to the Harmonized System nomenclature is specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in that set or assortment complies with the rules of origin established in this Chapter and in Annex 4.03.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed the percentage established in paragraph 1 of Article 4.08. with respect to the value of the game or assortment, adjusted on the basis indicated in Article 4.07, paragraphs 1 or 2, as the case may be.

3. The provisions of this Article shall prevail over the specific rules of origin established in Annex 4.03.

Article 4.11 Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. Accessories, spare parts or tools delivered with the merchandise as a normal part of the merchandise will be considered part of the merchandise and will not be taken into account to determine if all non-originating materials used in the production of a merchandise comply with the corresponding change. tariff classification established in Annex 4.03, provided that:

a) the accessories, spare parts or tools are not invoiced separately from the merchandise; and

b) the quantity and value of these accessories, spare parts or tools are the usual ones for the merchandise.

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts or tools will be considered as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the merchandise.

3. For those accessories, spare parts or tools that do not meet the aforementioned conditions, the rules of origin will be applied to each of them respectively or separately, in accordance with this Chapter.

Article 4.12Containers and Packaging Materials for Retail Sale

1. When the containers and packaging materials in which a merchandise is presented for retail sale are classified in the Harmonized System with the merchandise they contain, they will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the merchandise comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.03,

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of said containers and packaging materials will be taken into account as originating or non-originating material, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the merchandise. commodity.

Article 4.13 Shipping Containers and Packaging Materials

The containers and packaging materials in which the merchandise is packed for transport will not be taken into account for the purposes of establishing whether:

a) the non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in Annex 4.03; either

b) the good satisfies the regional value content requirement.

Article 4.14Transit and Transshipment

An originating good will not lose such character when it is exported from one Party to the other Party and during its transport passes through the territories of one or more countries that are not Parties, provided that the following requirements are met:

a) the transit is justified by geographical reasons or by considerations related to international transport requirements;

b) the merchandise is not intended for trade, consumption or use in transit countries;

c) during its transport and temporary storage, the merchandise is not subjected to operations other than loading, unloading or any other operation necessary to ensure its conservation; and

d) the merchandise remains under the control of a customs authority in the territory of a non-Party country.

ANNEX 4.03

SPECIFIC RULES OF ORIGIN in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 5

CUSTOMS PROCEDURES RELATED TO THE RULES OF ORIGIN


Article 5.01 Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood as:

customs authority: is the authority that, according to the respective laws of each Party, is responsible for administering and applying customs laws and regulations;

competent authority: in the case of the Republic of Guatemala, the Ministry of Economy, or its successor; and in the case of the Republic of China (Taiwan), the customs authority under the Ministry of Finance, or its successor;

certifying authority: in the case of the Republic of Guatemala, the Ministry of Economy or its successor; and in the case of the Republic of China (Taiwan), the designated authority is the Bureau of Foreign Trade (BOFT), the Ministry of Economic Affairs, or its successor, or other agencies authorized by the BOFT or its successor ;

valid certificate of origin : a certificate of origin in the format referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 5.02, completed, dated, and signed by the exporter of a good in the territory of one of the Parties, and certified by an authority certifying agency of that Party, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the instructions to complete the certificate;

days : "days" as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions) ;

exporter: is the person who participates in export and is located in the territory of a Party, who is obliged, according to this Chapter, to keep records in the territory of that Party in accordance with paragraph 1 a) of Article 5.05 ;

commercial importation : is the importation of a good into the territory of a Party for sale or for commercial, industrial or similar purposes;

importer: is a person who participates in importation and is located in the territory of a Party, who is obliged, in accordance with this Chapter, to keep records in the territory of that Party in accordance with paragraph 1 b) of Article 5.05 ;

Identical goods : are goods that are the same in all aspects, including physical characteristics, quality and commercial prestige, without taking into account minor differences in appearance that are not relevant to determine the origin of said goods . in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

producer: "producer" as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions); located in the territory of a Party and which is required under this Chapter to maintain records in the territory of that Party in accordance with paragraph 1 a) of Article 5.05;

Determination of origin: is the written legal document issued by the competent authority as a result of a procedure that verifies whether a good qualifies as originating in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin); and

preferential tariff treatment: the application of the tariff rate corresponding to an originating good in accordance with the tariff reduction program, in accordance with Article 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program).

2. The definitions established in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) will be incorporated into this Chapter.

Article 5.02 Origin Certification

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Parties will establish a single format for the certificate of origin, which will enter into force on the same date of this Agreement and may be modified as many times as they deem necessary by mutual agreement,

2. The certificate of origin referred to in paragraph 1 shall serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of another Party qualifies as originating.

3. The certifying authorities of each Party shall require exporters or producers to complete and sign a certificate of origin for each export of goods for which an importer of the other Party may claim preferential tariff treatment.

4. The exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate of origin will do so in terms of an affidavit, agreeing to assume any administrative, civil or criminal responsibility when false or incorrect information has been included in the certificate of origin.

5. The certifying authority of each Party shall certify that the certificate of origin filled out and signed by the exporter or producer of the good is correctly completed, based on the information provided by such exporter or producer, who shall be responsible for the accuracy and validity of the certificate. information provided and verify that the exporter or producer is actually located in that Party.

6. Each Party shall require the certificate of origin to be stamped, signed, and dated by the certifying authority of the exporting Party with respect to the export of a good for which the importer requests preferential tariff treatment. The certificate of origin must also have a serial number that allows its identification, which will be administered by the certifying authority.

7. The certifying authority of the exporting Party shall:

a) maintain the administrative procedures to certify the certificates of origin that its producer or exporter fills out and signs;

b) provide, if requested by the competent authority of the importing Party, information on the origin of the imported goods for which preferential tariff treatment is requested; and

c) notify in writing, before this Agreement enters into force, the list of the names of the authorized persons and, where applicable, the list of the entities authorized to certify the certificate of origin with their corresponding signatures and seals. Modifications to this list will be notified in writing to the other Party immediately and will become effective thirty (30) days after the date on which that Party receives the notification of the modifications.

8. Each Party shall provide that a certificate of origin may apply only to an importation of one or more goods into the territory of that Party.

9. Each Party shall provide that the customs authority of the importing Party accepts a certificate of origin valid for a period of one year from the date on which the certificate was signed and sealed by the certifying authority.

10. Each Party shall provide that preferential tariff treatment shall not be denied solely because the good covered by a certificate of origin is invoiced by a company located in the territory of a non-Party.

11. In the second year, counted from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will review the certification procedures with the intention of confirming whether it would be in the best interest of the Parties to allow exporters or producers certify the certifications of origin themselves instead of requiring any agency to do so. If the Parties so agree, the exporter or producer will be responsible for certifying the origin, without the certifying unit of each Party having to carry out the certification.

Article 5.03Obligations Related to Imports

1. Each Party shall require that the importer who requests preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party:

a) declare in writing in the import document required by its legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin, that a good qualifies as an originating good;

b) have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time the declaration is made;

c) provide, if requested by the customs authority, the certificate of origin or copies thereof; and

d) immediately make a corrected declaration and pay any corresponding duties when the importer has reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which the customs declaration is based contains incorrect information. When the importer presents the corrected declaration, before the customs authorities notify the revision, according to the national laws of each Party, the importer may not be penalized.

2. Each Party shall provide that, if an importer in its territory does not comply with any of the requirements established in this Chapter, it shall deny the importer the preferential tariff treatment of this Agreement for a good imported from the territory of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall provide that, when the importer has not requested preferential tariff treatment for goods imported into its territory that it has qualified as originating, the importer may, no later than four (4) months from the release of the goods imported, request the return of customs duties paid in excess for not having requested preferential tariff treatment for that merchandise, provided that the importer has the certificate of origin in his possession and that the request is accompanied by:

a) a written statement indicating that the good qualifies as originating at the time of importation;

b) the certificate of origin or its copy; and

c) any other documentation related to the importation of the merchandise, as may be required by the customs authority.

4. Compliance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this Article does not exempt the importer from the obligation to pay the corresponding customs duties in accordance with the laws applicable by the importing Party, when the competent authority of that Party concludes a verification of the origin and determines to deny preferential tariff treatment to imported goods, in accordance with Article 5.06.

Article 5.04 Obligations Related to Exports

1. Each Party shall require that its exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate of origin deliver a copy of said certificate to its competent authority when requested.

2. Each Party shall require, if it has reason to believe that a certificate of origin contains incorrect information, that its exporter or producer who has completed and signed the certificate of origin or provided information to its certifying authority immediately notify in writing all persons to those who have delivered that certificate and to their certifying authority, of any change that may affect the accuracy or validity of that certificate, in which case, the exporter or producer may not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certificate or information in accordance with the legislation internal to each Party.

3. Each Party shall provide that if its exporter or producer delivered a certificate or false information and with it merchandise was exported to the territory of the other Party, classified as originating, said exporter or producer shall be subject to sanctions similar to those that would be applied to an importer in its territory for contravening its customs laws and regulations by making false declarations and claims,

4. The certifying authority of the exporting Party shall provide the competent authority of the importing Party with the notification referred to in paragraph 2.

Article 5.05 records

1. Each Party shall provide that:

a) its exporter or producer who requests a certificate of origin and provides information to its certifying authority will maintain, for a minimum period of five (5) years from the date of signing the certificate, all records and documents related to the origin of the goods, including those that refer to:

i) the purchase, costs, value and payment of the merchandise exported from its territory;

ii) the purchase, costs, value and payment of all materials, including indirect materials, used in the production of the merchandise exported from its territory; and

iii) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory;

b) an importer claiming preferential tariff treatment! for a good imported into the territory of that Party, it will keep a copy of the certificate of origin and the other documentation related to the importation for a minimum period of five (5) years from the date of importation of the good; and

c) the certifying authority of the exporting Party that has issued a certificate of origin will maintain all documentation related to the issuance of the certificate for a minimum period of five (5) years from the date of issuance of the certificate,

2. A Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to an imported good subject to origin verification if the exporter, producer, or importer of the good, who is required to maintain records or documents in accordance with paragraph 1:

a) did not have the records or documents to determine the origin of the merchandise, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin); either

b) denies access to records or documents.

Article 5.06 Origin Verification Procedures

1. The importing Party, through its competent authority, may request information about the origin of a good from the certifying authority of the exporting Party. The competent authority of the importing Party may also request its Embassy in the territory of the other Party for assistance in these matters.

2. For purposes of determining whether a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party under preferential tariff treatment in accordance with this Agreement qualifies as originating, a Party may verify the origin of the good through its competent authority, by source of:

a) written questionnaires or requests for information sent directly to the importer in its territory or to the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party;

b) verification visits to the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party to review the records and documents referred to in Article 5.05, and to inspect the materials and facilities used for the production of the good in question;

c) delegate its Embassy in the territory of the other Party to conduct the aforementioned verification visit; either

d) other procedures that the Parties may agree.

3. For the purposes of this Article, the questionnaires, requests, official letters, determinations of origin, notifications or any other written communication sent by the competent authority to the importer, exporter or producer for verification of origin, shall be considered valid, if they are carried out by means of:

a) certified mail with an acknowledgment of receipt or other forms confirming that the importer, exporter or producer has received the documents;

b) official communications through the Embassies of the Parties when requested by the competent authority; either

c) any other way that the Parties may agree.

4. In a written questionnaire or request for information referred to in paragraph 2 a) you must:

a) indicate the period, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt, that the importer, exporter or producer must duly complete and return the questionnaire or provide the requested information; and

b) include the notification of intention to deny preferential tariff treatment in the event that the importer, exporter or producer does not duly complete and return the questionnaire or provide the requested information within said period.

5. The importer, exporter or producer who receives a questionnaire or request for information in accordance with paragraph 2 a), shall duly complete and return the questionnaire or respond to the request for information within the period established in paragraph 4 a), from from the date of receipt. During the period, the importer, exporter or producer may make an extension request in writing to the competent authority of the importing Party, for no more than thirty (30) days. Said request shall not have the consequence of denying preferential tariff treatment.

6. Each Party shall provide that, even if it has received the answered questionnaire or the requested information referred to in paragraph 5 within the specified period, it may still request, through its competent authority, additional information from the importer, exporter or producer, by through a questionnaire or subsequent application In these cases, the importer, exporter or producer will respond to the questionnaire or application within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of receipt.

7. If the importer, exporter or producer does not duly complete a questionnaire, or does not return the questionnaire, or does not provide the requested information within the period established in paragraphs 4 a), 5 and 6 above, the importing Party may deny treatment preferential tariff to the goods subject to verification, issuing to the importer, exporter or producer, a written determination of origin that includes the facts and the legal basis for that decision.

8. Prior to carrying out a verification visit in accordance with paragraph 2 b), the importing Party, through its competent authority, shall provide written notification of its intention to carry out the visit. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer to be visited, to the certifying authority and competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit is to be made, and if necessary to the Embassy of the other Party in the territory of the importing Party. . The competent authority of the other importing Party shall require the written consent of the exporter or producer to be visited.

9. The notification referred to in paragraph 8 shall include:

a) the name of the competent authority sending the notification;

b) the name of the exporter or producer to be visited;

c) the date and place of the proposed verification visit;

d) the objective and scope of the verification visit, including the specific reference of the goods subject to verification;

e) the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; and

f) the legal basis for carrying out the verification visit.

10. Any change to the information referred to in the previous paragraph must also be notified in accordance with paragraph 8.

11. If the exporter or producer has not consented in writing to a proposed verification visit within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notification as provided in paragraphs 8 and 9, the importing Party may deny the preferential tariff treatment to a good or goods by notifying the importer, exporter or producer in writing of its determination, including the facts and legal basis for this refusal.

12. Each Party shall provide, when an exporter or producer receives a notification pursuant to paragraphs 8 and 9, the exporter or producer may, within fifteen (15) days of receiving the notification, notify in writing the competent authority of the importing Party and the certifying authority and the competent authority of the exporting Party, their decision to postpone the proposed verification visit once for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date on which notification was received or for a longer period as the Parties may agree.

13. The Parties shall not deny preferential tariff treatment to a good solely because a verification visit is postponed pursuant to paragraph 12.

14. Each Party shall permit an exporter or producer that is subject to a verification visit to designate two observers to be present during the visit, provided that the observers do not participate other than as observers. However, if the observers are not designated by the exporter or producer, it will not be a cause for the visit to be postponed.

15. Each Party shall require an exporter or a producer to provide the records and documents referred to in paragraph 1 a) of Article 5.05 to the competent authority of the importing Party conducting the verification visit. If the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or producer, he may request the producer or supplier of the materials to deliver them to the aforementioned competent authority.

16. When the competent authority of the importing Party verifies whether a regional value content, minimis calculation or any other requirement established in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) have been met, it shall adopt, where applicable, the accounting principles generally accepted standards applied in the territory of the Party from which the merchandise subject to verification was exported.

17. When the verification visit has been completed, the competent authority of the importing Party shall draw up a record of the visit, which will include the facts confirmed by it. The exporter or producer may sign this document.

18. Within a period of one hundred and twenty (120) days from the conclusion of the verification of origin, the competent authority will issue a determination of origin in writing, including the facts, results and the legal basis for said determination, and send to the importer, exporter or producer of the good subject to verification in accordance with paragraph 3, to determine whether or not the good qualifies as originating,

19. When, through verification, the importing Party determines that an importer, exporter, or producer has provided a false or unsubstantiated certificate of origin more than once, or asserted that a good qualifies as originating, the importing Party may suspend the treatment. preferential tariff to identical goods imported, exported or produced by that person, until it is confirmed that said person has complied with all the requirements established in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin). The suspension and resumption of the preferential tariff treatment must be accompanied by a written notification, including the facts and the legal basis, to the importer, exporter or producer.

20. When the competent authority of the importing Party determines that a good imported into its territory does not qualify as originating, according to the tariff classification or the value applied by the Party to one or more materials used in the production of the good which differs of the classification or value applied to the materials by the Party from which the good was exported, that Party shall provide that its determination of origin shall not take effect until it has been notified in writing to the certifying authority of the exporting Party, to the importer of the merchandise, the person who has completed and signed the certificate of origin, as well as the producer of the merchandise.

21. A Party shall not apply a determination made pursuant to paragraph 20 to an import made before the effective date of the determination when:

a) the competent authority of that Party from whose territory the good was exported, issued a determination on the tariff classification or value of the materials, on which a person has the right to rely; and

b) the determination mentioned in the previous sub-paragraph was issued prior to the notification of the verification of origin.

Article 5.07 Advance Rulings

1. Each Party shall, through its competent authority, expeditiously grant an advance resolution in writing, prior to the importation of a good into its territory. The advance ruling must be issued in response to a written request made by an importer in its territory or an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by said importer, exporter or producer of the merchandise. , about:

a) if the good qualifies as originating, in accordance with Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

b) if the non-originating materials used in the production of the merchandise have complied with the applicable changes in the tariff classification indicated in Annex 4.03 (Specific Rules of Origin);

c) if the merchandise complies with the regional content value requirement established in Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) and in Annex 4.03 (Specific Rules of Origin); either

d) if the method applied by an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, in accordance with the rules and principles of the Customs Valuation Agreement, to calculate the transaction value of a good or materials used in production of the good, with respect to which advance ruling is requested, is adequate to demonstrate whether the good satisfies a regional value content requirement under Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) and Annex 4.03 (Specific Rules of Origin).

2. Each Party shall establish guidelines for the issuance of advance rulings, including:

a) the obligation of the importer to provide information reasonably required to process a request for said resolution;

b) the power of the competent authority to request additional information from the person requesting an advance ruling at any time, while said request is being evaluated;

c) the obligation of the competent authority to issue an advance resolution within a maximum period of one hundred and twenty (120) days, once all the necessary information has been obtained from the applicant; and

d) the obligation of the competent authority to issue an advance resolution in a complete, well-founded and reasoned manner.

3. Each Party shall apply an advance ruling to the imports concerned, from the date the ruling was issued or from a later date indicated in the ruling, unless said ruling has been modified or revoked in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.

4. Each Party shall provide any person requesting an advance ruling with the same treatment, including the same interpretation and application of the provisions of Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin), which refer to the determination of origin, as established for any another person, to whom an advance ruling has been issued, provided that the facts and circumstances are identical in all material respects.

5. An advance ruling may be modified or revoked by the issuing competent authority:

a) when based on an error:

i) in fact;

ii) in the tariff classification of a good or materials that are the object of the resolution; either

iii) in the application of the regional value content requirement under Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

b) when the resolution is not in accordance with the interpretation agreed by the Parties with respect to Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin);

c) when there is a change in the facts and circumstances on which the resolution is based;

d) to comply with a modification of Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin) or this Chapter; either

e) for the purpose of complying with an administrative decision independent of the issuing authority, a judicial decision or to adjust to a change in the national legislation of the Party that issued the advance ruling,

6. Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance ruling shall take effect from the date the modification or revocation is issued, or such later date as may be specified, and shall not apply to the importation of merchandise that was made prior to that date, unless the person to whom the advance ruling was issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.

7. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority verifies the origin of a good with respect to which an advance ruling has been issued, that authority shall assess whether:

a) the exporter or producer has complied with the terms and conditions of the advance ruling;

b) the operations of the exporter or producer are consistent with the facts and circumstances on which the advance ruling is based; and

c) the data and calculations used in the application of criteria or methods to calculate the regional value content are correct in all substantial respects.

8. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority determines that any of the requirements set forth in paragraph 7 have not been met, that authority may modify or revoke the advance ruling as the circumstances warrant.

9. Each Party shall provide that where the person to whom an advance ruling has been issued demonstrates that he or she has acted with reasonable care and in good faith when stating the facts and circumstances on which the ruling is based, that person shall not be penalized, provided that the issuing authority determines that the resolution was based on incorrect information.

10. Each Party shall provide that, when an advance ruling has been issued to a person who has falsely stated or omitted material facts or circumstances on which the ruling was based, or has not acted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the resolution, the competent authority may apply measures against that person in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

11. The Parties must provide that the holder of an advance ruling may use it only while the facts or circumstances on which it was based continue. In case, those facts or circumstances have changed, the holder of the resolution must be allowed to present the necessary information to the issuing authority to modify or revoke it in accordance with paragraph 5.

12. Any merchandise subject to a verification of origin or a request for revision, appeal in the territory of one of the Parties, will not be subject to an advance resolution.

Article 5.08 confidentiality

1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its laws, the confidentiality of confidential information collected under this Chapter and shall protect such information from disclosure.

2. The confidential information collected in accordance with this Chapter may only be disclosed to the authorities in charge of the administration and application of determinations of origin, and customs and tax matters in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 5.09 penalties

Each Party shall establish or maintain measures that impose criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for the violation of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 5.10 Review and Appeal _ _

1. Each Party shall grant the same rights of review and appeal with respect to advance determinations and rulings to its importers, or to exporters or producers of the other Party to whom such determinations and rulings have been issued pursuant to Article 5.06 and Article 5.07.

2. When a Party has denied preferential tariff treatment to a good for a determination based on failure to comply with any period established in this Chapter, with respect to the submission of records or other information to the competent authority of this Party, the decision made in the review or appeal will only address the non-compliance for the period referred to in this paragraph.

3. The rights referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 include access to at least one administrative review, regardless of the official or office responsible for the determination or advance ruling under review, and access to a judicial review of the determination. or resolution as the last instance of administrative measures, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.

Article 5.11 Uniform Regulations

1. The Parties shall establish and implement, through their respective laws or regulations by the date this Agreement enters into force, or at any later date as agreed by the Parties, uniform regulations regarding the interpretation, application, and administration of Chapter 4 (Rules of Origin), this Chapter and other matters agreed upon by the Parties.

2. Each Party shall apply any modification or addition to the uniform regulations no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the Parties agree on such modifications or additions, or within any other period that the Parties may agree.

Article 5.12 Cooperation

1. Each Party shall notify the other Party of the following determinations, measures and resolutions, including, to the extent possible, those that will be applied: 5-14

a) a determination of origin issued as a result of a verification conducted pursuant to Article 5.06, once the review and appeal referred to in Article 5.10 are exhausted;

b) a determination of origin that the Party considers contrary to a resolution issued by the competent authority of the other Party on the tariff classification, or on the value of a good, or on the materials used in the manufacture of a good;

c) a measure that establishes or significantly modifies an administrative policy that could affect, in the future, the determinations of origin; and

d) an advance resolution and its revocation or modification, issued in accordance with Article 5.07.

2. The Parties shall cooperate:

a) in compliance with their customs laws or regulations for the application of this Agreement and, if applicable, under the customs mutual assistance agreement, or any other related customs agreement to which they are a party;

b) to the extent possible and in order to facilitate the flow of trade between their territories, in customs matters such as the collection and exchange of statistics on the import and export of merchandise, and the exchange of information;

c) to the extent possible, in the collection and exchange of documentation on customs procedures; and

d) to the extent possible, in the verification of the origin of a good, in such a way that the competent authority of the importing Party can request, for the Republic of Guatemala, the competent authority and for the Republic of China (Taiwan) the certifying authority, so that it conducts investigations in its territory and provides the corresponding reports.

 

CHAPTER 6

SAFEGUARD MEASURES


Article 6.01 Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood as follows:

Agreement on Safeguards: the Agreement on Safeguards, which is part of the Agreement on the WTO, its amendments or any successor agreement;

threat of serious injury : as defined in the Agreement on Safeguards;

competent and investigative authority: for the purposes of this Chapter, the investigative authority will be:

a) in the case of the Republic of China (Taiwan), the International Trade Commission of the Ministry of Economic Affairs, or its successor institution; and

b) in the case of the Republic of Guatemala, the Ministry of Economy or its successor institution;

critical circumstances : those circumstances in which a delay in the application of the safeguard measure may cause damage that is difficult to repair;

serious injury : as defined in the Agreement on Safeguards;

safeguard measure: All tariff-type measures that are applied in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, with the exception of any safeguard measure derived from a procedure initiated before the entry into force of this Agreement. 1 ;

domestic industry : The group of producers of like or directly competitive goods that operate within the territory of a Party, or those whose joint production of like or directly competitive goods constitutes a proportion of the total domestic production of those goods. goods;

transition period : means a period of ten (10) years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except for goods where their tariffs must be eliminated in a period greater than ten (10) years , in accordance with the Program of the Annex (3.04) (Tariff Deduction) of the Party that applies the measure, in which case Transition Period means the one established in the indicated program;

causal link : as defined in the Agreement on Safeguards .

Article 6.02 Bilateral Safeguard Measures

1. All substantive aspects, procedures and, in general, the application of safeguard measures shall be governed by the provisions of this Chapter and additionally by Article XIX of the GATT 1994, the Agreement on Safeguards, and the national legislation applicable to each Part.

2. During the transition period, each Party may apply a safeguard measure in accordance with the procedure of this Chapter if, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, an originating good of a Party has been imported into the territory of the other Party in volumes that increase by such quantity in relation to domestic production and under such conditions as to constitute a substantial cause of serious injury, or a threat of serious injury to the domestic industry producing a like or directly competitive merchandise.

The importing Party may to the extent necessary to remedy or prevent serious injury or threat of serious injury:

a) suspend the future reduction of any tariff rate in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement for the merchandise; either

b) increase the rate of duty for the good to a level not to exceed less than:

i) the most favored nation (MFN) applied customs tariff in effect at the time the measure is applied; either

ii) the applied MFN customs duty the day prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.

3. Guatemala shall have the right to extend the period of application of the safeguard measure for a term of up to two (2) additional years beyond the maximum period established in Article 6.02 paragraph 4.

4. The following conditions shall be observed in the procedure that may result in the application of safeguard measures pursuant to paragraph 2:

a) a Party shall notify the other Party, without delay and in writing, of the initiation of the procedure that could result in the application of a safeguard measure to a product originating in the territory of that other Party;

b) any safeguard measure will begin to take effect no later than one (1) year from the date of initiation of the procedure; except what is established in article 6.04 paragraph 15;

c) no safeguard measure may be maintained:

i) for more than four (4) years, extendable for an additional period of four (4) consecutive years in accordance with Article 6.04 paragraphs 27 to 29; either

ii) after the end of the transition period, except with the consent of the Party to whose product the measure has been applied;

d) a safeguard measure may be applied as many times as necessary, provided that a period equivalent to half of that during which the safeguard measure was applied for the first time has elapsed;

e) the term of the provisional safeguard measures that have been applied will be computed for the purposes of determining the term of duration of the definitive safeguard measure established in subparagraph (c) of this paragraph;

f) Provisional measures that do not become final will be excluded from the limitation set forth in subparagraph (d) of this paragraph;

g) Upon termination of the safeguard measure, the tariff rate must be the one that corresponds, in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program.

5. In critical circumstances, a Party may apply provisional bilateral safeguard measures by virtue of a preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence that the increase in imports has occurred on originating goods of the other Party, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and under such conditions that it has caused or threatens to cause serious damage. The duration of the provisional safeguard measures shall not exceed two hundred (200) days.


Article 6.03 Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party shall retain its rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994, and the Agreement on Safeguards, except those relating to compensation or retaliation and exclusion of a safeguard measure insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Article.

2. Any Party that applies a safeguard measure in accordance with paragraph 1 shall exclude imports of goods from the other Party from this measure, unless:

a) imports will not normally be considered substantial if the other is not considered to be among the three main suppliers of the merchandise subject to the procedure, based on their participation in imports during the immediately preceding three (3) years;

b) imports from that other Party contribute significantly to the serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by the imports. In order to determine these extremes, the investigating authorities must take into account factors such as changes in the participation of that Other Party in total imports, as well as the volume of imports from the other Party and the changes that said volume have suffered. Imports from a Party shall not normally be considered to be a significant contributor to serious injury or threat of serious injury if their growth rate during the period in which the injurious surge occurred is appreciably less than the growth rate of total imports from all sources, during the same period.

3. A Party shall notify the other Party in writing within fifteen (15) days of the initiation of a procedure that could result in the application of a safeguard measure, in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article.

4. Neither Party may apply a measure provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article that imposes restrictions on merchandise, without prior written notification to the other Party and without giving adequate opportunity to carry out prior consultations with the other Party, as far in advance as possible. feasible before applying it.

5. When a Party determines, pursuant to this Article, that it needs to apply a safeguard measure to originating goods of the other Party, the measures applied to such goods shall consist solely and exclusively of tariff measures.

6, The Party that applies a safeguard measure in accordance with this Article shall provide the other Party with mutually agreed trade liberalization compensation, in the form of concessions, that have substantially equivalent trade effects or that are equivalent to the value of the additional customs duties. expected as a result of the safeguard measure.

7. If the Parties cannot reach an agreement on compensation, the Party to whose product the safeguard measure is applied may impose measures that have trade effects substantially equivalent to those of the safeguard measure applied in accordance with paragraph 1. of this Article.

Article 6.04 Administration of Procedures Related to Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party shall ensure the uniform and impartial application of its applicable legislation, regulations, resolutions and determinations that govern all procedures for the application of safeguard measures, which must be compatible with the provisions established in Article XIX of the GATT 1994. , the Safeguards Agreement, its modifications or successor provisions.

2. The procedures for the application of safeguard measures, and the determination of the existence or threat of serious damage will be the responsibility of the investigating authority of each Party. The investigative authority that is empowered by the national legislation of each Party to carry out these procedures will be provided with all the means necessary for the fulfillment of its functions.

3. Each Party shall comply with the safeguard procedures established in this Chapter, in an equitable, timely, transparent and effective manner.

Procedure

4. The investigating authority may initiate a procedure, ex officio or through a request submitted by the corresponding branch of national production. When the investigating authority proceeds ex officio, it will notify the domestic industry to confirm its consent to continue with the investigation.

5. When the initiation of the procedure is ex officio or at the request of the domestic industry, the support of at least 25% of said domestic industry will be required.

Application Content

6. The domestic industry that submits a request to initiate an investigation, will provide the following information in its request to the extent that it is available to the public from government or other sources, or in case it is not available, its best estimates and the bases that support them.

a) Designation of the investigating authority to whom the request is submitted;

b) identification data of the applicant or applicants, as well as the location of the establishments where the similar or directly competitive merchandise is produced. The legal representative will document the capacity in which he acts;

c) the documentation that proves the percentage of participation in the national production of the similar or directly competitive merchandise that they represent, and the reasons why it affirms that they are representative of the national industry;

d) description of the imported merchandise in question, at the level of the tariff subheading in which it is classified, or when necessary, at a more disaggregated level, the current tariff treatment, as well as the specifications and elements that allow comparison with national merchandise;

e) description of the similar or directly competitive national merchandise affected and its tariff subheading;

f) volume and value of imports;

g) import data corresponding to each of the three (3) complete years immediately prior to the initiation of the procedures related to the application of a safeguard, which constitute the basis that the merchandise is imported into the territory of the other Party in larger quantities , either in absolute terms or related to national production;

h) Cause of damage: The enumeration and description of the presumed causes of damage or threat of serious damage, and a summary of the grounds for alleging that imports of the merchandise in question increase in relation to national production. The quantitative and objective indicators that denote the nature and scope of the damage caused or the threat of damage to the domestic industry, such as those that demonstrate changes in the levels of sales, prices, production, productivity, use of installed capacity , market share, profit or loss and employment;

i) volume and value of domestic production of the similar or directly competitive merchandise; corresponding to each of the last three (3) complete years immediately prior to the initiation of the procedures related to the application of a safeguard measure;

j) request for the initiation of the investigation and the imposition of a safeguard measure;

k) list of known importers and exporters and place to notify them;

l) place to receive notifications from the applicant;

m) place and date of the request; and

n) signature of the applicant or legal representative.

Admission or Rejection of the application

7. After receiving the application, the investigating authority will review and decide on the admission of the application within a period of thirty (30) days:

a) If the application meets the requirements, the investigating authority must declare the opening of the investigation;

b) If the request does not meet the requirements, the investigating authority must notify the requesting party of the requirement to comply with them within a period of fifteen (15) days for it to comply with them, and this period must be extended for one equal period, at the request of the interested parties; either

c) The investigating authority may reject the request through a reasoned resolution if sufficient elements are not provided to justify the initiation of the investigation or it does not comply with the minimum representative percentage of the national industry. If the applicant meets the requirements in accordance with subparagraph b) of this paragraph, the investigating authority will decide to accept the application, declaring the opening of the investigation or rejecting it within a period of thirty (30) days following the presentation. of the information. If the applicant does not meet the requirements, the investigating authority will resolve to reject the application,

Resolution to Open the Investigation

8. The resolution to open the investigation will contain at least:

a) identification of the investigating authority, as well as the place and date of issuance of the resolution;

b) indication that the application is accepted with the attached documents;

c) the name of the individual or legal person of the national producers of the similar or directly competitive merchandise that supports the application and the address to notify them;

d) description of the merchandise subject to the procedure, at the level of the tariff subheading in which it is classified or more disaggregated when necessary, current tariff treatment, as well as the description of similar or directly competitive merchandise;

e) the rationale behind the resolution;

f) previous representative period;

g) deadline for interested parties to present written arguments and any related documents, and

h) Other data that may be relevant.

Notifications in General

9. Notifications of the resolutions in the procedure will be made in writing within fifteen (15) days after the date of their issuance and must be accompanied by copies of the public versions of the applications and documents.

Publication Requirements _

10. When the investigation begins, the investigating authority will publish the beginning of the same in the official gazette or in another newspaper with national circulation, within a period of ten (10) days from the admission of the request. The notification of the opening of the investigation will be made through the competent authority to the other Party by certified mail, specialized courier, telefax or any other means that ensures its reception.

opposition _ _

11. The investigating authority will grant a period of forty-five (45) days to the interested party from the day after the notification of the initiation of the investigation for the interested parties to file opposition and provide evidence. The investigating authority, at the request of the interested parties, may extend the previous term for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.

Previous Representative Period

12. The previous representative period will be the basis for determining the existence of a threat of serious injury to the domestic industry and must be determined by the investigating authority when the investigation is initiated and may modify it when deemed appropriate.

inquiries

13. Once the investigation is accepted and in any case, before its initiation, the Party that intends to initiate the case will notify the other Party of its intention to hold consultations, in order to resolve the matter and the Parties they will be able to carry out consultations without interrupting the procedure.

14. During these consultations, the Parties may try to address, among others, any matter related to the investigation, the elimination of the measure, and in general, any related matter.

Investigation period _

15. The investigation period must conclude within six (6) months except in exceptional circumstances, qualified by the investigating authority, in which case it will conclude within a maximum period of twelve (12) months from the initiation of the investigation.

Information requirement _

16. The investigating authority may request any type of information from the interested parties. When they deny access to the necessary information, or do not provide it within the period established by the investigating authority, the latter will adopt its resolutions based on the evidence at its disposal.

Provisional Safeguard Measures

17. If, the investigating authority has determined the existence of a threat of harm" and the justifying elements for the application of a provisional measure are present, it will recommend to the competent authority the application of a provisional measure.

18 The provisional measures must be adopted in the form of tariff increases in accordance with this Chapter, which will be returned promptly later, if the investigation does not determine that the increase in imports has caused or threatens to cause serious injury to an industry national.

Proof of Harm or Threat of Serious Harm

19. In order to carry out the procedure, the investigating authority will collect as much as possible all the pertinent information so that the corresponding resolution is issued. It will assess all the relevant factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that affect the situation of that domestic industry, including the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the merchandise in question in absolute terms or in relation to the domestic industry; the proportion of the domestic market covered by increased imports; changes in the levels of sales, production, productivity, utilization of installed capacity, profits or losses, and employment.

Public Hearing _

20. During the course of each proceeding, the investigating authority:

to). shall notify the interested parties, including importers and exporters, of the date and place of the public hearing fifteen (15) days in advance so that they may appear, by themselves or through representatives, in order to present evidence, arguments and are heard in relation to serious harm or threat of serious harm and its appropriate solution; and

b). will provide an opportunity for all interested parties to appear at the hearing and question the interested parties and present arguments therein.

21. After the public hearing, the interested Parties will have fifteen (15) days to present their complementary evidence and conclusions on the investigation in writing to the investigating authority.

Confidential Information _

22 The investigating authority shall establish or maintain procedures for the handling of confidential information, protected by national legislation, that is provided during the proceeding, and shall require interested parties to provide such information and deliver non-confidential written summaries thereof. If interested parties indicate the impossibility of summarizing this information, they will explain the reasons why it is not possible. Authorities may disregard such information unless convincingly demonstrated to them from the appropriate source that it is accurate.

23. The investigating authority shall not disclose any confidential information provided pursuant to any commitment, relating to confidential information, that has been acquired in the course of the proceeding.

Deliberation and Resolution _ _

24. Except in critical circumstances or in the case of bilateral safeguard measures related to perishable agricultural goods, the investigating authority, prior to issuing a final resolution in a proceeding for the application of safeguard measures, will grant sufficient time to gather and examine the pertinent information, hold a public hearing and give all interested parties the opportunity to prepare and present their views.

25. The investigating authority will publish the final resolution without delay in the official gazette or other newspaper with national circulation and will indicate the results of the investigation and the reasoned conclusions regarding all pertinent issues of fact and law. The resolution will describe the imported merchandise, the corresponding tariff subheading, the methodology applied and the conclusion reached in the procedure. The recitals will mention the grounds of the resolution, including a description of:

to). the domestic industry that has suffered or is threatened by serious injury;

b.) the information that supports the conclusion that imports have increased; that the domestic industry suffers or is threatened with serious injury; that increased imports are causing or threatening to cause serious injury; and

c) if provided for in domestic law, any conclusion or recommendation on the appropriate remedy, as well as its grounds.

26. Each Party shall ensure that resolutions may be subject to review by judicial or administrative authorities, to the extent provided by national legislation. Negative resolutions on the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage may not be modified by the investigating authority unless said modification is required by the respective judicial or administrative instances.

extension _ _

27. If the importing Party determines that the reasons that gave rise to the application of the bilateral safeguard measure still subsist, it shall notify the competent authority of the other Party of its intention to extend it, at least ninety (90) days in advance of the expiration of its validity, and will provide evidence that the causes that led to its application persist, in order to initiate the respective consultations, which will be held in accordance with the provisions established in this Article.

28. The domestic industry that submits the extension request must submit an adjustment plan, which includes variables that can be controlled by the industry or domestic industry in question, in order to eliminate serious injury or threat of serious injury.

29. Notifications of the extension and compensation shall be made in accordance with this Article before the expiration of the applied measure.

compensation _ _

30. The Party that applies a safeguard measure, in accordance with this Article, shall provide the other Party with mutually agreed compensation, in the form of concessions that have substantially equivalent commercial effects or that are equivalent to the value of the additional customs duties that are wait for the safeguard measure. However, no compensation will be provided during the first three (3) years that the safeguard measure is in force; Likewise, it will not be exercised by the Party against which the safeguard measure is applied during those (3) three years, it will not exercise the right of suspensions or other substantially equivalent obligations.

31. After the three (3) years alluded to in the preceding paragraph, the Party applying the measure will provide an opportunity to carry out consultations within ninety (90) days. If the Parties cannot reach an agreement on compensation, the Party to whose good the safeguard measure is applied may suspend concessions or other obligations that have commercial effects substantially equivalent to those of the safeguard measure applied in accordance with this Article, must be notified in writing at least thirty (30) days before imposing said measures.

Article 6.05 Settlement of Disputes Regarding Safeguard Measures

No Party may request the integration of an arbitration group, in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.07 (Establishment of the Arbitration Group), before the other Party has applied any safeguard measure.

 

CHAPTER 7

UNFAIR TRADE PRACTICES

Article 7.01 Antidumping and Countervailing Measures

The Parties confirm their rights and obligations for the application of an antidumping duty or a countervailing duty imposed by one Party on goods imported from the territory of the other Party, which shall be in accordance with Article VI and XVI of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade 1994, the Agreement on the application of Article VI of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade 1994 and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.

Article 7.02 Scope of application

Except as established in this Chapter, antidumping and countervailing duties must be applied between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of the agreements indicated in Article 7.01 and the legislation of each party in a supplementary manner.. 2

Article 7.03 Competent Authority

For the investigation and application of the provisions contained in this Chapter, the competent authority in the case of Guatemala is the Ministry of Economy or the successor institution and for the Republic of China (Taiwan) the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Ministry of Finance or the institutions successors.

Article 7.04 Consultations

After the request to open an investigation has been admitted, and in any case before it begins, the requesting Party shall notify the other Party of its intention to carry out consultations and the Parties may hold them at any time during the procedure, without interrupting it. the same.


Article 7.05 Support of the National Production Branch

An antidumping or countervailing investigation shall not be initiated between the Parties unless the authorities have determined that it has been requested on behalf of the domestic industry whose production constitutes more than fifty percent (50%) of the total production of the like product produced. by the part of the national production that expresses its support or opposition to the application, however, no investigation will be initiated when the national producers that expressly support the application represent less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total production of the product. similar product produced by the domestic industry,


Article 7.06 Maximum Period to Complete an Investigation

An investigation on dumping or subsidy practices initiated by a Party against goods imported from the territory of the other Party must be concluded within one year from its initiation; in special circumstances, this period may be extended to no more than eighteen ( 18) months after the start of the investigation.


Article 7.07 Duration of measures

Without prejudice to the right of review in accordance with the WTO Agreements established in Article 7.01, any antidumping duty or definitive countervailing duty imposed by a Party on merchandise imported from the territory of the other Party must terminate within a period not exceeding five ( 5) years from its imposition.

 

THIRD PART

BARRIERS TO TRADE

CHAPTER 8

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Article 8.01 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the Parties shall apply the definitions and terms established:

a) in the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which forms part of the WTO Agreement, hereinafter the AMSF;

b) by the International Office of Epizootics, hereinafter OIE;

c) in the International Plant Protection Convention, hereinafter IPPC; and

d) by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, hereinafter Codex.

Article 8.02 General Provisions

1. Competent authorities are considered to be those that have the legal responsibility of guaranteeing compliance with the sanitary and phytosanitary requirements contemplated in this Chapter.

2. Based on the AMSF, the Parties establish this framework of rules and disciplines that guide the adoption and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

3. Through mutual cooperation, the Parties shall facilitate trade to prevent the introduction or spread of pests and diseases, and to improve plant health, animal health, and food safety.

Article 8.03 Rights of the Parties

The Parties may, in accordance with the AMSF:

a) establish, adopt, maintain or apply any sanitary or phytosanitary measure in their territories, only when necessary for the protection of human (food safety) and animal life and health, or to preserve plant health, even those that are stricter than an international measure, standard, guideline or recommendation, provided there is a scientific basis that justifies it;

b) apply their sanitary and phytosanitary measures only to the extent necessary to achieve their appropriate level of protection; and

c) verify that the plants, animals, products and by-products for export are subject to sanitary and phytosanitary monitoring, which ensures compliance with the requirements of the sanitary and phytosanitary measures established by the importing Party.


Article 8.04 Obligations of the Parties

1. Sanitary and phytosanitary measures shall not constitute a disguised restriction on trade nor shall they have the object or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

2. Sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be based on scientific principles, will be maintained only when there are grounds to support them, and will be based on a risk assessment.

3. Sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be based on international standards, guidelines or recommendations.

4. When identical or similar conditions exist, a sanitary or phytosanitary measure shall not discriminate arbitrarily or unjustifiably.


Article 8.05 International Standards and Harmonization

With the purpose of harmonizing sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the control, inspection and approval procedures of sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the Parties will be based on the following principles:

a) each Party shall use international standards, guidelines or recommendations for its sanitary and phytosanitary measures as a reference framework;

b) each Party may adopt, apply, establish or maintain a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that offers a level of protection different from that which would be achieved by a measure based on, or stricter than, an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that there is scientific justification;

c) In order to achieve a greater degree of harmonization, each Party will follow the AMSF guidelines, the IPPC in terms of plant health, the OIE in aspects of animal health and in terms of food safety and tolerance limits will be established. adopt Codex standards; and

d) The Parties shall establish harmonized systems in the sanitary and phytosanitary field for the methods of sampling, diagnosis, inspection and certification of animals, plants, their products and by-products, as well as food safety.

Article 8.06 Equivalence

In order to apply sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the territory of the Parties, the Parties shall apply control, inspection and approval procedures in accordance with the following principles:

a) each Party will accept as equivalent the sanitary or phytosanitary measures of the other Party, even when they differ from its own in the same product, when the latter objectively demonstrates, with scientific information and with risk assessment methods agreed upon by them, that the measures achieve the appropriate level of protection required. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall grant reasonable access to information related to inspection, testing and other relevant procedures; and

b) The Parties shall facilitate access to their territories for the purpose of inspection, testing and other relevant procedures, in order to establish equivalences between their sanitary and phytosanitary measures.


Article 8.07 Risk Assessment and Determination of the Appropriate Level of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Protection

In accordance with the guidelines issued by the competent international organizations:

a) The Parties shall ensure that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures are based on an assessment appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks for the protection of life, human (food safety) and animal health, or to preserve the health of plants taking into account the risk assessment guidelines and techniques developed by the competent international organizations;

b) The Parties will grant the necessary facilities for the evaluation of sanitary and phytosanitary services, through the current procedures for verification of controls, inspections, approval procedures, application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and programs based on the guidelines and recommendations of international organizations, recognized by the WTO; When evaluating the risk on a good and when establishing its adequate level of protection, the Parties will take into account, among other factors:

i) available scientific and technical information;

ii) the existence of pests or diseases;

iii) the epidemiology of pests and diseases of quarantine interest;

iv) analysis of critical control points in sanitary (food safety) and phytosanitary aspects;

v) physical, chemical and biological risks in food;

vi) relevant ecological and environmental conditions;

vii) production processes and methods and inspection, sampling and testing methods;

viii) the structure and organization of sanitary and phytosanitary services;

ix) the protection procedures, epidemiological surveillance, diagnosis and treatments that ensure the safety of food;

x) the loss of production or sales in case of entry, establishment, propagation or dissemination of a pest or disease;

xi) the applicable quarantine measures and treatments that satisfy the importing Party in terms of risk mitigation, and

xii) the costs of control or eradication of pests or diseases in the territory of the importing Party and the cost-effectiveness of other possible methods to reduce the risk;

When establishing their appropriate level of protection, the Parties shall avoid making arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions that may cause discrimination or constitute a disguised restriction on trade;

when the scientific information is insufficient to carry out the risk analysis, the Party may adopt provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measures, basing them on the available information, including that coming from the competent international organizations described in this Chapter. In such circumstances the Parties shall obtain the additional information necessary for a more objective risk analysis and review of the sanitary or phytosanitary measures within a reasonable period of time and for this purpose the following procedure shall be applied;

i) the importing Party applying the provisional measure shall request, within thirty (30) days following the adoption of the provisional measure from the other Party, all the technical information necessary to finalize the risk assessment and the other Party shall provide information. If the information is not provided, the provisional measure must be maintained and if the information has not been requested after said period, the provisional measure must be withdrawn;

ii) if the importing Party has requested the information, it will have sixty (60) days from the presentation of said information, to review, withdraw or maintain the provisional measure as final. If necessary, the Party may extend the term;

iii) the importing Party may request clarifications on the information submitted by the exporting Party after having received it;

iv) the importing Party shall allow the exporting Party to submit its comments and shall take them into account for the conclusion of the risk assessment, and

v) the adoption or modification of the provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure must be immediately notified to the other Party through the information centers established in accordance with the AMSF;

if the result of the risk analysis implies the non-acceptance of the import, the scientific basis of the decision will be notified in writing; and

where a Party has reason to believe that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure established or maintained by the other Party restricts or may restrict its exports and that measure is not based on relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, or there are no such standards, guidelines or international recommendations, may request an explanation of the reasons for these sanitary and phytosanitary measures and the Party that maintains these measures will have to provide it within a period of sixty (60) days from the date the competent authority receives the consultation.
Article 8.08 Recognition of Pest or Disease Free Areas and Areas of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence

1 The Parties shall recognize pest- or disease-free areas and areas with low prevalence of pests or diseases in accordance with international guidelines and recommendations, considering the geographic location, ecosystems, epidemiological surveillance, and the effectiveness of sanitary and phytosanitary controls. in that area.

2. The Party that declares an area of ​​its territory free of a certain pest or disease must objectively demonstrate to the importing Party said condition and grant the assurance that it will remain as such, based on the protection measures adopted by those responsible. of the sanitary and phytosanitary services.

3 The Party interested in obtaining recognition of a zone free of any pest or disease must make the request and provide the corresponding scientific and technical information to the other Party.

4. The Party receiving the application for recognition may carry out inspections, tests and other verification procedures. In case of non-acceptance, it will state in writing the technical grounds for its decision.

5. The Parties may initiate consultations to reach agreements on specific requirements for recognition of free zones or zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases. Due to the lack of international standards for the recognition of areas of low prevalence of pests or diseases, the Parties agree that the recognition of such areas will be pending the establishment of international standards.
Article 8.09 Control, Inspection and Approval Procedures

1. The Parties, in accordance with this Chapter, shall apply the provisions contained in Annex C of the AMSF, with regard to control, inspection and approval procedures, including approval systems for the use of additives or establishment of tolerances for contaminants in food products, beverages or fodder.

2. When the competent authority of the exporting Party requests for the first time the competent authority of the importing Party to inspect a production unit or a production process in its territory, the competent authority of the importing Party after full review and evaluation of the necessary documents and data, you must carry out said inspection within a maximum period of one hundred (100) days. This period may be extended by mutual agreement between the Parties, in those cases in which it can be justified. Once the inspection has been carried out, the competent authority of the importing Party must issue a resolution based on the result obtained in the inspection and must notify the exporting Party within a maximum period of ninety (90) days, counted from the day the inspection ended. inspection.

Article 8.10 Transparency

1. Each Party, when proposing the adoption or modification of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of general application at the central level, shall notify the following:

a) the adoptions and modifications of said measures, likewise, it will provide information on them, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the AMSF and will make the pertinent adaptations;

b) changes or modifications to sanitary or phytosanitary measures that have a significant effect on trade between the Parties, at least sixty (60) days before the entry into force of the new provision, to allow the other Party to make observations, emergency situations will be exempt from the term indicated above, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the AMSF;

c) changes that occur in the field of animal health, such as the appearance of exotic diseases and those on OIE List A, within twenty-four (24) hours after the confirmation of the disease;

d) changes that occur in the phytosanitary field, such as the appearance of quarantine pests and diseases or the spread of pests and diseases under official control, within seventy-two (72) hours after their verification; and

e) Disease outbreaks in which the consumption of imported, natural or processed food products is scientifically proven to be the cause.

2. The Parties shall use the notification and information centers established in accordance with the AMSF as a channel of communication. In the case of emergency measures, the Parties undertake to notify each other in writing immediately, briefly indicating the objective and reason for the measure, as well as the nature of the problem.

3. Pursuant to the provisions of Article 16.02 (Information Center), each Party shall respond to reasonable requests for information from the other Party and shall provide the relevant documentation in accordance with the principles established in paragraph 3 of Annex B of the AMSF.

Article 8.11 Technical consultations

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party, when in doubt about the application or interpretation of its content, from initiating consultations with the other Party.

2. When a Party considers that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the other Party is interpreted or applied in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, it shall have the obligation to demonstrate the inconsistency.

3. When a Party requests consultations and so notifies the Committee, the latter must facilitate the consultations, being able to refer them to an ad-hoc working group or to another forum, for non-obligatory technical advice or recommendation.

4. When the Parties have resorted to the consultations in accordance with this article, without satisfactory results, these consultations will constitute the consultations provided for in article 18.05 of the Dispute Resolution Chapter, if the Parties so agree.

Article 8.12 Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, the composition of which is indicated in Annex 8.13.

2. The Committee will hear matters related to this Chapter and, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 17.05(2) (Committees), it will have the following functions:

to). promote the necessary facilities for the training and specialized technical personnel;

b). promote the active participation of the Parties in international organizations; and

c). Create and update a registry of qualified specialists in the areas of food safety, plant health, and animal health, for the purposes of the provisions of Article 17.07 (Groups of Experts).

ANNEX 8.13

COMMITTEE ON SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 9

STANDARDIZATION MEASURES , METROLOGY AND AUTHORIZATION PROCEDURES

Article 9.01 Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood as

TBT Agreement: the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, which is part of the World Trade Organization (WTO);

risk assessment : the assessment of potential adverse effects on legitimate targets that could impede trade;

make compatible: bring the different measures related to standardization, approved by different standardization bodies, but with the same scope, to a level such that they are identical, equivalent or have the effect of allowing the goods to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose;

standardization measures ; standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures;

standard: a document approved by a recognized institution that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods or related processes and production methods, and the observance of which is not mandatory. May also include terminology requirements, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling applicable to a good, process or production method, or dealing exclusively with them;

international standard: a standard, or other guide or recommendation, adopted by an international standardization body and made available to the public;

legitimate objectives : the imperatives of national security, the prevention of practices that may lead to error, the protection of human health or safety, of animal, plant or environmental life or health;

international standardization and metrology body : a standardization or metrology body open to participation by at least all Members of the WTO, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the International Organization of Legal Metrology (IML) and the International Commission on Radiological Units and Measurements (ICUMR) or any other body designated by the Parties;

authorization procedure : any obligatory administrative process to obtain a registration, permit, license or any other authorization, in order for a good to be produced, commercialized or used for defined purposes or according to established conditions;

conformity assessment procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine whether technical regulations or standards are met, including sampling, testing, inspection, evaluation, verification and assurance of conformity, registration, accreditation and approval , as well as their combinations;

administrative refusal: the actions taken by a public administration body of the importing Party, in the exercise of its powers, to prevent the entry into its territory of a consignment due to non-compliance with technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures or compliance requirements. metrology;

technical regulation : a document that establishes the characteristics of the goods or their related processes and production methods, including the applicable administrative provisions, and compliance with which is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process or production method; and

comparable situation : one that guarantees the same level of security or protection to achieve a legitimate objective .

2. Except as defined in paragraph 1, the Parties shall use the terms contained in ISO/IEC Guide 2:1996, "General Terms and their Definitions in relation to Standardization and Related Activities".

Article 9.02  General Provisions

In addition to the provisions of the WTO Agreement, the Parties shall apply the provisions of this Chapter.


Article 9.03 Scope of Application

1. This Chapter shall apply to the standardization measures, authorization procedures and metrology of the Parties, as well as the measures related to them, which may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods between the Parties.

2. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

Article 9.04  Basic Rights and Obligations

Right to Adopt Standardization Measures

1. Each Party may develop, adopt, apply and maintain:

a) standardization measures, authorization procedures and metrology, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter; and

b) technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that allow the Party to guarantee the achievement of its legitimate objectives.

Unnecessary Obstacles

2. Neither Party shall develop, adopt, maintain or apply standardization measures, authorization procedures or metrology, which have the
purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade for the other Party.

Non-discriminatory Treatment

3. In relation to standardization measures, authorization procedures and metrology, each Party shall grant to the goods of the other Party national treatment and treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar goods from any other country.

Use of International Standards

4. For the preparation or application of its standardization measures, authorization procedures or metrology, each Party shall use international standards when they exist or their adoption is imminent, or shall use their relevant elements, except when these international standards do not constitute an effective means
. or adequate to achieve its legitimate objectives, due to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological,
infrastructure nature, or for scientifically proven reasons.

Article 9.05 Risk Assessment

1. In pursuit of its legitimate objectives, each Party carrying out risk assessments shall take into consideration:

a) risk assessments carried out by international standardization or metrology bodies;

b) the scientific evidence or technical information available;

c) related processing technology; either

d) final uses for which the goods are intended.

2. When a Party establishes a level of protection that it deems appropriate and conducts a risk assessment, it shall avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions between like goods at the level of protection that it deems appropriate, if those distinctions:

a) have the effect of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against goods of the other Party;

b) constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties; either

c) discriminate between similar goods for the same use, in accordance with the same conditions that pose the same level of risk and that grant similar benefits.

3. A Party will provide the other Party, when it so requests, the pertinent documentation in relation to its risk assessment processes,
as well as the factors considered to carry out the assessment and definition of protection levels, in accordance with Article 9.04.

Article 9.06 Compatibility and Equivalence

1. Without prejudice to the rights conferred on them by this Chapter and taking into account international standardization and metrology activities, the Parties will make their respective standardization and metrology measures compatible to the greatest extent possible without reducing the level of safety or protection of human, animal or plant life or health, the environment or consumers.

2. A Party shall accept a technical regulation adopted by the other Party as equivalent to its own when, in cooperation with that other Party, the importing Party determines that the technical regulations of the exporting Party adequately meet the legitimate objectives of the Party. importing party.

3. At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall provide it in writing with the reasons why it does not treat as equivalent a technical regulation under paragraph 2,

Article 9.07  Conformity Assessment

1. Each Party shall develop, adopt, and apply conformity assessment procedures so as to grant access to like goods from the territory of the other Party under conditions no less favorable than those granted to its like goods or to those of any other country not Part, in a comparable situation.

2. In relation to its conformity assessment procedures, each Party shall be required to:

a) such procedures are initiated and concluded as quickly as possible and in a non-discriminatory manner;

b) the procedure and the normal duration of each of these procedures are published or, upon request, the applicant is informed of said information;

(c) the competent body or authority promptly examines, upon receipt of an application, whether the documentation is complete and communicates to the applicant as soon as possible the results of the assessment in an accurate and complete manner, so that the applicant can take corrective action if if necessary, and even where the application is deficient, proceed with the conformity assessment to the extent feasible, if requested by the applicant; and that upon request, the applicant be informed of the stage of the procedure, explaining any delays;

d) only the information necessary to assess conformity and calculate duties is required;

e) the confidential nature of the information referring to a good of the other Party, resulting from such procedures or that has been provided as a result of them, is respected in the same way as in the case of a good of that Party, in manner that protects legitimate business interests;

f) the fees imposed for evaluating the conformity of a good of the other Party are equitable in comparison with those that would be collected for evaluating the conformity of a good of that Party, taking into account the expenses of communications, transportation and other expenses derived from the differences in location of the applicant's facilities and those of the conformity assessment body;

g) ensure that the location of the facilities used in the conformity assessment procedures and the sample selection procedures do not cause unnecessary inconvenience to the applicants, or their agents;

h) whenever the specifications of a good are modified after the determination of its conformity with the applicable technical regulations or standards, the conformity assessment procedure of the modified good is limited to what is necessary to determine if there is adequate security of that the merchandise continues to comply with the technical regulations or applicable standards; and

i) there is a procedure to review complaints regarding the application of a conformity assessment procedure and take corrective action when the complaint is justified.

3. In order to advance in trade facilitation, a Party shall favorably consider the request of the other Party to enter into negotiations aimed at the conclusion of mutual recognition agreements for the results of their respective conformity assessment procedures.

4. To the extent possible, each Party shall accept the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, provided that such procedures offer sufficient confidence, equivalent to the confidence provided by its own procedures and that the merchandise complies with the technical regulation or with the applicable standard adopted or maintained in the territory of that Party.

5. Prior to the acceptance of the results of a conformity assessment procedure in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4, and in order to strengthen the sustained reliability of the results of the conformity assessment of each of them , the Parties may consult on matters such as the technical capacity of the conformity assessment bodies in question, including verified compliance with relevant international standards through means such as accreditation.

6. In recognition that this will be of mutual benefit to the Parties involved, each Party shall accredit, approve or recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party, under conditions no less favorable than those granted to assessment bodies. of conformity in its territory.

7. For conformity assessment procedures, the Parties may use the capacity and technical infrastructure of accredited bodies established in the territory of the Parties.

Article 9.08 Authorization Procedures

1. Each Party shall develop, adopt and apply authorization procedures so as to grant access to like goods from the territory of the other Party under conditions no less favorable than those granted to its like goods or those of any other country, in a situation comparable.

2. In connection with its authorization procedures, each Party shall be required to:

a) such procedures are initiated and concluded as quickly as possible and in a non-discriminatory manner;

b) the procedure and the normal duration of each of these procedures are published or, upon request, the applicant is informed of said information;

(c) the competent body or authority promptly examines, upon receipt of an application, whether the documentation is complete and communicates the results of the authorization to the applicant as soon as possible and in an accurate and complete manner, so that the applicant can take action corrective if necessary; and even when the application is deficient, continue with the authorization procedure to the extent feasible, if requested by the applicant; and that, upon request, the applicant be informed of the stage of the procedure, explaining any delays;

d) only the information necessary to authorize and calculate the rights is required;

e) the confidential nature of the information referring to a good of the other Party, resulting from such procedures or that has been provided as a result of them, is respected in the same way as in the case of a good of that Party, in manner that protects legitimate business interests;

f) the fees imposed for the authorization procedure of a good of the other Party are equitable in comparison with those that would be collected for the authorization procedure of a similar good of that Party, taking into account the costs of communications, transport and other expenses derived from the differences in the location of the applicant's facilities and those of the authorization body; and

g) establish a procedure to review complaints regarding the application of an authorization procedure and take corrective action when the complaint is justified.

Article 9.09 Metrology

Each Party shall guarantee, to the extent possible, the documented traceability of its standards and the calibration of its measuring instruments, in accordance with the recommendations of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) and the International Organization of Legal Metrology ( OIML), and comply with the requirements stipulated in this Chapter.

Article 9.10 Notification

1. In cases where there is no relevant international standard or where the technical content of a proposed technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure is not in accordance with the technical content of the relevant international standards, and if such technical regulation may have a significant effect on trade between the Parties, each Party shall notify the other Party in writing of the proposed measure, at least sixty (60) days prior to its adoption, in order to allow the Interested Parties provide comments, discuss those comments upon request, and take into account these comments and the results of these discussions.

2. If serious security, health, environmental protection or national security problems arise or threaten to arise, that Party may omit prior notification of the project, but once adopted it must notify the other Party.

3. The notifications established in paragraphs 1 and 2 will be made in accordance with the formats established in the TBT Agreement.

4. Within thirty (30) days after the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall notify the other Party of the entity designated to carry out notifications pursuant to this Article.

5. Each Party shall notify the other Party in writing of its standardization plans and programs.

6. When a Party rejects a shipment, by administrative decision, the Party must notify the person holding the shipment, the technical reasons for the rejection without delay and in writing, via fax, document sent by courier, by email or other means .

7. Once the information referred to in paragraph 5 has been generated, the Party will send it immediately to the Information Center of the other Party,

Article 9.11 Information Centers _ _

1. Each Party shall ensure that there is an information center in its territory capable of responding to all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing up-to-date relevant documentation in relation to any security measure. standardization, metrology, conformity assessment procedures or authorization procedures adopted or proposed in its territory, by governmental or non-governmental bodies.

2. Each Party designates as the Information Center the one indicated in Annex 9.11(2).

3. When an information center requests copies of the documents referred to in paragraph 1, they will be provided free of charge. Interested persons
of the other Party will be provided with copies of the documents at the same price as nationals of the Party, plus the actual cost of shipping.

Article 9.12 Technical Consultations

1. When a Party considers that a measure on standards, regulations, authorization procedures or metrology of the other Party is interpreted or applied in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, the Party shall have the obligation to demonstrate the inconsistency.

2. When a Party requests consultations and so notifies the Committee, specified in Article 9.13, the Committee shall facilitate the consultations, being able to refer them to an ad-hoc working group or to another forum for consultations.

3. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with this Article, without satisfactory results, these consultations shall constitute the consultations provided for in Article 18.05 (Consultations) if the Parties so agree.

Article 9.13 Committee for Standardization, Metrology and Authorization Procedures

1. The Parties establish the Committee for Standardization, Metrology and Authorization Procedures, the composition of which is indicated in Annex 9.13.

2. The Committee will hear matters related to this Chapter, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 17.05 (Committees) and will have the following functions:

a) analyze and propose solutions for those standardization measures, authorization procedures and metrology that a Party considers a technical obstacle to trade;

b) facilitate the process through which the Parties will make their standardization and metrology measures compatible, giving priority, among others, to labeling and packaging;

c) promote technical cooperation activities between the Parties;

d) assist in risk assessments carried out by the Parties;

e) collaborate in the development and strengthening of the standardization and metrology measures of the Parties; and

f) facilitate the process through which the Parties will establish mutual recognition agreements.

ANNEX 9.11 (2)

INFORMATION CENTERS in pdf format

ANNEX 9.13

COMMITTEE FOR STANDARDIZATION, METROLOGY AND AUTHORIZATION PROCEDURES in pdf format

 

FOURTH PART

INVESTMENT, SERVICES AND RELATED ISSUES

CHAPTER 10

INVESTMENT _ _

Section A - Definitions

Article 10.01Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood as:

ICSID: the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

New York Convention: the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held in New York on June 10, 1958 ;

ICSID Convention: the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded in Washington on March 18, 1965;

ICC: International Chamber of Commerce;

company: "company" as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions); and a branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the law of a Party; and a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out business activities therein;

investment : all kinds of merchandise or rights of any nature, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit or other business purposes, acquired with resources transferred or reinvested by an investor, and will include :

a) a company, shares of a company, shares in a company, that allow the owner to participate in the income or profits of the same. Debt instruments of a company and loans to a company when;

i) the company is a branch of the investor, or

ii) the maturity date of the debt instrument or loan is at least three (3) years;

b) a share in a company that entitles the owner to participate in the assets of that company in a liquidation, provided that these are not derived from a debt instrument or a loan excluded pursuant to subparagraph (a);

c) Real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, including rights in the field of intellectual property, as well as any other real right (such as mortgages, pledge rights, usufruct and similar rights) acquired with the expectation of, or used for the purpose of obtaining economic benefit or for other business purposes; and

d) the participation or benefit resulting from allocating capital or other committed resources for the development of an economic activity in the territory of a Party, among others, in accordance with:

i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of the Party, including concessions, construction contracts and turnkey contracts;

ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company;
but investment does not mean;

e) a payment obligation or a credit granted to the State or a state company;

f) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:

i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or a company in the territory of one Party to a company in the territory of the other Party; either

ii) the granting of credits in relation to a commercial transaction whose expiration date is less than three (3) years, as trade financing; except for a loan covered by the provisions as established in subparagraph (a); either

g) any other pecuniary claim that does not refer to the aspects
related in subparagraphs (a) to (d);

disputing investor: an investor who makes a claim under the terms of Section C of this Chapter;

investment of an investor of a Party: the investment owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an investor of that Party;

investor of a Party: a Party or a State company thereof, or a national or company of said Party, which intends to make or, as the case may be, makes or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party;

investor of a Non-Party means, with respect to a Party, an investor who intends to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of that Party, who is not an investor of a Party;

ICSID Additional Facility: Additional ICSID Facility Rules established in 1978;

Disputing Parties: the disputing investor and the disputing Party;

Disputing Party: a Party against which a claim is made under the terms of Section C of this Chapter;

disputing party: the disputing investor or the disputing Party;

ownership or control: In the case of a company, an investment is owned by an investor of a Party, if that investor owns more than fifty percent (50%) of the interest,

An investment is under the control of an investor of a Party if that investor has the power to:

i) appoint the majority of its directors; either

ii) otherwise legally direct its operations;

claim : the claim made by the disputing investor against a Party under the terms of Section C of this Chapter;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976;

Secretary General: the Secretary General of ICSID or of the ICC;

transfers: international shipments and payments;

Tribunal: an arbitral tribunal established pursuant to Article 10.21 and 10.27.

SECTION B - INVESTMENT

Article 10.02Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party,
relating to:

a) investors of the other Party in relation to all matters related to their investment;

b) investments of investors of the other Party in the territory of the Party; and

c) all investments of investors of one Party in the territory of the other Party in relation to Article 10.07.

2. This Chapter does not apply to:

a) measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to financial services;

b) the measures adopted by a Party to limit the participation of the investments of investors of the other Party in its territory for reasons of public order or national security;

c) the economic activities reserved to each Party, in accordance with its legislation in force on the date of signing this Agreement, which are listed in Annex III on the economic activities reserved to each Party;

d) government services or functions such as law enforcement, social rehabilitation services, pension or unemployment insurance or social security services, social welfare, public education, public training, health and child care or child protection ;

e) disputes or claims arising prior to the entry into force of this Agreement or related to events that occurred prior to its entry into force, even if its effects remain even after it, and

f) public procurement.


3. This Chapter applies throughout the territory of the Parties and at any level of government, regardless of incompatible measures that may exist in the laws of those levels of government.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2(d)f if an investor of a Party, duly authorized, provides services or carries out functions such as social rehabilitation services, pension or unemployment insurance or social security services, welfare social, public education, public training, health and child care or child protection, the investments of that investor will be protected by the provisions of this Chapter.

5. This Chapter shall apply both to existing investments on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, as well as to investments made afterward, by investors of one Party in the territory of the other Party.


Article 10.03 national treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to its own investors in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale, or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall grant to the investments of investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to the investments of its own investors with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation , sale or other disposition of investments.

Article 10.04 Most Favored Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that granted, in similar circumstances, to investors of a non-Party, with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation , sale or other disposition of investments

2. Each Party shall grant to the investments of investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to the investments of investors of a non-Party with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct , operation, sale or other disposition of investments.


Article 10.05 Fair and Equitable Treatment

Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party and their investments treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as full protection and security.


Article 10.06Loss Compensation _ _ _

Each Party will grant investors of the other Party, with respect to investments that suffer losses in its territory, due to armed conflicts, state of emergency or civil strife, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to any measure that it adopts or maintains in relation to those losses.


Article 10.7 Performance Requirements

1. Neither Party may impose or enforce any of the following requirements or commitments or obligations, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct or operation of an investment of an investor of the other Party in its territory for :

a) export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;

b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

c) acquire or use or grant preference to goods produced or services provided in its territory, or acquire goods or services from people in its territory; either

d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign currency income associated with said investment;

all the provisions contained in paragraph 1 shall not apply to any requirement other than those indicated therein.

2. Neither Party may condition the receipt of an advantage or the continued receipt thereof, in relation to an investment in its territory by an investor of the other Party, on compliance with any of the following requirements:

a) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

b) acquire, use or grant preference to merchandise produced in its territory, or acquire merchandise from producers in its territory; either

c) relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign exchange earnings associated with said investment;

all the provisions established in paragraph 2 does not apply to any other requirement other than those indicated therein.

3. The provisions contained in:

a) paragraph 1(a), (b) and (c) and paragraph 2(a) and (b) do not apply with respect to the requirements for qualification of goods and services with respect to promotional programs to exports and foreign aid;

b) paragraph 1(b) and (c) and paragraph 2(a) and (b) do not apply to purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; and

c) paragraph 2(a) and (b) do not apply to requirements imposed by an importing Party related to the necessary content of goods to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.

4. Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed as preventing a Party from conditioning the receipt of or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with an investment in its territory by an investor of the other Party, on compliance with a requirement to locate production, provide a service, train or employ workers, build or expand certain facilities, or carry out research and development, in its territory.

5. Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in paragraphs 1(b) or (c) or 2(a) or (b) ) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including those of an environmental nature, necessary to:

a) ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

b) protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

c) the preservation of non-renewable natural resources, living or not.

6. In the event that, in the opinion of a Party, the imposition by the other Party of any of the requirements indicated below, negatively affects the flow of trade or constitutes a significant barrier to investment by an investor of a Party, the matter will be considered by the Commission:

a) restrict the sales in their territory of the goods that this investment produces, relating in any way those sales to the volume or value of their exports or to foreign currency earnings that they generate;

b) transfer technology, production process or other knowledge reserved to a person in its territory, except when the requirement is imposed by a judicial court or competent administrative authority, to repair an alleged violation of competition law or to act in a manner that is not inconsistent with other provisions of this Agreement; either

c) act as the exclusive supplier of the goods or services it produces for a specific, regional or global market.

7. A measure that requires an investment to use a technology to meet generally applicable health, safety, or environmental requirements shall not be considered inconsistent with paragraph 6(b). For greater certainty, Sections 10.03 and 10.04 apply to this measure.

8. If the Commission finds that, in effect, the requirement in question adversely affects the flow of trade or constitutes a significant barrier to investment by an investor of the other Party, it will recommend that the practice in question be suspended.


Article 10.08 Senior Executives and Administration Councils or Boards of Directors

1. Neither Party may require that a company of that Party, which is an investment of an investor of the other Party, appoint persons of any particular nationality to senior management positions in that company,

2. A Party may require that the majority of the members of the administrative bodies or boards of directors of an enterprise of that Party, which is an investment of an investor of the other Party, be of a particular nationality or resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not impair the investor's ability to exercise control of its investment.


Article 10.09 Reservations and Exceptions

1. Articles 10.03, 10.04, 10.07 and 10.08 do not apply to:

any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by:

i) a Party at the national level, as stipulated in its Schedule to Annex I or III, or

ii) a local or municipal government;

the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that said modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force before said modification with Articles 10.03, 10.04, 10.07 and 10.08.

2. Articles 10.03, 10.04, 10.07 and 10.08 shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its list in Annex II.

3. Neither Party shall for any reason require, in accordance with any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and included in its list in Annex II, an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, that sells or otherwise disposes of an existing investment at the time the measure becomes effective.

4. Article 10.04 does not apply to the treatment agreed by a Party under this Agreement with respect to sectors included in its list in Annex V.

5. Articles 10.03, 10.04 and 10.07 do not apply to:

a) purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; and

b) subsidies or donations provided by a Party or a state enterprise, including government-backed loans, granted by a Party or by a state enterprise.

Article 10.10 transfers

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to the investment of an investor of the other Party in the Party's territory to be made freely and without delay. Such transfers include:

a) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration expenses, technical assistance and other charges, gains in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;

b) profits derived from the sale or total or partial liquidation of the investment;

c) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or its investment is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

d) payments made in accordance with Article 10.11; and

e) payments derived from the application of the dispute resolution mechanism contained in Section C of this Chapter.

2. Each Party shall permit transfers to be made without delay in freely convertible currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of the transfer.

3. None of the Parties shall require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits, or profits or other amounts derived from, or attributable to the investments carried out in the territory of the other Party, nor shall it penalize them in the event that do not make transfers.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent a transfer through the equitable, non-discriminatory application of its laws in the following cases:

a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;

b) definitive administrative or judicial decision;

c) failure to report transfers of currency or other monetary instruments;

d) guarantee compliance with judgments and arbitral awards rendered; either

e) issuance, sale or negotiation of securities.

5. Paragraph 3 shall not be construed as an impediment for a Party, through the application of its laws in an equitable, non-discriminatory manner and in good faith, to impose any measure related to subparagraphs (a) to (e) of paragraph 4.

Article 10.11 Expropriation and Compensation

1. Neither Party may nationalize or expropriate, directly or indirectly, an investment of an investor of the other Party in its territory, or take any measure equivalent to the expropriation or nationalization of that investment ("expropriation"), except as :

a) for reasons of public interest;

b) on non-discriminatory grounds;

c) with adherence to the principles of legality and due process; and

d) through compensation in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

2. The compensation will be equal to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out (date of expropriation), and will not reflect any change in value due to the intention to expropriate was known in advance of the expropriation date. The valuation criteria will include the current value, the value of the asset, including the declared tax value of tangible properties, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value.

3. The payment of the compensation will be made without delay and will be fully payable.

4. The amount paid as compensation to the expropriated investor shall not be less than the equivalent amount that would have been paid on said date in freely convertible currency in the international financial market according to the exchange rate in force on the date on which the fair market value was determined. The compensation will include the payment of interest calculated from the day of dispossession of the expropriated investment until the day of payment, which will be calculated based on an applicable commercial rate for that currency of the system national bank of the Party where the expropriation takes place.

5. Once paid, compensation shall be freely transferable in accordance with Article 10.10.

6. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights, to the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is in accordance with TRIPS .

7. For the purposes of this Article and for greater certainty, a non-discriminatory measure of general application shall not be considered to be a measure equivalent to the expropriation of a debt security or a loan covered by this Chapter, only because said measure imposes costs to a debtor whose result is non-payment of the debt.

Article 10.12 Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 10.03 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of the other Party, such as the requirement that investors be residents of a Party or that the investments are constituted in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do not significantly impair the protection granted by a Party in accordance with this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 10.03 and 10.04, a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its investment in its territory to provide routine information regarding that investment, exclusively for information or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect business information that is confidential from any disclosure that could negatively affect the competitive situation of the investor or investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a Party from obtaining by another party or disclosing information in connection with the good faith and equitable application of its law.

Article 10.13 Relationship with other Chapters

1. In the event of any incompatibility between a provision of this Chapter and the provision of another, the provision of the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

2. If a Party requires a service provider of the other Party to post a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for providing a service in its territory, this by itself does not make this Chapter applicable to cross-border provision. of that service. This Chapter applies to the treatment granted by that Party to the deposited bond or financial guarantee.

Article 10.14 Denial of Benefits

Prior notification and consultation, made in accordance with the provisions of Articles 16.04 (Provision of Information) and 18.05 (Consultations), a Party may deny the benefits contained in this Chapter to an investor of the other Party that is a company of such Party and the investments of such investors, if investors of a non-Party own or control (directly or indirectly), the enterprise and the enterprise do not have substantial business activities in the territory of the Party, under whose law it is constituted or organized.

Article 10.15  Measures Related to the Environment

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party from adopting, maintaining, or executing any measure, consistent with this Chapter, that it deems appropriate to ensure that investment activities in its territory comply with ecological or environmental legislation in that Party. .

2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by relaxing domestic measures applicable to health, safety, ecology or the environment. Accordingly, a Party shall not waive or derogate or offer to waive or derogate such measures as an encouragement to the establishment, acquisition, expansion or maintenance of an investor's investment in its territory. If a Party believes that the other Party has encouraged an investment in such a way, it may request consultations with that other Party.

Section C - Settlement of Disputes between a Party and an Investor of the other Party

Article 10.16 Purpose _

Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties established in Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution), this Section establishes a mechanism for the solution of investment disputes that arise as a result of the violation of an obligation established in Section B of this Chapter, and ensures equal treatment between investors of the Parties in accordance with the principle of reciprocity and due process before an impartial arbitral tribunal.

Article 10.17 Claim by an Investor of a Party, on its own account

1. In accordance with this Section, an investor of the other Party may submit to arbitration a claim based on the fact that the other Party or a company directly or indirectly controlled by that Party has violated an obligation established in this Chapter, if the investor has suffered loss or damage by virtue of that breach.

2. An investor may not file a claim if more than three (3) years have elapsed from the date on which they first knew or should have known of the alleged violation, as well as knowledge that they suffered losses or damage.

Article 10.18 Claim by an Investor of a Party, on behalf of a Company

1. An investor of a Party, on behalf of an enterprise of the other Party, owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the investor, may submit to arbitration, in accordance with this Section, a claim based on the fact that the other Party or a company controlled directly or indirectly by that Party has violated an obligation established in this Chapter, provided that the company has suffered losses or damages by virtue of that violation or as a consequence of it.

2. An investor may not file a claim on behalf of the company referred to in paragraph 1, if more than three (3) years have elapsed from the date the company first became aware of it, or he must have known of the alleged violation, as well as knowledge that he suffered loss or damage.

3. When an investor presents a claim in accordance with this Article and, in parallel, an investor that does not have control of a company, presents a claim under the terms of Article 10.17 as a consequence of the same acts that gave rise to the presentation. of a claim under this Article, or two or more claims are submitted to arbitration under Article 10.21, the Tribunal established under Article 10.27 shall jointly consider such claims, unless the Tribunal determines that the interests of a disputing party they would be harmed by it.

Article 10.19 Settlement of a Dispute through Consultation and Negotiation

The disputing Parties shall first attempt to settle the dispute through consultation or negotiation.

Article 10.20  Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration

The disputing investor shall notify the disputing Party in writing of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration at least ninety (90) days before the claim is filed, and the notice shall state the following:

a) the name and address of the disputing investor and when the claim has been made in accordance with Article 10.18, it will include the name or business name, address and business line of the company;

b) the provisions of this Chapter allegedly breached and any other pertinent provision;

c) the issues of fact and law on which the claim is based; and

d) the reparation requested and the approximate amount of the damages claimed.

Article 10.21 Submission of the Claim to Arbitration

1. As long as six (6) months have elapsed since the acts that gave rise to the claim took place, a disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration in accordance with:

a) the ICSID Convention, provided that the disputing Party and the investor Party are Contracting Parties to the Convention;

b) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, when the disputing Party or the investing Party, but not both are Contracting Parties to the ICSID Convention; either

the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; either

the ICC Rules of Arbitration.

2. The applicable arbitration rules will govern the arbitration established in this chapter, except as modified by this section.

Article 10.22  Conditions Prior to the Submission of a Claim to the Arbitration Procedure

1. The consent of the disputing parties to the arbitration procedure in accordance with this Chapter shall be considered as consent to said arbitration to the exclusion of any other mechanism.

2. Each Party may require the prior exhaustion of its administrative remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under this Chapter. However, if after six (6) months from the moment the corresponding administrative resources were filed, and the administrative authorities have not issued their final resolution, the investor may resort directly to arbitration, in accordance with the provisions of this Section. .

3. A disputing investor may submit a claim to
arbitration proceedings in accordance with Article 10.17, only if;

to). consents to arbitration under the terms of the procedures set forth in this Section; and

b). the investor and, when the claim refers to loss or damage of a participation in a company of the other Party that is owned by the investor or is under its direct or indirect control, the investor and the company waive their right to initiate o continue any proceeding before any judicial or administrative court, in accordance with the law of the Parties, or other dispute resolution procedures and any proceeding with respect to any measure of the disputing Party allegedly in violation of the provisions referred to in Article 10.17, except for the procedures, which do not involve the payment of monetary damages, before the judicial court or administrative or competent authority, in accordance with the legislation of the disputing Party.

4. A disputing investor may submit a claim to arbitration in accordance with Article 10.18, only if both the investor and the company:

a) agree to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures set forth in this Section; and

b) they waive their right to initiate or continue any proceeding with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be one of the violations referred to in Article 10.18 before any judicial court 10-15 or competent authority under the law of a Party or other dispute resolution procedures, except procedures, which do not involve the payment of monetary damages, before the administrative or judicial court, in accordance with the law of the disputing Party.

5. The consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in writing, delivered to the disputing Party, and included in the submission of the claim to arbitration.

6. A waiver by an enterprise pursuant to paragraphs 3(b) and 4(b) shall not be required if and only if the disputing Party has deprived the disputing investor of control of the enterprise.

Article 10.23 Consent to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to submit claims to arbitration in accordance with the procedures and requirements established in this Section.

2. The consent referred to in paragraph 1 and the submission of a claim to arbitration by a disputing investor will be deemed to have met the requirements of:

a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the Parties;

b) Article II of the New York Convention, which requires a written agreement.

Article 10.24 Number of Arbitrators and Method of Appointment

With the exception of what refers to the Tribunal established pursuant to Article 10.27, and unless the disputing Parties agree otherwise, the Tribunal shall be composed of three (3) arbitrators, one appointed by each of the disputing Parties and the third to be the president of the tribunal and will be appointed by agreement of the disputing Parties.

Article 10.25 Integration of a Tribunal in the event that a Party does not appoint an arbitrator or the disputing Parties do not reach an Agreement on the appointment of the President of the Tribunal

1. In the event that a disputing party does not appoint an arbitrator or an agreement is not reached in the appointment of the President of the Tribunal, they will be appointed in accordance with this Section.

2. When a Tribunal, other than the one established in accordance with Article 10.27, is not integrated within a period of ninety (90) days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, the Secretary General of the CIADL or an official assigned (hereinafter the Secretary General) of an international organization agreed upon by the disputing Parties, after consulting them, shall appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed, but not the President of the Tribunal who shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of Article paragraph 3. In any case, the majority of the arbitrators may not be nationals of the disputing Party or nationals of the Party of the disputing investor.

3. The Secretary General shall appoint the president of the Tribunal from the list of arbitrators referred to in paragraph 4, ensuring that the president of the Tribunal is not a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the Tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary General shall designate, from the List of CIADl Arbitrators, the president of the Tribunal, provided he is of a nationality other than that of the disputing Party or the of the Party of the disputing investor.

4. As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall establish and maintain a list of six (6) arbitrators as possible presidents of the Tribunal, none of whom may be a national of a Party, who meet the requirements established in the Article 10.21 and who have experience in international law and investment matters. The members of the list will be appointed by mutual agreement regardless of their nationality for a period of two (2) years, renewable if the Parties so agree. In the event of the death or resignation of a member of the list, the Parties by mutual agreement will designate another person to replace him in his functions for the rest of the period for which he was appointed.

Article 10.26 Agreement for the Appointment of Arbitrators

For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator pursuant to Article 10.25(3) or on a basis other than nationality:

a) the disputing Party accepts the appointment of each of the members of a Tribunal established in accordance with the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules;

b) a disputing investor referred to in Article 10.17 may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules, only on condition that the disputing investor consents in writing to the arbitration. appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal; and

c) the disputing investor referred to in Article 10.18(1) may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID Convention or the Additional Facility Rules, only on condition that the disputing investor and the company state their written consent to the appointment of each of the members of the Tribunal.

Article 10.27 Accumulation of processes

1. A Tribunal established under this Article shall be constituted in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of said Rules, except as provided in this Section.

2. When a Tribunal established under this Article determines that the claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.21 raise a common issue of fact or law, the Tribunal may in the interest of a fair and efficient resolution of the claims, and having heard the disputing Parties, order that:

a) assume jurisdiction, know and resolve all or part of the claims, jointly; either

b) assumes jurisdiction, knows and resolves one or more of the claims on the basis that this will contribute to the resolution of the others.

3. A disputing party seeking an order under the terms of paragraph 2 shall request the Secretary General to set up a Tribunal and shall specify in its request:

a) the name of the disputing Party or of the disputing investors against whom the order is sought;

b) the nature of the requested order; and

c) the grounds on which the request is based,

4. The disputing party shall deliver a copy of its request to the disputing Party or to the disputing investors against whom the order is sought.

5. Within a period of sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the request, the Secretary General shall establish a Tribunal made up of three (3) arbitrators. The Secretary General shall appoint the President of the Tribunal from the list of arbitrators referred to in Article 10.25 (4). In the event that one (1) arbitrator available to preside over the Tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary General will designate, from the ICSID List of Arbitrators, the president of the Tribunal who will not be a national of any of the Parties. The Secretary General will appoint the other two (2) members of the Tribunal from the list referred to in Article 10.25 (4) and, when they are not available on said list, he will select them from the ICSID List of Arbitrators; If there are no arbitrators available on this List, the Secretary General will make the remaining appointments at his discretion. One (1) of the members shall be a national of the disputing Party and the other member of the Tribunal shall be a national of the Party of the disputing investors.

6. When a Tribunal has been established pursuant to this Article, the disputing investor who has submitted a claim to arbitration pursuant to Article 10.17 or 10.18 and has not been named in the request made pursuant to paragraph 3, may request in writing to the Court to be included in an order made in accordance with paragraph 2, and you must specify in the application:

a) The name, address and line of business of the disputing investor's company.

b) the nature of the requested order; and

c) the grounds on which the request is based.

7. A disputing investor referred to in paragraph 6 shall deliver a copy of its request to the disputing parties named in a request made pursuant to paragraph 3.

8. A Tribunal established under Article 10.21 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, over which a Tribunal established under this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

9. At the request of a disputing party, a Tribunal established under this Article may, pending its decision under paragraph 2, order that the proceedings of a Tribunal established under Article 10.21 be adjourned unless that latter Tribunal has suspended its procedures until it is resolved on the origin of the accumulation.

10. A disputing Party shall deliver to the Secretariat within fifteen (15) days from the date it is received by the disputing Party, a copy of:

a) a request for arbitration made pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention;

b) a notice of arbitration under the terms of Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; either

c) a notice of arbitration in the terms provided by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; either

d) a request for arbitration made in accordance with the arbitration rules of the ICC.

11. A disputing party shall deliver to the Secretary a copy of the request formulated in the terms of paragraph 3:

a) within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the request in the case of a request made by the disputing investor; either

b) within fifteen (15) days from the date the request was made in the case of a request made by the disputing Party.

12. A disputing party shall deliver to the Secretariat a copy of a request formulated in the terms of paragraph 6 within a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the request.

13. The Secretariat will keep a public record of the documents referred to in paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 of this article.

Article 10.28  Notification

The disputing party shall deliver to the other party:

a) written notification of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration no later than thirty (30) days after the date of submission of the claim; and

b) copies of all pleadings submitted in the arbitration proceeding.

Article 10.29 Participation by a Party

Upon written notice to the disputing parties, a Party may submit to a Tribunal its views on a question of interpretation of this Agreement.

Article 10.30 Documentation

1. A Party shall be entitled, at its own expense, to receive from the disputing party a copy of:

a) the evidence offered to the Tribunal established pursuant to this Section; and

b) the arguments written by the disputing parties.

2. A Party receiving information pursuant to paragraph 1 shall treat the information as confidential as if it were a disputing party.

Article 10.31 Seat of the Arbitration Procedure

Unless otherwise agreed by the disputing parties, a Tribunal established pursuant to this Section shall conduct arbitration proceedings in the territory of a Contracting Party to the New York Convention, which shall be selected in accordance with:

a) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those Rules or by the ICSID Convention; either

b) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those Rules; either

c) the ICC Rules of Arbitration, if the arbitration is governed by those Rules.

Article 10.32 Applicable Law

1 A Tribunal established under this Section shall decide disputes in accordance with this Treaty and with applicable rules of international law.

2. The Commission's interpretation of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on a Tribunal established pursuant to this Section.

Article 10.33  Interpretation of Annexes

1. When a disputing party alleges as a defense that a measure allegedly in violation falls within the scope of a reservation or exception consigned in those Annexes at the request of the disputing party, the Tribunal established pursuant to this Section shall request an interpretation from the Commission on that affair. The Commission, within a period of sixty (60) days from the delivery of the request, will present its interpretation in writing to the Tribunal.

2. Pursuant to Article 10.32(2), the Commission's interpretation submitted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be binding on any Tribunal established pursuant to this Section. If the Commission does not submit an interpretation within a period of sixty (60) days, the Tribunal will decide on the matter.

Article 10.34  Expert Opinions

Notwithstanding the appointment of other types of experts, when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the Tribunal, at the request of a disputing party, or on its own initiative, may appoint one or more experts to rule in writing on any situation related to the controversy.

Article 10.35  Provisional Protection Measures

A Tribunal established pursuant to this Section or the disputing parties may request the courts, in accordance with their legislation, the imposition of a provisional measure of protection, to preserve the rights of the disputing party or to ensure that the jurisdiction or jurisdiction of the Court takes full effect. A Court established pursuant to this Section may not order the seizure or seizure, nor may it impose the application of the allegedly infringing measure referred to in Article 10.17 or 10.18.

Article 10.36  Final Award

1. When a Tribunal established pursuant to this Section renders a final award unfavorable to a disputing party, said Tribunal may only rule on:

a) pecuniary damages and applicable interest; either

b) the restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the disputing party pay the pecuniary damages, and the applicable interest, instead of the restitution.

A Tribunal may also award the payment of costs in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, where the claim is made under Article 10.18(1):

a) the award that provides for the restitution of the property, will provide that the restitution be granted to the company; either

b) the award that provides for the payment of pecuniary damages and interest that proceed, will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company.

3. The award will be rendered without prejudice to any rights that a person may have in restitution under applicable national law.

Article 10.37 Finality and Enforcement of the award

1. The award rendered by any Tribunal established pursuant to this Section shall be binding only for the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and the award review procedure, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with an award without delay.

3. A disputing party may not request enforcement of a final award as long as:

a) in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID Convention:

i) one hundred and twenty (120) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested its clarification, revision, or annulment; either

ii) the clarification, review or annulment procedures have been completed;

and

b) in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;

i) Ninety (90) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has made use of the pertinent legal remedies.

ii) a court has rejected or admitted a request for the pertinent appeals against the award and this resolution cannot be appealed,

4. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.

5. When a disputing party fails to comply with or does not comply with a final award, the Commission, upon delivery of a request from a Party whose investor was a party to the arbitration proceeding, shall form an arbitration group in accordance with Article 18.07 (Establishment of the Arbitration Panel). . The requesting Party may invoke in said proceedings:

a) a determination that the breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement;

and

b) a recommendation that the Party comply with and abide by the final award.

6. The disputing investor may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the New York Convention, or the ICSID Convention regardless of whether or not the procedures contemplated in paragraph 5 have been initiated.

7. A claim submitted to arbitration under this section shall be deemed to arise out of a business relationship or transaction, pursuant to Article 1 of the New York Convention.

Article 10.38  General Provisions

Moment in which the claim is considered submitted) to arbitration

1. A claim is considered subject to arbitration under this Section when:

a) the request for arbitration pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention has been received by the Secretary-General.

b) the notice of arbitration pursuant to Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules has been received by the Secretary-General;

c) the notice of arbitration provided for in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules has been received by the disputing Party; either

d) The request included in article 3 of the ICC contemplated in the Arbitration Rules has been received by the Secretariat.

Service of Notice and Other Documents

2. The delivery of the notice and other documents to a Party shall be made at the place designated by it in Annex 10.38 (2).

Payments Under Insurance or Guarantee Contracts

3. In an arbitration proceeding pursuant to the provisions of this Section, a Party shall not adduce as a defense, against demand, right of compensation, or others, that the disputing investor has received or will receive, according to an insurance or guarantee contract, indemnity or other compensation for all or part of the claimed damages.

Publication of an award

4. The awards will be published only if there is a written agreement between the disputing parties.

ANNEX 10.38 (2)

DELIVERY OF NOTIFICATIONS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 11

CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES

Article 11.01 Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood as:

cross-border trade in services or cross-border service: the provision of a service:

a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

b) in the territory of one Party to a consumer of services of the other Party; either

c) by a service provider of a Party, through the presence of natural persons of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the provision of a service in the territory of a Party through an investment, as defined in Article 10.01 (Definitions) in that territory;

company: a "company" as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions);

enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the law of a Party; and a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out business activities therein;

quantitative restriction : a non-discriminatory measure that imposes limitations on:

a) the number of service providers, whether through a quota, a monopoly or an economic needs test or by any other quantitative means; either

b) the operations of any service provider, whether through a fee or an economic needs test or by any other quantitative means;

services supplied in the exercise of government functions: any cross-border service provided by a public institution, which is not provided on commercial terms or in competition with one or more service providers; and

service provider of a Party: a person of the Party that provides or intends to provide a service cross-border;

Article 11.02 Area of ​​application

1 This Chapter applies to the measures that a Party adopts or maintains on cross-border services, carried out by the service providers of the other Party, including those related to;

a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a cross-border service;

b) the purchase, use or payment of a cross-border service;

c) access to and use of distribution and transportation systems related to the provision of a cross-border service;

d) the presence in its territory of a cross-border service provider of the other Party; and

e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a cross-border service.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood that the measures adopted or maintained by a Party include the measures adopted or maintained by non-governmental institutions or organizations in the exercise of regulatory, administrative or other functions of a governmental nature delegated to them by that Party. Part.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:

a) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including loans, guarantees and insurance supported by a Party;

b) air services, including national and international air transport, scheduled and non-scheduled, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:

i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period when an aircraft is withdrawn from service;

ii) the sale and marketing of air transport services; and

iii) the services of computerized reservation systems (SCR);

c) government services or functions, such as law enforcement, social rehabilitation services, pension or unemployment insurance or social security services, merchandise, social welfare, public education, public training, health and child care or protection of childhood;

d ) cross-border financial services; and

e) Government purchases made by a State Party or company.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in the sense of imposing any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor to confer any right to that national, with respect to that income or employment.

Article 11.03 National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant cross-border services and service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own services or to service providers.

2. Specific commitments under this Article shall not be construed as requiring Members to compensate inherent competitive disadvantages resulting from the foreign nature of the relevant services or service suppliers,

Article 11.04 Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall immediately and unconditionally grant to cross-border services and service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own services and to service providers of any non-Party country. .

Article 11.05 Local presence

Neither Party shall require a service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of company, or to reside in its territory, as a condition for the provision of a cross-border service.

Article 11.06Granting of Permits, Authorizations, Licenses and Certifications

In order to guarantee that any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the requirements and procedures for the granting of permits, authorizations, licenses or certifications to nationals of the other Party does not constitute an unnecessary barrier to cross-border services, each The Party shall endeavor to ensure that such measures:

a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as the capacity and aptitude to provide a cross-border service;

b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of a cross-border service; and

c) do not constitute a disguised restriction on the provision of a cross-border service.

Article 11.07  Reservations

1. Articles 11.03, 11.04 and 11.05 do not apply to:

a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by:

i) a Party at the national level, as stipulated in its Schedule to Annex I or III;

ii) a local or municipal government;

b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

c) a modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a), provided that such modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 11.03, 11.04 and 11.05.

2. Articles 11.03, 11.04 and 11.05 shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

Article 11.08 Quantitative Restrictions

1. Each Party shall indicate in its schedule to Annex IV any quantitative restrictions it maintains.

2 Each Party shall notify the other Party of any measure that constitutes a quantitative restriction, other than those at the local government level, that is adopted after the entry into force of this Agreement, and shall indicate the restriction in the list referred to in the paragraph 1.

3. Periodically, at least once every two (2) years, the Parties shall endeavor to negotiate to liberalize or eliminate:

a) existing quantitative restrictions maintained by a Party, according to the list referred to in paragraph 1; either

b) quantitative restrictions adopted by a Party after the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 11.09 Denial of Benefits

Upon notification and consultation, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 16.04 (Provision of Information) and 18.05 (Consultations), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service provider of the other Party, where the Party decides, according to its current law that the service is being provided by a company that is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party that does not have substantial economic activities in the territory of the other Party.

Article 11.10 Future Liberalization

Through future negotiations to be convened by the Commission, the Parties will deepen the liberalization achieved in the different service sectors, with a view to achieving the elimination of the remaining restrictions listed in accordance with Article 11.07(1) and (2).

Article 11.11  Procedures

The Parties will establish procedures so that;

a) a Party notifies the other Party and includes in its relevant lists

i) modifications to measures referred to in Article 11.07(1) and (2); and

ii) quantitative restrictions in accordance with Article 11.08; and

b) consultations on reservations or quantitative restrictions tending to achieve
greater liberalization.

Article 11.12 Disclosure of Confidential Information

Nothing in this Chapter may be interpreted in the sense of imposing on the Parties, the obligation to provide confidential information whose disclosure may constitute an obstacle to compliance with the laws or be otherwise contrary to the public interest, or may harm legitimate commercial interests. of public or private companies.

Article 11.13 Committee on Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Investment and Cross-Border Trade in Services, the composition of which is indicated in Annex 11.13.

2. The Committee will hear matters related to this Chapter and Chapter 10 (Investment) and, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 17.05 (2) (Committees), it will have the following functions:

a) supervise the execution and administration of Chapters 10 (Investment) and 11 (Cross-Border Trade in Services);

b) discuss matters on investment and cross-border trade in services that are presented to it by any of the Parties;

c) analyze these matters, which are discussed in other international forums;

d) facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties and cooperate in matters of advice on investment and cross-border trade in services; and

e) create working groups or convene groups of experts on issues of mutual interest to the Parties.

3. The Committee will meet when necessary, or at any time at the request of either Party. Likewise, representatives of other institutions may participate when the responsible authorities deem it appropriate.

ANNEX 11.13

COMMITTEE ON INVESTMENT AND CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES in pdf format

 

GUATEMALAN LIST

ANNEX I

NON-CONFORMING MEASURES in pdf format

ANNEX II

FUTURE MEASURES in pdf format

ANNEX III

ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES RESERVED TO THE STATE in pdf format

ANNEX IV

NON-DISCRIMINATORY QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS in pdf format

ANNEX V

MOST FAVORED NATION TREATMENT in pdf format

 

LIST OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA (TAIWAN)

ANNEX I

NON-CONFORMING MEASURES in pdf format

ANNEX II

FUTURE MEASURES in pdf format

ANNEX III

ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES RESERVED TO THE STATE in pdf format

ANNEX IV

NON-DISCRIMINATORY QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS in pdf format

ANNEX V

MOST FAVORED NATION TREATMENT in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 12

TEMPORARY ENTRY OF BUSINESS PERSONS

Article 12.01 Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood as:

business activities: those legitimate activities of a commercial nature created and operated in order to obtain profits in the market, not including the possibility of obtaining employment, nor salary or remuneration from a labor source in the territory of a Party;

labor certification : the procedure carried out by the competent administrative authority aimed at determining whether a national of one Party, who intends to temporarily enter the territory of the other Party, displaces national labor in the same labor branch or significantly impairs working conditions Of the same;

temporary entry: the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;

national: "national" as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions), but does not include permanent residents:

business person: a national of a Party who is engaged in trade in goods, provision of services, or investment activities; and

recurring practice : a practice carried out by the immigration authorities of a Party on a repetitive basis during a representative period prior to and immediately after its execution.

2. For the purposes of Annex 12.04 (Temporary Entry of Business Persons), the following terms shall be understood as:

executive functions: the functions assigned within an organization to a person who has mainly the following responsibilities:

a) direct the administration of the organization, or an essential function within it;

b) establish the policies and objectives of the organization, components or functions; either

c) receive supervision or general direction only from the highest level executives, the board of directors or the council of administration of the organization or the shareholders of the same.

managerial functions: the functions assigned within an organization to a person who basically has the following responsibilities:

a) direct the organization or an essential function within it;

b) supervise and control the work of other professional employees, supervisors or administrators;

c) have the authority to hire and fire, or recommend those actions, as well as others regarding! management of the personnel that is being directly supervised by that person and execute functions at a higher level within the organizational hierarchy or with respect to the function of their position; either

d) execute actions at their discretion regarding the daily operation of the function over which that person has authority; and

functions that involve specialized knowledge: those functions that involve special knowledge of merchandise, services, research, equipment, techniques, administration of the organization or its interests and its application in international markets, or an advanced level of knowledge or experience in the processes and procedures of the organization.


Article 12.02 General principles

This Chapter reflects the preferential commercial relationship that exists between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating temporary entry on a reciprocal basis and the establishment of transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose; as well as the need to guarantee security at the borders and to protect the national labor force and permanent employment in their respective territories.

Article 12.03 General Obligations

1. Each Party shall apply the measures related to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with Article 12.02 and, in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or prejudice in trade in goods and services, or in investment activities. covered by this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall endeavor to develop and adopt common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the application of this Chapter.

Article 12.04 Temporary Entry Authorization

1. In accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, including those contained in Annexes 12.04 (Temporary Entry of Business Persons) and 12.04(1) (Specific Provisions for the Temporary Entry of Business Persons), each Party shall authorize the entry to business persons who comply with the other applicable measures, related to public health and safety, as well as those related to national security.

2. A Party may deny temporary entry to a business person when the temporary entry of that person is likely to adversely affect:

a) the solution of any ongoing labor dispute in the place where they are employed or will be employed; either

b) the employment of any person involved in that conflict.

3. When a Party denies temporary entry, in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party may:

a) inform in writing the reasons for the refusal to the affected business person; and

b) notify promptly and in writing to the Party where the business person is from, the reasons why their entry has been denied.

4. Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees for processing applications for temporary entry of business persons, to the approximate cost of the services rendered.

5. A temporary entry authorization in accordance with this Chapter does not replace the requirements for the exercise of a profession or activity in accordance with the specific regulations in force in the territory of the Party that authorizes temporary entry.

Article 12.05 Provision of information

1. In addition to the provisions of Article 16.03 (Publication), each Party shall:

a) provide the other Party with information material that allows it to know the measures it adopts in relation to this Chapter; and

b) no later than one (1) year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, it shall prepare, publish and make available to the interested parties, both in its own territory and in that of the other Party, a consolidated document with material explaining the requirements for temporary entry under this Chapter, so that business persons of the other Party can see it.

2. Each Party shall compile, maintain, and make available to the other Party information related to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this Chapter, to business persons of the other Party who have been issued immigration documentation, including specific information for each authorized category.

Article 12.06 Settlement of Disputes

A Party may not initiate proceedings pursuant to Article 18.05 (Consultations), with respect to a refusal to grant temporary entry pursuant to this Chapter, or with respect to any particular case covered by Article 12.03, unless:

a) the matter refers to a recurring practice; and

b) the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him with respect to that particular matter, in accordance with the legislation of that Party.

Article 12.07 Relationship with Other Chapters and Articles

Except as provided in this Chapter and in Chapters 1 (Initial Provisions), 2 (General Definitions), 1/(Treaty Administration), 21 (Final Provisions), and Articles 16.02 (Information Centers), 16.03 (Publication) , 16.04 (Provision of Information), 16.05 (Hearing Guarantees, Legality and Due Process) and 16.06 (Administrative Procedures for the Adoption of Measures of General Application), no provision of this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures. .

ANNEX 12.04

TEMPORARY ENTRY OF BUSINESS PERSONS in pdf format

ANNEX 12.04 (1)

SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR TEMPORARY ENTRYin pdf format

APPENDIX 12.04 (A) (1)

BUSINESS VISITORS in pdf format

APPENDIX 12.04 (A) (2)

CURRENT IMMIGRATION MEASURES in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 13

AIR TRANSPORT


Article 13.01 Scope of Application

1. This Chapter shall apply to the measures that a Party adopts or maintains in the area of ​​air transport services.

2. The Agreements on air transport entered into and to be entered into between the Republic of Guatemala and the Republic of China (Taiwan) will be incorporated into this Agreement, hereinafter the Agreements.

3. In case of incompatibility between this Agreement and the Agreements, the former shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

Article 13.02 Consolidation of Measures

Any modification to the Agreements shall not eliminate or reduce existing rights to this Agreement.

Article 13.03 Dispute Resolution

1. Controversies that arise regarding the application or interpretation of this Chapter or the Agreements will be governed by the provisions of Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution), except as established in this Article.

2. When a Party asserts that a dispute arises in relation to paragraph 1, Article 18.10 (Selection of the Arbitration Panel) shall apply, except when the arbitration panel is made up entirely of persons who meet the requirements established in subparagraphs a) and b);

a) within a period of thirty (30) days from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will establish by consensus a list of up to six (6) people who have the necessary aptitudes and suitability to act as arbitrators in terms of air transport services; and

b) the members of the list must:

i) have specialized knowledge or experience in the practice of air transport services; and

ii) comply with the requirements established in Article 18.09 (Qualities of the Referees).

3. In the event that the list referred to in paragraph 2(a) has not been established, each disputing party shall appoint an arbitrator and the third shall be appointed by the disputing Parties by mutual agreement. When an arbitration group has not been integrated in accordance with this paragraph within the term established in article 18.07 (Establishment of the Arbitration Group), the President of the Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) or a suitable official of an international organization agreed by the disputing Parties, may designate the arbitrator or arbitrators that had not been appointed, in accordance with the procedures of that body and at the request of any disputing Party.

Article 13.04 Air Transport Committee

1. The Parties establish an Air Transport Committee, the composition of which is indicated in Annex 13.04.

2. The Committee will handle all matters related to this Chapter.

ANNEX 13.04

AIR TRANSPORT COMMITTEE in pdf format

CHAPTER 14

MARINE TRANSPORT


Article 14.01Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter shall apply to the measures that a Party adopts or maintains in the area of ​​maritime transport services.

2. The agreements on maritime transport entered into and to be entered into between the Republic of Guatemala and the Republic of China (Taiwan) will be incorporated into this Agreement, hereinafter the Agreements.

3. In case of incompatibility between this Agreement and the Agreements, the former shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

Article 14.02 Consolidation of Measures

Any modification that is carried out in the Agreements, may not eliminate or impair the rights in force before said modification was made.

Article 14.03 Dispute Resolution

1. Disputes that arise regarding the application or interpretation of this Chapter or the Agreements will be governed by the provisions of Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution), except as established in this Article.

2. When a Party asserts that a controversy arises in relation to paragraph 1r, Article 18.10 (Selection of the Arbitration Group) will be applicable, except when the arbitration panel is made up entirely of persons who meet the requirements established in the literals to ) and b);

a) within a period of thirty (30) days from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will establish by consensus a list of up to six (6) people, who have the necessary aptitudes and suitability to act as arbitrators in matters of maritime transport services; and

b) the members of the list must:

i) have specialized knowledge or experience in the practice of maritime transport services; and

ii) comply with the requirements established in Article 1809 (Qualities of Arbitrators).

3. In the event that the list referred to in paragraph 2(a) has not been established, each disputing party shall appoint an arbitrator and the third shall be appointed by the disputing Parties by mutual agreement. When an arbitral group has not been integrated in accordance with this paragraph within the period established in article 18.07 (Establishment of the Arbitration Group), the President of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCIDRAL) or a suitable official of An international organization agreed upon by the disputing Parties may designate the arbitrator or arbitrators that have not been appointed, in accordance with the procedures of that organization and at the request of any disputing Party.

Article 14.04 Maritime Transport Committee _ _

1. The Parties establish a Maritime Transport Committee, the composition of which is indicated in Annex 14.04.

2. The Committee will handle all matters related to this Chapter.

ANNEX 14.04

MARITIME TRANSPORT COMMITTEE in pdf format

PART FIVE

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

CHAPTER 15

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

Section A - General Provisions

Article 15.01 Application

The Parties reaffirm the protection of Intellectual Property Rights contained in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The Parties undertake to establish appropriate measures to ensure adequate and effective protection in accordance with international standards on the matter.

Section B - Protection of Intellectual Property Rights

Article 15.02 Protection of Geographical Indications

1. Within a period of (2) two years from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties must initiate consultations to protect and/or recognize the geographical indications of both Parties, in the terms stipulated in Articles 23 and 24 of the TRIPS Agreement.

2. Each Party shall establish the measures to prevent the import, manufacture, or sale of a good that uses a protected geographical indication in the territory of the other Party in order to access protection, each Party shall notify the other Party of its protected geographical indications.

Article 15.03 Protection of Traditional Knowledge

1. Each Party shall protect the collective intellectual property rights and traditional knowledge of its indigenous peoples and local communities with respect to their commercially used creations. This will be achieved through a special system of registration, promotion and commercialization of their rights, with a view to emphasizing the autochthonous, sociological and cultural values ​​of indigenous peoples and local communities with the purpose of granting them social justice.

2. Each Party will recognize those customs, traditions, beliefs, spirituality, religiosity, worldview, folkloric expressions, artistic manifestations, traditional skills and any other form of traditional expression of indigenous peoples and local communities are part of their cultural heritage.

3. Cultural heritage should not be subject to any form of exclusivity by unauthorized third parties applying the intellectual property system, unless the request is made by indigenous peoples and local communities or by third parties authorized by them.

Article 15.04 Folklore Protection

Each Party shall ensure the effective protection of all folkloric and artistic expressions and manifestations of the traditional and popular culture of indigenous and local communities.

Article 15.05 Relationship between Access to Genetic Resources and Intellectual Property

1. Each Party shall protect access to its genetic resources and to the traditional knowledge developed by its indigenous peoples and local communities regarding the uses of biological resources that contain such genetic resources, against the indiscriminate use of biological diversity, and shall also ensure that participate in the benefits derived from the use of their genetic resources,

2. Each Party shall agree to a fair and equitable sharing of the benefits derived from access to its genetic resources and from the uses of its traditional knowledge and folkloric expressions.

3. Each Party shall ensure that the protection granted to industrial property will safeguard its biological and genetic legacy. Consequently, patent licenses on inventions developed from materials obtained from heritage or traditional knowledge must be subject to the condition that said material has been acquired in accordance with the relevant national and international laws and regulations,

Section C - Application

Article 15.06 Transparency

The Parties shall notify the Intellectual Property Committee of this Agreement of their laws, regulations and procedures regarding intellectual property rights. Regarding final judicial decisions and administrative resolutions of general application, the foregoing must be published, where such publication cannot be made available, other means of availability will be provided to the public to allow Parties and rights holders have knowledge of them.

Article 15.07 Intellectual Property Committee

1. The Parties establish the Intellectual Property Committee, whose composition is indicated in Annex 15.07.

2. The Intellectual Property Committee shall meet once a year, and at any other time at the request of a Party or the Commission, to ensure the effective execution and administration of this Chapter.

3. The Committee will take cognizance of matters related to this Chapter, and without prejudice to the provisions of Article 17.05 (Committees) must;

a) seek the most appropriate means to effectively apply the provisions of this Chapter;

b) review any proposal for modification or addition at the request of any of the Parties;

c) perform any task assigned by the Commission; and

d) establish subcommittees or technical groups.

Article 15.08 Settlement of Disputes

When a Party requests consultations and notifies the Committee, said action shall constitute the activation of the consultation process as established in Article 18.05 (Consultations).

Article 15.09  Technical Cooperation

The Parties shall establish a system of technical cooperation based on mutually agreed terms and conditions and within the framework of the WTO on matters relating to intellectual property, and in the newly developed areas of matters related to intellectual property, as well as:

a) promote and develop the dissemination of information and technology transfer based on the technological content existing in patent documents, for which the appropriate databases must be available;

b) promote and execute training programs both nationally and internationally on intellectual property rights and related topics (including traditional knowledge, biodiversity and folklore);

c) promote and strengthen training programs to ensure intellectual property rights and related issues that have been observed:

d) execute and implement automated systems for the administration of the entire intellectual property system and related issues;

e) Promote the exchange of information in the technical aspects as well as in the legal aspects between the Intellectual Property Offices and other institutions.

ANNEX 15.07

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY COMMITTEE in pdf format

 

PART SIX

ADMINISTRATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER 16

TRANSPARENCY

Article 16.01  Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, "administrative resolution of general application " shall be understood as an administrative resolution or interpretation that applies to all persons and factual situations that generally fall within its scope, and that establishes a standard of conduct , but does not include:

a) resolutions or rulings in administrative procedures that apply to a particular person, good or service of the other Party in a
specific case; either

b) a judgment that resolves with respect to a particular act or practice.


Article 16.02 Information Center

1, Each Party shall designate a unit as an information center to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. When a Party requests it, the information center of the other Party will indicate the agency or official responsible for knowing the matter and will provide the support that is required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party,

Article 16.03 Publication

Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative resolutions of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement, are published as soon as possible or made available for the knowledge of the other Party and any interested party.

Article 16.04 Provision of Information

1. Each Party shall notify the other Party, to the extent possible, of any current measure that it considers could affect in the future or substantially affect the interests of that other Party under the terms of this Agreement.

2. Each Party, at the request of the other Party, will provide information and promptly respond to its questions regarding any current or proposed measure.

3. The notification or provision of information on current or proposed measures, referred to in this Article, shall be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

Article 16.05  Hearing, Legality and Due Process Guarantees

Each Party shall ensure that in the judicial and administrative procedures related to the application of any measure mentioned in Article 16.03, the guarantees of hearing, legality and due process enshrined in their respective legislations are observed, in the sense of the Articles 16.06 and 16.07.

Article 16.06 Administrative Procedures for the Adoption of Measures of General Application

In order to administer in a compatible, impartial and reasonable manner all the measures of general application that affect the aspects covered by this Agreement, each Party shall ensure that, in its administrative procedures in which the measures mentioned in Article 16.03 are applied with respect to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party in specific cases:

a) whenever possible, the persons of that other Party who are directly affected by a procedure, receive, in accordance with the internal provisions, reasonable notice of the initiation of the same, including a description of its nature, the declaration of the authority to the that it is your legal responsibility to initiate it and a general description of all the controversial issues;

b) when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest permit, said persons receive a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their positions, prior to any final administrative action; and

c) its procedures comply with its legislation.

Article 16.07 Review and Appeal _

1. Each Party shall maintain tribunals or judicial or administrative procedures in accordance with the legislation of the Parties for the purposes of the prompt and timely review and, when justified, the correction of final administrative actions related to matters covered by this Agreement. These courts will be impartial and will not be linked to the agency or authority in charge of the administrative application of the law, and will not have a substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, before such courts or in such proceedings, the parties to the proceedings have the right to:

a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions and arguments; and

b) a decision based on the evidence and arguments presented by them.

3. Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with the means of challenge or subsequent review that could be resorted to in accordance with its legislation, said resolutions are implemented by the agencies or authorities.

Article 16.08 Communications and Notifications

Unless otherwise provided, a communication or notification shall be understood to have been delivered to a Party upon receipt by the national section of the Secretariat of that Party.

Article 16.09  Language

Unless the Parties agree otherwise,

a) notifications, communications and information provided by a Party to another Party, in accordance with this Agreement, must be in English.

b) the briefs, pleadings, notifications, communications, hearings and procedures that the Parties present in any proceeding described in Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution), must be in English.

 

CHAPTER 17

ADMINISTRATION OF THE TREATY

Section A - Commission , Subcommittee and Secretariat


Article 17.01 Administrative Commission of the Treaty

1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission of the Treaty, made up of the officials referred to in Annex 17.01 or by the persons they designate.

2. The Commission will have the following functions:

a) ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Agreement;

b) evaluate the results achieved in the application of this Agreement;

c) monitor the development of the Treaty and recommend to the Parties the modifications it deems appropriate;

d) resolve disputes that arise regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement);

e) supervise the work of all committees established or created under this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article 17.05 (3); and

f) hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, or any other that is entrusted to it by the Parties.

3. The Commission may:

a) create the ad hoc or permanent committees and groups of experts required by the execution of this Agreement and assign their functions to them;

b) modify, in compliance with the objectives of this Agreement:

i) the list of goods of a Party contained in Annex 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program), in order to incorporate one or more goods excluded in the tariff treatment;

ii) the deadlines established in Annex 3.04 (Tariff Elimination Program), in order to accelerate the tariff elimination;

iii) the rules of origin established in Annex 4.03 (Specific Rules of Origin);

iv) the Uniform Regulations;

v) Annexes I, II, III and IV of Chapter 10 (Investment); and

vi) Annexes I, II and V of Chapter 11 (Cross-Border Trade in Services),

c) request the advice of persons or groups without governmental ties;

d) develop any regulations necessary for the execution of this Agreement; and

e) if agreed by the Parties, adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions.

4. The modifications referred to in paragraph 3(b) shall be implemented by the Parties in accordance with their respective national laws.

5. The Commission may establish its rules and procedures and all its decisions will be made by consensus.

6. The Commission shall meet at least once a year, in ordinary session and, at the request of any Party, in extraordinary session. The sessions will be held alternating the venue between the Parties.

Article 17.02 Administrative Subcommittee of the Treaty

1 . The Parties establish the Administrative Subcommittee of the Agreement, made up of the officials referred to in Annex 17.02 or by the persons they designate.

2. The Administrative Subcommittee of the Treaty will have the following functions:

a) prepare and review the technical files necessary for decision-making within the framework of the Treaty;

b) follow up on the decisions made by the Commission;

c) without prejudice to the provisions of Article 17.01(2), may also supervise the work of all committees, subcommittees and groups of experts established in this Agreement in accordance with the provisions of Article 17.05(3). ; and

d) know about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Treaty that is entrusted to it by the Commission,

3. The Commission may establish the applicable rules and procedures for the proper functioning of the Administrative Subcommittee of the Treaty.

Article 17.03  Secretariat

1. Each Party:

a) designate its permanent official office or dependency, which will act
as the national section of the Secretariat of that Party and notify the Commission of the address, telephone number and any other relevant information of the place where its national section is located;

b) will be in charge of:

i) the operation and costs of its section; and

ii) the remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators, their assistants and experts appointed in accordance with this Agreement, as provided in Annex 17.03; and

c) appoint the Secretary of its national section, who will be the official
responsible for its administration.

2, The Secretariat will have the following functions:

a) provide assistance to the Commission and the Sub-Commission;

b) provide administrative support to arbitration groups created in accordance with Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement), in accordance with the procedures established under Article 18.11 (Model Rules of Procedure);

c) on instructions from the Commission, support the work of the committees, subcommittees and groups of experts established under this Agreement;

d) carry out the communications and notifications in the terms set forth in Article 16.08 (Communications and Notifications); and

e) Any other tasks entrusted to it by the Commission.

Section B - Committees , Subcommittees and Expert Groups

Article 17.04 General Provisions

1. The provisions set forth in this Section shall apply, on a supplementary basis, to all committees, subcommittees and groups of experts created within the framework of this Agreement.

2. Each committee, subcommittee and group of experts will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties and all their decisions will be adopted by consensus.

Article 17.05 Committees

The Commission may create committees other than those established in Annex 17.05.

Each Committee will have the following functions:

a) monitor the implementation of the Chapters of this Agreement that fall within its competence;

b) hear the matters submitted to it by a Party that considers that a current measure of the other Party affects the effective application of any commitment included in the Chapters of this Agreement that are within its competence;

c) request technical reports from the competent authorities and take the necessary actions that contribute to resolving the matter;

d) evaluate and recommend to the Commission proposals for modification, amendment or addition to the provisions of the Chapters of this Agreement that fall within its competence;

e) propose to the Commission the review of measures in force by a Party that it deems may be incompatible with the obligations of this Agreement or cause nullification or impairment in the sense of Annex 18.02 (Nullation and Impairment); and

f) Comply with the other tasks entrusted to it by the Commission, by virtue of the provisions of this Treaty and other instruments derived from it.

3. The Commission and the Sub-Commission shall supervise the work of all committees established or created under this Agreement.

4. Each committee may establish its own rules and procedures, and will meet at the request of either Party or the Commission.

5. Whenever it deems appropriate, each Committee may establish subcommittees, establishing the tasks that correspond to it to carry out.

Article 17.06 Groups of Experts

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 17.01(3)(a), a committee or subcommittee may also create ad hoc groups of experts, in order to carry out the technical studies it deems necessary for the fulfillment of its functions, whose work shall supervise. The group of experts must strictly comply with what has been entrusted to it, in the terms and deadlines established. Each expert group should report to the committee or subcommittee that created it.

2. The rules and procedures of a group of experts may be established by the same committee or subcommittee that created it.

ANNEX 17.01

MEMBERS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COMMISSION OF THE TREATY in pdf format

ANNEX 17.02

MEMBERS OF THE SUBCOMMISSION ADMINISTERING THE TREATY in pdf format

ANNEX 17.03

REMUNERATION AND PAYMENT OF EXPENSES in pdf format

ANNEX 17.04

COMMITTEES in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 18

RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES

Section A - Dispute Resolution

Article 18.01 Cooperation

The Parties shall always endeavor to reach agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement through cooperation and consultation, and shall endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that might affect its operation.

Article 18.02 Scope of Application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply:

a) to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement;

b) when a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of another Party is or could be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or that the other Party has in any way failed to comply with the obligations of this Agreement; either

c) when a Party considers that an existing or proposed measure of another Party causes or could cause nullification or impairment, in the sense of Annex 18.02.

Article 18.03 Choice of Forum

1. Disputes that arise in relation to the provisions of this Agreement and the WTO Agreement or the agreements negotiated in accordance with the latter, may be resolved in one or another forum, at the choice of the complaining Party.

2. When a Party has requested the establishment of an arbitral group pursuant to Article 18.07, or has requested the establishment of a panel pursuant to Article 6 of the Understanding Related to the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes of the Agreement of the WTO, the selected forum will be exclusive.

Article 18.04 Perishable Goods

1. In disputes relating to perishable goods 1 , the Parties and the arbitral group referred to in Article 18.07 will do everything possible to expedite the procedure as much as possible. For this purpose, the Parties will try to reduce by mutual agreement the terms established in this Chapter.

2. In cases of urgency, including those related to perishable goods, consultations will begin within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the request,

Article 18.05 Consultations

1. A Party may request, in writing, consultations with the other Party regarding any current or proposed measure, or regarding any other matter that it considers could affect the operation of this Agreement under the terms of Article 18.02.

2. The requesting Party shall deliver the request to the other Party, and explain the reasons for its request, including the identification of the current or proposed measure or other matter in question, and the legal basis of the claim,

3. The consulting Parties shall use their best efforts to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter through the consultations provided for in this Article or other consultative provisions of this Agreement. For this purpose
, the Parties must:

a) provide the information that allows a full examination of the way in which the current or proposed measure, or any other matter, could affect the operation of this Agreement; and

b) treat confidential or proprietary information exchanged during consultations in the same manner as the Party that provided it.

Article 18.06 Commission - Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation

1. Any Party may 2 request in writing that the Commission meet if the Parties fail to resolve the matter in accordance with Article 18.04 or 18.05, within:

a) 30 days after sending the request for consultations;

b) 15 days after sending the request for consultations in matters related to perishable merchandise; or

c) other deadlines that have been agreed.

2. The requesting Party shall deliver the request to the other Party and must establish the reasons for the request, including the identification of the measure or other matter and the legal basis of its claim.

3. Unless otherwise decided, the Commission will meet within ten (10) days after delivery of the application and will endeavor to resolve the dispute. The Commission may:

a) convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary;

b) resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other dispute resolution procedures;

c) make recommendations.

to assist the consulting Parties in reaching a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute.

4. Unless otherwise decided, pursuant to this Article, the Commission must consolidate two or more procedures presented for its consideration related to the same measure. The Commission may consolidate two or more proceedings submitted for consideration related to other matters when they deem appropriate to consider these proceedings jointly.

Article 18.07  Establishment of the Arbitration Group

1. If the Parties have not resolved the matter within:

a) thirty (30) days after the meeting of the Commission in accordance with Article 18.06;

b) thirty (30) days after the meeting of the Commission to address the most recent matter that has been submitted to it, when several procedures have been accumulated in accordance with Article 18.06 (4);

c ) fifteen (15) days after a Party has delivered the request for consultations pursuant to Article 18.05 in a matter relating to perishable goods, if the Commission has not met in accordance with Article 18.06(1);

d ) thirty (30) days after a Party has delivered a request for consultations pursuant to Article 18.05, if the Commission has not met pursuant to Article 18.06 (3); either

e) any other term that the consulting Parties agree,

Any Party that has requested the meeting of the Commission in accordance with Article 18.05, may request in writing the establishment of an arbitration group to consider the matter, and must indicate the reasons for its request, including the identification of the measure in force or project or other matter at issue, and the legal basis for the claim.

2. Upon delivery of the request, the arbitration group will be established.

3. The complaining Party shall deliver the request to the other Party, and shall indicate the reasons for its request, including the identification of the measure or other matter in question and the legal basis of the claim.

4. The Parties may join two (2) or more proceedings relating to other matters when they deem appropriate to consider these proceedings jointly.

5. The arbitration proceedings shall be considered invoked upon delivery of the request for the establishment of the arbitration group. The Parties shall adopt all necessary measures in accordance with Article 18.10 for the establishment of the arbitration group.

6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitration group shall be established and perform its functions in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

7. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Arbitration Panel may not be established to review a proposed measure.

Article 18.08  List

1 No later than three (3) months after the entry into force of the Agreement, the Parties shall establish and maintain a list of up to twenty (20) individuals with the required qualities to act as arbitrators. Said list will be made up of the "List of arbitrators of the Parties" and the "List of arbitrators from non-Party countries". To this end, each Party may designate five (5) national arbitrators that will make up the "List of arbitrators of the Parties and five ( 5) arbitrators from non-Party countries, which will make up the "List of arbitrators from non-Party countries".

2 The lists of arbitrators may be modified every three (3) years. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at the request of a Party, the Commission may review the lists of arbitrators before said period expires.

3 The members of the arbitrator lists must meet the qualities indicated in Article 18.09.

Article 18.09  Qualifications of the Referees

1. The referees must meet the following qualities:

a) have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters related to this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;

b) be elected strictly based on their objectivity, reliability and good judgment;

c) be independent, not linked to the Parties and not receive instructions from them; and

d) comply with the Code of Conduct established by the Commission.

2. The persons who have intervened in a controversy, under the terms of Article 18.06, may not be arbitrators for the same controversy.

Article 18.10  Composition of the Arbitration Group

1. When integrating the arbitration group, the Parties will observe the following procedure:

a) the arbitration group will be made up of three (3) members;

b) the Parties shall endeavor to agree on the appointment of the chairperson of the arbitration group within fifteen (15) days from the receipt of the request for the establishment of the arbitration group;

c) if the Parties do not reach a Treaty on the appointment of the president of the arbitral group within the aforementioned period, the latter will be chosen by drawing lots from the "List of arbitrators from non-Party countries";

d) within a period of fifteen (15) days from the appointment of the chair, each Party will select an arbitrator from the "List of arbitrators of the Parties", and the selected arbitrator could be a national of any of the Parties; and

e) if a Party does not select an arbitrator, the arbitrator shall be designated by lot among the "List of arbitrators of the Parties" and must be a national of that Party,

2. When a Party considers that an arbitrator has committed a violation of the Code of Conduct, the Parties shall hold consultations, and if they agree, they shall remove that arbitrator and elect a new one in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

Article 18.11 Model Rules of Procedure

1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Commission shall establish the Model Rules of Procedure, in accordance with the following principles:

a) the procedures will guarantee the right to at least one hearing before the arbitration group, as well as the opportunity to present arguments and replies in writing; and

b) The hearings before the arbitration group, the deliberations and the preliminary report, as well as all the writings and communications with it, will be confidential.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitral group will conduct the proceedings in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within twenty (20) days of receipt of the request for the establishment of the arbitration group, the terms of reference of the arbitration group will be:

"To examine, in the light of the provisions of this Agreement, the matters submitted to its consideration, and to make the reports, determinations and recommendations referred to in Article 18.13 (2) and Article 18.14."

4. If the complaining Party alleges that a matter has been the cause of nullification or impairment of benefits referred to in Annex 18.02, the terms of reference must indicate so.

5. When a Party requests that the arbitral panel formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse trade effects generated by the measure adopted by the other Party and that is considered by the Party to be inconsistent with this Agreement or that the measure has caused nullification or impairment in the sense of Annex 18.02, the terms of reference will indicate it.

Article 18.12  Role of the Experts

At the request of a Party, or ex officio, the arbitral group may collect information and technical advice from the persons or institutions it deems pertinent in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure.

Article 18.13  Preliminary Report

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitration panel shall issue a preliminary report, based on the communications and arguments presented by the Parties, as well as the relevant provisions of this Agreement and any information received pursuant to Article 18.12.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within ninety (90) days following the appointment of the last arbitrator, the arbitral group will present a preliminary report to the Parties that will contain:

a) findings of fact, including any derived from a request under Article 18.11(5);

b) the determination of whether the measure in question is or may be incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment in the sense of Annex 18.02 or in any other determination requested in the terms of reference; and

c) its recommendations, when any, for the solution of the dispute.

3. The arbitrators may reason their vote in writing on matters in which they have not reached consensus.

4. Any of the Parties may make written observations to the arbitral group on the preliminary report within fourteen (14) days following its presentation, After considering any written observation by the arbitral group, at the request of a Party or ex officio , you can:

a) reconsider its report; and

b) carry out any diligence it deems appropriate.

Article 18.14 Final Report

1. Within thirty (30) days of the presentation of the preliminary report, unless the Parties agree otherwise, the arbitral group will notify the Parties of its final report, reached by majority vote, including written reasoned votes, on matters which there is no consensus.

2. No arbitral group may reveal in its preliminary report or in its final report, the entity of the arbitrators who have voted with the majority or with the minority of votes.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Parties shall make the final report available to the public within fifteen (15) days after its notification to the Parties.

Article 18.15  Compliance with the Final Report

1. The final report of the arbitration group will be mandatory for the Parties under the terms and conditions specified therein. The term of compliance must not exceed six (6) months from the date on which the final report has been notified to the Parties, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

2. When the final report of the arbitral group determines that a measure is inconsistent with these obligations of a Party under this Agreement, the Party complained against shall refrain from executing or eliminating the measure.

3. When the report of the arbitral panel determines that a measure is cause for nullification or impairment in the sense of Annex 18.02, it will indicate the level of nullification or impairment, and may suggest adjustments mutually satisfactory to the Parties.

Article 18.16 Suspension of Benefits

1. Unless the Parties notify the Commission that the final report has been completed to their satisfaction, within fifteen (15) days following the expiration of the term set in the final report determined by the arbitration group, the group shall determine whether the Party complained against has complied with said report.

2. The complaining Party may suspend to the defendant Party the application of benefits derived from this Agreement that have equivalent effect to the benefits not received, if the arbitral group resolves that:

a) a measure is incompatible with the obligations of this Agreement and that the Party complained against does not comply with the final report within the term established by the arbitral panel; either

b) a measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of Annex 18.02, and the Parties do not reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute within the term established by the arbitral group,

3. The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant Party complies with the final report or until the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute.

4. When examining the benefits that will be suspended in accordance with this Article:

a) the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or for another matter that the arbitral group has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or that has been cause for annulment or impairment within the meaning of Annex 18.02; and

b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, it may suspend benefits in other sectors.

5. Once the benefits have been suspended in accordance with the Parties at the written request of one of them, they will establish an arbitral group when it is necessary to determine if the final report has not yet been complied with or if the level of benefits that the Party has provided is excessive. complaining Party has suspended the Party complained against in accordance with this Article. To the extent possible, the arbitration group will be made up of the same arbitrators who resolved the dispute.

6. When the arbitral group established in paragraph 5 is made up of the same arbitrators who resolved the dispute, it must present a final report within thirty (30) days following the request referred to in paragraph 5. When the arbitral group established in paragraph 5 is not made up of the same arbitrators the arbitral group will present a final report within sixty (60) days following the meeting in which it was established or that the Parties decide so

7 When the defendant Party cannot comply with the final report established by the arbitration panel, said Party may, within thirty (30) days following the date on which the arbitration group delivers its resolution, request consultations with the complaining Party with the in order to reach an agreement on alternative measures to compensate the complaining Party.

8. If no agreement is reached on alternative measures, the complaining Party may suspend benefits to the Party complained against, notwithstanding what is established in paragraphs 2 and 4 above, to the extent necessary to persuade the Party complained against to comply with the final report. In applying this provision, differences in the level of development of the Parties shall be taken into account.

Section - B Internal Procedures and Dispute Resolution

Commercial Private

Article 18.17  Interpretation of the Treaty before Judicial and Administrative Instances

1. When a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement arises in an internal judicial or administrative proceeding of a Party and that the other Party considers that it deserves its intervention, or when a court or administrative body of a Party requests the opinion of a Party, that Party shall notify the other Party. The Commission will try, as soon as possible, to agree on an appropriate response.

2. The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall present to them any interpretation agreed upon by the Commission to the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.

3. When the Commission is unable to agree on an interpretation or response, any Party may submit its own opinion in the judicial or administrative proceeding, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.

Article 18.18 Rights of Individuals

Neither Party may grant a right of action in its domestic law against the other Party, on the grounds that a measure of the latter Party is inconsistent with this Agreement.

Article 18.19 Alternative Means for Dispute Resolution

1. To the extent possible, each Party shall promote and facilitate the use of arbitration and other alternative means for the solution of international commercial disputes between individuals in the free trade zone, established in this Agreement.

2. To this end, each Party shall establish adequate procedures to ensure compliance with arbitration agreements and the recognition and enforcement of arbitration awards that are pronounced in those disputes.

3. The Commission may establish a Private Business Dispute Advisory Committee composed of persons who have specialized knowledge or experience in the resolution of international business disputes of a private nature. The Committee will submit reports and general recommendations to the Commission regarding the feasibility, use, and effectiveness of arbitration and other procedures for the settlement of such disputes in the free trade zone, established in this Agreement.

ANNEX 18.02

NULLIFICATION AND IMPAIRMENT in pdf format

 

CHAPTER 19

 EXCEPTIONS

Article 19.01 Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be understood as:

tax agreement: an agreement to avoid double taxation or another international agreement or arrangement in tax matters;

Fund: the International Monetary Fund;

international current transaction payments: "international current transaction payments" as defined in the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

international capital transactions: "international capital transactions" as defined in the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund; and

transfers: international transactions and international transfers and related payments.

Article 19.02 General Exceptions


1. Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof , for the purposes of:

a) Part Two (Trade in Goods), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services or investment; and

b) Part Three (Trade Barriers), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services or investment;

2. Subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article XIV of the GATS are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of:

a) Part Two (Trade in Goods), to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services;

b) Part Three (Trade Barriers) to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services; and

c ) Part Four (Investment and Services and Related Matters)

Article 19.03  National Security

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;

b) prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:

i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade in merchandise, material, service and technology operations carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment ;

ij) applied in times of war or in other cases of serious international tension; either

iii) applied to national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;

c) prevent a Party from adopting measures in compliance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.

Article 19.04 Balance of Payments

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures restricting transfers when the Party is facing serious or threatened balance-of-payments difficulties, provided that such restrictions are consistent with this article.

2. The Party shall notify the other Party within a period of thirty (30) days from the adoption of a measure in accordance with paragraph 1. In the event that both Parties are parties to the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, they must follow the procedure established in the following paragraph 3.

3. As soon as practicable after a Party applies a measure in accordance with this Article, and its international obligations, the Party shall:

a) submit for review by the Fund all restrictions on current account operations in accordance with Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

b) initiate consultations with the Fund regarding economic adjustment measures, aimed at addressing the fundamental economic problems causing the difficulties; and

c) adopt or maintain economic policies compatible with said consultations.

4 . The measures that are adopted or maintained in accordance with this Article must:

a) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial interests of the other Party;

b) not be more onerous than necessary to face the difficulties or threats to the balance of payments:

c) be temporary and phased out as the balance of payments situation improves;

d) be compatible with the provisions of paragraph 3 (c), as well as the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund; and

e) be applied according to the most favorable treatment, between the principles of national treatment and most favored nation.

5. A Party may adopt or maintain a measure under this Article that gives priority to services essential to its economic program, provided that the Party does not apply the measure in order to protect a particular industry or sector, unless the Party measure is compatible with paragraph 3 (c), and with Article VIII (3) of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund.

6. The restrictions imposed on transfers;

a) must be compatible with Article VIII (3) of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, when applied to payments for current international transactions, and

b ) must be consistent with Article VI of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund and applied only in conjunction with measures on payments for international current transactions in accordance with paragraph 3 (a), when applied to international capital transactions.

Article 19.05 Disclosure of Information

No provision of this Agreement shall be construed in the sense of forcing a Party to provide or give access to confidential information, the disclosure of which may impede compliance or be contrary to its Political Constitution, the public interest or its laws insofar as which refers to the protection of the privacy of individuals, financial affairs and bank accounts of individual clients of financial institutions.

Article 19.06 Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any of the Parties arising from any tax agreement. In the event of any inconsistency between any of these agreements and this Agreement, the former shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

a) Article 3.03 (National Treatment), and those other provisions in this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same degree as Article III of the GATT 1994; and

b) Article 3.12 (Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. For the purposes of this Article, tax measures do not include;

a) a "customs duty", as defined in Chapter 2 (General Definitions); neither

b) the measures listed in exceptions (b), (c) and (d) of that definition.

5. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2:

a) Articles 10.03 (National Treatment) and 11.03 (National Treatment) shall apply to tax measures on income, capital gains or taxable capital of companies, referring to the acquisition or consumption of specific services;

b) Articles 10.03 (National Treatment) and 10.04 (Most Favored Nation Treatment); 11.03 (National Treatment) and 11.04 (Most Favored Nation Treatment); will apply to all tax measures, other than those related to income, capital gains or taxable capital of companies, as well as taxes on wealth, inheritance and donations, the provisions of these Articles will not apply to
:

i) any most-favored-nation obligation in respect of benefits granted by a Party pursuant to a tax treaty;

ii) any current tax measure that grants a different tax treatment to residents and non-residents;

iii) a non-conforming provision of any current tax measure;

iv) the continuation or renewal of a non-conforming provision of any current tax measure;

v) to an amendment to a non-conforming provision of any current tax measure, as long as that amendment does not reduce, at the time of being made, its degree of conformity with any of those articles.

vi) any new tax measure, aimed at ensuring the application and collection of taxes in an equitable and effective manner, and that does not arbitrarily discriminate between persons, goods or services of the Parties, nor nullifies or impairs in the same way the advantages granted in accordance with those articles, within the meaning of Exhibit 18.02 (Nullification and Impairment).

 

CHAPTER 20

 COOPERATION _ _

Part I - General Provisions

Article 20.01 General Objective

The main objective of this Chapter is to establish the guidelines within which the Government of the Republic of China (Taiwan) will strengthen its cooperative relations with the Government of the Republic of Guatemala, reaffirming its importance in the economic, financial and technique, as a means to contribute to the realization of the objectives and principles derived from this Treaty.

Article 20.02 Specific Objectives

The specific objectives of this Chapter are the following:

a) strengthen and diversify cooperation actions between the Parties;

b) strengthen cooperation to develop, improve, intensify and diversify trade relations and environmental management systems;

c) strengthen and diversify financing modalities for development;

d) promote cooperation for the protection and improvement of the environment in the territory of the Parties for the well-being of present and future generations;

e) improve the capacity of the public and private sectors to take advantage of the opportunities offered by this Agreement; and

f ) contribute to the establishment of commercial, financial and technological flows and investment between the Parties.

Article 20.03 Principle of Application

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as granting the right to either Party to apply its legislation in the territory of the other Party.

Article 20.04 Right of Action

Neither Party may grant right of action in its legislation against another Party, based on the fact that the other Party has acted inconsistently with this Chapter.

Article 20.05  Protection of Information

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to oblige
any of the Parties to provide or give access to information:

a) whose disclosure could hinder the application of its legislation; either

b) the disclosure of which is protected by your laws regarding confidential business or commercial information, personal private information, or confidentiality in government decision-making.

2. Confidential information may only be made known by the express will of both Parties or by explicit authorization of one Party to the other,

Article 20.06 Settlement of Disputes

None of the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the dispute settlement mechanism contained in this Agreement.


Part II - Cooperation _

Article 20.07  Cooperation Activities

1. The Parties may initiate and carry out cooperative activities with the participation of experts and national and international institutions, as appropriate, to promote the achievement of the objectives and compliance with their obligations under the terms of this Agreement.

2. Cooperation activities will be carried out taking into consideration:

a) the economic, environmental, geographical, social, cultural differences and legal systems between the Parties;

b) the national priorities agreed by the Parties;

c) the advisability of not duplicating existing cooperation activities; and

d) the intention of both Parties to apply and carry out cooperative activities through initiatives of the Parties.

Article 20.08 Commercial and Industrial Cooperation

1. The Parties will support and promote measures to develop and strengthen actions aimed at implementing a dynamic, integrated and decentralized management of commercial and industrial cooperation in order to create favorable conditions for economic development, taking into account their mutual interests.

2. Such cooperation shall focus in particular on the following:

a) Strengthen contacts between the economic agents of the Parties, through conferences, seminars, trade missions to detect commercial and technical opportunities, as well as hold meetings at round tables, general or specific fairs for various sectors, with the purpose of identifying and explore sectors of mutual commercial interest in order to intensify trade, investment, industrial cooperation and technology transfer projects;

b) strengthen and broaden the existing dialogue between the economic operators of the Parties by promoting additional consultation and coordination activities in this area in order to identify and eliminate obstacles to cooperation;

c) promote respect for competition rules, guarantee the coherence of global measures and help to train and train human resources in foreign trade;

d) encourage industrial cooperation initiatives in the context of privatization and liberalization processes in order to encourage investment through industrial cooperation between companies of the Parties;

e) promote the participation of the Parties in pilot projects and in special cooperation programs for the improvement of capacities in the area of ​​statistics and information technology, as well as in terms of negotiation opportunities with shipping companies; and

f ) promote cooperation projects in information and market research, taking into account technical assistance in production, administration and marketing of exporting companies, as well as the promotion of technology transfer.

Article 20.09 Cooperation in the Sector of Small and Medium Enterprises

1. The Parties shall promote a favorable environment for the development of small and medium-sized enterprises.

2. This cooperation will consist of the following:

a) promote contacts between economic agents, promote joint investments and the establishment of business alliances and information networks that allow the Parties to promote financial cooperation between them, particularly that aimed at the development of micro, small and medium-sized companies; and

b) facilitate administrative procedures so that the commercial, productive, and exporting sectors have better access to financing.

Article 20.10 Cooperation on Exportable Offer

1. The Parties will establish a cooperation program aimed at carrying out studies on the exportable supply and idle production capacities, as well as identifying possible fields of investment, joint ventures and strategic alliances that allow the expansion and diversification of trade flows between the Parties and towards other markets.

2. Cooperation programs will also be established in terms of exportable supply, taking into account;

a) technical assistance and strengthening for the productive and export sectors and in general for the diversification and transfer of technology;

b) support for specific programs to strengthen the development of the export sector; and

c) cooperation for the development of strategies and programs that contribute to the increase, diversification and improvement of the quality of the products, especially providing vocational training, consulting services and facilitating the transfer of technologies.

Article 20.11 Tourism Cooperation

The primary objective of cooperation between the Parties in the field of tourism is to improve the exchange of information and establish the best practices in order to ensure balanced and sustainable tourism development.

For purposes of this article, the Parties will focus especially on the following:

a) respect the integrity and interests of local communities;

b) promote investments and co-investments that allow the expansion of tourism;

c) exchange information on tourism development;

d) provide assistance in statistics and information technology, as well as the creation of business databases;

e) education and training;

f ) organization of events and participation in tourism fairs;

g) cooperation in feasibility studies; and

h) support in the commercial promotion agreed by the Parties for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises in the tourism sector.

Article 20.12  Cooperation in Matters of Environment and Natural Resources

1. In all cooperation measures initiated by virtue of this Agreement, the Parties shall take into account the need to preserve the environment and the ecological balance.

2. The Parties undertake to carry out cooperative activities in order to:

a) to prevent environmental deterioration;

b) promote the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources;

c) develop, disseminate and exchange information and experiences on environmental legislation;

d) promote the use of economic incentives to encourage compliance;

e) strengthen environmental management at different levels of government;

f ) promote the training of human resources, education on environmental issues and joint research projects;

g) develop channels for social participation; and

h) Promote cleaner production systems that contribute to environmental improvement and maintenance in the territory of the Parties.


3. The Parties will promote mutual access to programs on the matter according to their specific modalities, including cleaner production programs in micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.

4. As a result of this cooperation, the Parties may enter into a sectoral agreement on the environment and natural resources, if deemed appropriate.


Article 20.13 Cooperation in the Energy Sector

1. The cooperation between the Parties shall be aimed at developing their respective energy sectors, concentrating on the promotion of technology transfer and the exchange of information on the respective legislations.

2. Cooperation in this sector will be carried out, fundamentally, through exchanges of information, the training of human resources, the transfer of technology and joint projects for technological development and infrastructure agreed upon by the Parties, as well as the design of more efficient energy generation, the rational use of energy, support for the use of alternative energy sources that protect the environment and are renewable, and the promotion of recycling and waste treatment projects for energy use.

3. Provide cooperation to the institutions in charge of energy issues and the formulation of energy policy.

Article 20.14  Cooperation in the Transportation Sector


1. Cooperation between the Parties with respect to transport matters shall be aimed at:

a) support the improvement and modernization of transportation systems, according to the possibilities of the Parties; and

b) promote operational standards.

2. For purposes of this Article, the Parties will give priority to:

a) exchanges of information between experts on the respective transport policies and other issues of common interest; and

b) technical assistance to support the improvement and modernization of the transportation system, in all its modalities.

3. The Parties will study all aspects related to the exchange of information on international maritime transport services to avoid that these constitute an obstacle to the mutual expansion of trade.


Article 20.15 Cooperation in the Agricultural and Rural Sector and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The objective of cooperation in this field is to support and promote agricultural policy measures with the intention of promoting and consolidating the efforts of the Parties in the agricultural sector as well as achieving sustainable agricultural and rural development.

2. Each Party may provide the other Party with advice, information and technical cooperation, under mutually agreed terms and conditions, in order to strengthen sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as well as activities, procedures and systems in these matters,

3. For the purposes of this Article, the Parties will make efforts in the following aspects, but not limited to them:

a) diversification and restructuring of agricultural sectors;

c) Mutual exchange of information, including that referring to the evolution of the agricultural policies of the Parties;

d ) technical assistance to increase productivity and the exchange of alternative agricultural technologies;

e) scientific and technical experiments; and measures aimed at increasing the quality of agricultural products and supporting trade promotion activities;

Article 20.16  Cooperation on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. Each of the Parties shall promote technical cooperation between their standardization and metrology groups to provide assistance or technical information to the extent of their possibilities and in mutually agreed terms in order to contribute to compliance with this Article in order to strengthen the activities, processes, as well as systems and measures of standardization and metrology.

2. The Parties are committed to making joint efforts in order to negotiate technical cooperation with countries that are not parties to this Agreement,

3. The Parties shall endeavor to develop technical cooperation programs for effective compliance with the obligations agreed upon in this Article, taking into account the different levels of development in standards, accreditation and certification procedures and oil institutions of the other Party. . For this purpose, the Parties agree to strengthen their respective competent authorities in matters of processes and related systems in this field, as follows:

a) preparation, application and review of technical cooperation and institutional programs;

b) promotion of bilateral exchange of institutional and regulatory information;

c) promotion of bilateral cooperation through the respective agencies for international and multilateral standards including metrology;

d) promotion of cooperation to develop surveillance systems in matters of control and food safety, effectiveness of medicines and the like to achieve equivalence of the systems; and

e) technical assistance in inspection systems and good manufacturing practices.

Article 20.17 Ministerial Cooperation Committee

1. The Parties hereby establish the Ministerial Cooperation Committee ("the Committee") consisting of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Economic Affairs or their designees, in the case of the Republic of China (Taiwan); and by the Minister of Economy or his designee, in the case of the Republic of Guatemala.

2. The Committee will have the following functions:

a) encourage actions that promote cooperation;

b) examine in a timely and expeditious manner any matter of mutual interest that the Parties decide to study;

c) monitor the cooperation programs contemplated in this Chapter;

d) create, in addition to what is established in this Chapter, the instances and technical mechanisms to support its development.

3. The Parties agree that representatives of the private sector of their respective countries may participate in the meetings of the Committee, prior consultation between them
and by mutual agreement.

4. The Committee shall meet within the first year after the entry into force of this Agreement and, unless otherwise agreed, annually thereafter, alternately in the Republic of China (Taiwan) or in the Republic of Guatemala at in order to supervise the execution of this Chapter and its progress, as well as to consider the status of the cooperation activities developed in accordance with this Chapter. At the request of one of the Parties, extraordinary meetings may be called.

5. The Chair of the Committee will rotate annually between the Parties and all decisions will be taken by consensus.

Article 20.18 Contact Points

1. The Parties shall designate contact points in order to follow up on the decisions adopted by the Committee, as well as all cooperation programs that have been agreed upon in the Committee with the purpose of complying with the objectives of this Chapter.

2. The designation of these contact points shall be notified between the Parties three (3) months after the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 20.19 Work Plan

The Parties will develop a work plan that reflects national priorities regarding cooperative activities and will be agreed by the Committee. The work program may include long, medium and short term activities, likewise the Committee will be in charge of ensuring that this Plan is carried out satisfactorily.

Article 20.20 Information to the Public

1. The Parties shall agree on modalities for informing the public of activities, including meetings of the Parties and cooperative activities undertaken pursuant to this Chapter.

2. The Parties shall endeavor to create opportunities to involve the public, where appropriate, in activities undertaken for the implementation of this Chapter.20-9

 

CHAPTER 21

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 21.01 Modifications

1. Any modification to this Agreement will require the agreement of both Parties.

2. The agreed modifications will enter into force once they are approved, according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party, and will constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 21.02 Reservations

This Agreement may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations by any of the Parties at the time of its ratification, without the written consent of the other Party.

Article 21.03 Validity

1. This Agreement will have an indefinite duration and will enter into force between the Republic of Guatemala and the Republic of China (Taiwan) on January 1, 2006, provided that the countries have exchanged their corresponding ratification instruments that certify that the legal procedures and formalities have concluded.

2. If this Agreement does not enter into force on January 1, 2006, it will enter into force on January 1 of the year following the exchange of their corresponding ratification instruments certifying that the legal procedures and formalities have been completed, unless the Parties Agree on a different term.

Article 21.04 Annexes

The Annexes to this Agreement constitute an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 21.05 Complaint

1. Any Party may denounce this Agreement.

2. The denunciation will take effect one hundred eighty (180) days after it is communicated to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different date.

Article 21.06 Authentic Texts _

The English, Chinese and Spanish texts of this Treaty are equally authentic. In case of divergences in the interpretation of this Agreement, the English version will prevail.