FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN TURKEY AND CROATIA
_______________
PREAMBLE
 Desirous to develop and strengthen friendly relations, especially in the fields of economic cooperation and trade, with an aim to contribute to the progress of economic co-operation between the
two countries and to increase the scope of mutual trade exchange,
 The Republic of Turkey and the Republic of Croatia (hereinafter “the Parties”)
 Confirming their intention to participate actively in the process of economic integration in
Europe and in the Mediterranean Basin expressing their preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways
and means to strengthen this process;
 Taking into consideration the Agreement Establishing an Association between Turkey and the
European Economic Community and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the
European Communities and their Member States and the Republic of Croatia;
 Having regard to the experience gained from the co-operation developed between the Parties
to this Agreement as well as between them and their main trading partners;
 Declaring their readiness to undertake activities with a view to promoting harmonious
development of their trade as well as to expanding and diversifying their mutual co-operation in the
fields of joint interest, including fields not covered by this Agreement, thus creating a framework and
supportive environment based on equality, non discrimination, and a balance of rights and obligations;
 Referring to the mutual interest of the Parties in the continual reinforcement of the
multilateral trading system and considering that the provisions and instruments of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (hereinafter “GATT 1994”) and the World Trade Organization
(hereinafter “WTO”) constitute a basis for their foreign trade policy;
 Resolved to lay down for this purpose provisions aimed at the progressive abolition of the
obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of these instruments, in
particular those concerning the establishment of free trade areas;
 Have decided, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the following Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement").
Article 1
Objectives
1. The Parties, by taking into account the Turkey’s obligations arising from the Customs Union
with the EU and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Croatia and the EU, shall
gradually establish a free trade area on substantially all their trade between them in a transitional
period ending on 1.1.2007 at the latest in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in
conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the other multilateral agreements on trade in
goods annexed to the Agreement establishing the WTO. 
Page 2
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to increase and enhance the economic cooperation between the Parties and raise the
living standard of the population of the two countries;
(b) to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods, including also
the agricultural products;
(c) to promote, through the expansion of reciprocal trade, the harmonious development
of the economic relations between the Parties;
(d) to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Parties;
(e) to contribute by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious development and
expansion of world trade;
(f) to create conditions for further encouragement of investments particularly for the
development of joint investments in both countries;
(g) to promote trade and cooperation between the Parties in third country markets.
Article 2
Basic Duties
1. In the trade between the Parties covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall apply their
respective Customs Tariffs on the classification of goods for imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which successive reductions set out in this Agreement are
to be applied shall be the Most Favored Nation (MFN) duty that was in force in the Parties on the date
of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. If after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes
basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff negotiations in the WTO, such reduced duties
shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 2 as from that date when such reductions are
applied.
4. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective basic duties.
CHAPTER I: INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
Article 3
Scope
 The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products originating in the Parties falling within
Chapters 25 to 97 of Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the exception of
the products listed in Annex I of this Agreement. 
Page 3
Article 4
Customs Duties On Imports And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties on imports or
charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased in
trade between the Parties.
2. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect on imports shall be abolished in
accordance with the provisions of Protocol I to this Agreement.
Article 5
Customs Duties Of A Fiscal Nature
 The provisions concerning the abolition of customs duties on imports shall also apply to
customs duties of a fiscal nature.

Article 6
Customs Duties On Exports And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of the entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties on exports or
charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties.
2. All customs duties on exports and any charges having equivalent effect shall be abolished
between the Parties upon entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 7
Quantitative Restrictions On Imports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of the entry into force of this Agreement no new quantitative restriction on
imports or measure having equivalent effect shall be introduced nor shall those already applied be
increased in trade between the Parties.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished between the Parties upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 8
Quantitative Restrictions On Exports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of the entry into force of this Agreement no new quantitative restriction on
exports or measure having equivalent effect shall be introduced nor shall those already applied be
increased in trade between the Parties.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and any measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished between the Parties upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 
Page 4
Article 9
Technical Regulations
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to standards or technical regulations and
related measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. Each Party, upon request of the other Party, shall provide information on particular individual
cases of standards, technical regulations and related measures.
3. The Parties shall endeavour to reduce technical barriers to trade. To this end the Parties will
enter where appropriate into negotiations for the conclusion of the agreements for the mutual
recognition in the field of conformity assessment, in the spirit of the recommendations of the WTO
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
CHAPTER II: AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
Article 10
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural and fishery products originating in
the Parties.
2. The term "agricultural and fishery products" means for the purpose of this Agreement the
products falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding
System and the products listed in Annex I of this Agreement.
Article 11
Exchange Of Concessions
1. The Parties to this Agreement shall mutually allocate concessions set forth in Protocol II in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Taking into account the role of agriculture in their respective economies; the development of
trade in agricultural products between the Parties; the high sensitivity of agricultural products; the
rules of their respective agricultural policy, the Parties shall examine in the Joint Committee the
possibilities of granting to each other further concessions in trade in agricultural products.
3. In pursuance of this objective, Protocol II providing for measures to facilitate trade in
agricultural products has been concluded between the Parties.
Article 12
Sanitary And Phytosanitary Measures
 The Parties shall not apply their regulations in sanitary and phytosanitary matters as an
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between them. The Parties
shall apply their sanitary measures within the spirit of the provisions of the GATT and the other
relevant WTO agreements. 
Page 5
Article 13
Specific Safeguards
 Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Article 22, given the
particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, if imports of products originating in a Party, which
are the subject of concessions granted under this Agreement, cause serious disturbance to the markets
or to their domestic regulatory mechanisms, in the other Party, both Parties shall enter into
consultations immediately to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Party concerned
may take the measures it deems necessary.
CHAPTER III: SERVICES AND INVESTMENTS
Article 14
1. The Parties to this Agreement recognize the growing importance of certain areas, such as
services and investments. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden their co-operation, in
particular in the context of the European integration, they will co-operate with the aim of achieving a
progressive liberalization and mutual opening of their markets for investments and trade in services,
taking into account relevant provisions of the General Agreement on Trade and Services (GATS).
2. The Parties will discuss in the Joint Committee this co-operation with the aim of developing
and deepening of their relations in conformity with this Article.
CHAPTER IV: COMMON PROVISIONS
Article 15
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing,
whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products of one Party and like products
originating in the other Party.
2. Products exported to the territory of the Parties may not benefit from repayment of internal
taxes in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxes imposed on them.
Article 16
Trade Relations Governed By Other Agreements
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free
trade areas or arrangements for cross-border trade of the Parties with third countries to the extent that
these do not negatively affect the trade regime and in particular the provisions concerning rules of
origin provided for by this Agreement.
2. Exchange of information shall take place, upon request of either Party, within the Joint
Committee concerning agreements establishing such customs unions or free trade areas. 
Page 6
Article 17
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article 4 may
be taken by the Parties in the form of increased customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important
social problems.
3. Customs duties on imports applicable in the Parties to products originating in the other Party
introduced by these measures may not exceed 25 % ad valorem and shall maintain an element of
preference for products originating in the other Party. The total value of imports of the products which
are subject to these measures may not exceed 15 % of total imports of industrial products from the
other Party as defined in Article 4, during the last year for which statistics are available.
4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding five years unless a longer duration
is authorized by the Joint Committee. They shall cease to apply at the latest on the expiry of the
transitional period.
5. No such measures can be introduced in respect of a product if more than three years have
elapsed since the elimination of all duties and quantitative restrictions or charges or measures having
an equivalent effect concerning that product.
6. The Parties shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures they intend to take
and, at the request of either Party, consultations shall be held in the Joint Committee on such
measures and the sectors to which they apply before they are applied. When taking such measures the
Parties shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the customs duties
introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a phasing out of these duties starting at
the latest two years after their introduction, at equal rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a
different schedule.
Article 18
Dumping
 If a Party finds that dumping, within the meaning of Article VI of GATT 1994 is taking place
in trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures against that practice
in accordance with Article VI of the GATT and the rules established by agreements related to that
Article, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 22 of this
Agreement.
Article 19
Emergency Action On Imports Of Particular Products
 Where any product is being imported into either of the Parties in such increased quantities and
under such conditions as to cause, or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injury to domestic producers or disturbances on the market of like or directly
competitive products
(b) serious disturbances in any sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring
about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region, 
Page 7
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the
procedures laid down in Article 22.
Article 20
Re-Export And Serious Shortage
 Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 6 and 8 leads to:
(a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party to this Agreement
maintains for the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or
measures or charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to major difficulties for
the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance
with the procedures laid down in Article 22 of this Agreement. The measures shall be nondiscriminatory and shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
Article 21
State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall progressively adjust any state monopoly of a commercial character so as to
ensure that by the end of the fourth year following the entry into force of this Agreement, no
discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed will exist
between nationals of the Parties.
2. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to implement this
objective.
Article 22
Procedure For The Application Of Safeguard Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in this
Article, the Parties shall endeavour to solve any differences between themselves through direct
consultations, and shall inform the other Party thereof.
2. In the cases specified in Articles 13, 18, 19, 20, 25 and 33 a Party which is considering to
resort to safeguard measures shall promptly notify the Joint Committee thereof. The Party concerned
shall provide the Joint Committee with all relevant information and give it the assistance required to
examine the case. Consultations between the Parties shall take place without delay in the Joint
Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
3. If, within one month of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the Party in question
fails to put an end to the practice objected to or to the difficulties notified and in the absence of a
decision by the Joint Committee in the matter, the concerned Party may adopt the safeguard measures
it considers necessary to remedy the situation.
4. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee. They
shall be restricted, with regard to their extent and to their duration, to what is strictly necessary in
order to rectify the situation giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the damage 
Page 8
caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures that will
least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of regular consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view to their relaxation, or abolition when conditions no longer justify their
maintenance.
6. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 13, 18, 19, 20, 25 and 33 apply forthwith
the precautionary measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified
without delay to the Joint Committee and consultations between the Parties to this Agreement shall
take place within the Joint Committee.
Article 23
Rules Of Origin And Cooperation Between The Customs Administrations
 Protocol III lays down the rules of origin and methods of administrative cooperation.
Article 24
Payments
 Any payment arising from trade of goods, services and rights to non material goods between
the Parties shall be made in convertible currency, in accordance with the respective national
legislation of the Parties.
Article 25
Rules Of Competition Concerning Undertakings, State Aid
1. The following are incompatible with the proper implementation of this Agreement, in so far
as they affect trade between the Parties:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of dominant position in the territories of the
Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof;
(c) any state aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favoring certain
undertakings or the production of certain goods.
2. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid. Upon request by one Party, the
other Party shall provide information on particular individual cases of state aid.
3. For the purpose of applying the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article, the Parties will take
the measures in conformity with the procedures and under the conditions laid down in their respective
Agreements with the European Communities. In case of any change in those procedures and/or
conditions these changes will be applicable between the Parties.
4. If the Parties consider that a particular practice is incompatible with the terms of the first
paragraph of this Article, and: 
Page 9
(a) is not adequately dealt with under the implementing rules referred to in paragraph 3
of this Article, or
(b) in the absence of such rules, and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious
prejudice to the interest of the other Party or material injury to its domestic industry,
including its services industry,
it may take appropriate measures after consultation within the Joint Committee or after thirty working
days following referral for such consultation.
5. In the case of practices incompatible with paragraph 1 (c) of this Article, such appropriate
measures may, where the WTO/GATT 1994 applies thereto, only be adopted in conformity with the
procedures and under the conditions laid down by the WTO/GATT 1994 and any other relevant
instrument negotiated under its auspices which are applicable between the Parties.
6. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary adopted in conformity with this Article, the
Parties shall exchange information taking into account the limitations imposed by the requirements of
professional and business secrecy.
Article 26
Balance Of Payments Difficulties
 Where either Party is in a serious balance of payments difficulties or under threat thereof, the
Party concerned may in accordance with the conditions laid down within the framework of
WTO/GATT 1994 and with Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of International Monetary
Fund, adopt restrictive measures, which shall be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is
necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The Party concerned shall inform the other
Party forthwith of their introduction and present to the other Party, as soon as possible, a time
schedule of their removal.
Article 27
Intellectual, Industrial And Commercial Property
1. The Parties shall provide suitable and effective protection of intellectual, industrial and
commercial property rights in line with Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPs) and other international Agreements. This shall encompass effective means of
enforcing such rights.
2. Implementation of this Article shall be regularly assessed by the Parties. If difficulties which
affect trade arise in connection with intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights, either
Party may request urgent consultations to find mutually satisfactory solutions.
Article 28
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the opening up of the award of public contracts on the basis of nondiscrimination and reciprocity, to be a desirable objective.
2. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, both Parties shall grant each other’s companies
access to contract award procedures a treatment no less favorable than that accorded to companies of
any other country. 
Page 10
Article 29
Establishment Of The Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Party shall be represented. The Joint
Committee shall be responsible for the administration of this Agreement and shall ensure its proper
implementation.
2. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall exchange
information and, at the request of either Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee.
The Joint Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to
trade between the Parties.
3. The Joint Committee may, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 30,
take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement. On other matters the Joint Committee may
make recommendations.
Article 30
Procedures Of The Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet at an
appropriate level whenever necessary upon request but at least once a year. Either Party may request a
meeting be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall decide by consensus.
3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Party to this Agreement has accepted a decision
subject to reservation of the fulfilment of constitutional requirements the decision shall enter into
force, if no later date is contained therein, on the date of the receipt of the written notification stating
that such requirements have been fulfilled.
4. The Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure which shall, inter alia, contain
provisions for convening meetings and for the designation of the Chairman and his/her term of office.
5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working groups as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
Article 31
Security Exceptions
 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties from taking any measures which it
considers necessary:
(a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies:
(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such
traffic in other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or
indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or 
Page 11
(ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
(iii) in time of war or other serious international tension constituting threat of war.
Article 32
General Exceptions
 This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in
transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of
health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic,
historic or archaeological value; the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property.
Such prohibitions or restrictions must not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a
disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 33
Fulfilment Of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the objectives of
this Agreement and the fulfilment of their obligations under this Agreement.
2. If either Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation under this
Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 22 of this Agreement.
Article 34
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where either Party considers that it would be useful and in the interest of the economies of the
Parties to develop the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not covered
thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Party. The Parties may instruct the Joint
Committee to examine this request and, where appropriate, to make recommendations to them,
particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be subject to
ratification or approval by the Parties to this Agreement in accordance with their national legislation.
Article 35
Amendments
 Amendments to this Agreement, as well as to its Annexes and Protocols, shall enter into force
on the date of receipt of the later written notification through diplomatic channels, by which the
parties inform each other that all necessary requirements foreseen by their national legislation for the
entry into force of this Agreement, have been fulfilled. 
Page 12
Article 36
Protocols And Annexes
 Protocols and Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. The Joint
Committee may decide to amend the Protocols and Annexes in accordance with the national
legislation of the Parties.
Article 37
Duration And Denunciation
1. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Either party may denounce this Agreement by a written notification to the other Party. The
Agreement shall terminate on the first day of the seventh month following the date when the other
Party received the denunciation notice.
Article 38
Entry Into Force
 This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month, following the date
of the receipt of the later written notification through diplomatic channels, by which the Parties
inform each other that all necessary requirements foreseen by their national legislation for the entry
into force of this Agreement, have been fulfilled.
 DONE at Zagreb, this 13 day of March 2002, in two originals each in the Turkish, Croatian
and English languages, all texts being equally authentic. In case of any divergence in the
interpretation of this Agreement, the English text shall prevail.
_______________
 