protocol to the international convention for the northwest atlantic fisheries relating to measures of controlsource: source: unts vol. 756, pp. 220.the governments parties to the international convention for the northwest atlantic fisheries signed at washington under date of february 8, 1949, which convention, as amended,1 is hereinafter referred to as the convention, desiring to provide for national and international measures of control on the high seas for the purposes of ensuring the application of the convention and the measures in forcethereunder, agree as follows: ARTICLE iparagraph 5 of article viii of the convention is amended by adding the following:" and may also, on its own initiative, make proposals for national and international measures of control on the high seas for the purposes of ensuring the application of the convention and the measures in force thereunder. " ARTICLE iiparagraph 8 of article viii of the convention is amended by adding the follolowing:" or, in the case of proposals made under paragraph 5 above, from all contracting governments. " ARTICLE iii1. this protocol shall be open for signature and ratification or approval or for adherence on behalf of any government party to the convention.2. this protocol shall enter into force on the date on which instruments of ratification or approval have been deposited with, or written notifications of adherence have been received by, the government of the united states of america, on behalf of all the governments parties to the convention; provided, however, that article ii of this protocol shall enter into force only if the protocol relating to entry into force of proposals adopted by the commission, done at washington on november 29, 1965, has not entered into force and shall, in such case, continue in force only until that protocol enters into force.3. any government becoming a party to the convention after this protocol enters into force shall adhere to this protocol, such adherence to be effective on the same date that such government becomes a party to the convention.4. the government of the united states of america shall inform all governments signatory or adhering to the convention of all ratifications and approvals deposited and adherences received and of the date this protocol enters into force ARTICLE iv1. the original of this protocol shall be deposited with the government of the united states of america, which government shall communicate certified copies thereof to all the governments signatory or adhering to the convention.2. this protocol shall bear the date on which it is opened for signature and shall remain open for signature for a period of fourteen days thereafter, following which period it shall be open for adherence.in witness whereof the undersigned, having deposited their respective powers, have signed this protocol.done at washington this twenty-ninth day of november 1965, in the english language.for canada: c. s. a. ritchie dec. 13, 1965 for denmark: torben ronne dec. 1st, 1965 for the federal republic of germany: k. h. knappstein dec. 8th, 1965 for france: bruno de leusse dec. 13th, 1965 for iceland: petur thorsteinsson dec. 7, 1965 for italy: sergio fenoaltea dec. 13, 1965 for norway: hans engen dec. 13th, 1965 for poland: e. drozniak dec. 13th, 1965 for portugal: vasco vieira garin 13th dec. 1965 for spain: merry del val december 8th 1965 for the union of soviet socialist republics: a. dobrynin dec. 2, 1965 for the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland: patrick dean december 8, 1965 for the united states of america: burdick h. brittin dec. 2, 1965.
