AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF NEPAL ON THE KOSI PROJECT,
SIGNED AT KATHMANDU, APRIL 25, 1954

This agreement made this twenty fifth day of April, 1954, between the
Government of the Kingdom of Nepal (hereinafter referred to as the 'Government')
and the Government of India (hereinafter referred to as the
'Union').

1. SUBJECT MATTER.- Whereas the Union is desirous of constructing a
barrage, head-works and other appurtenant work about 3 miles upstream
of Hanuman Nagar town on the Kosi River with afflux and flood banks,
and canals and protective works, on land lying within the territories of
Nepal, for the purpose of flood control, irrigation, generation of hydroelectric
power and prevention of erosion of Nepal areas on the right side
of the river, upstream of the barrage (hereinafter referred to as the 'project');
And whereas the Government has agreed to the construction of the said
barrage, head-works and other connected works by and at the cost of the
Union, in consideration of the benefits hereinafter appearing:

Now THE PARTIES AGREE AS FOLLOWS:
(i) The barrage will be located about 8 miles upstream of Hanuman
Nagar town.
(ii) Details of the Project.- The general layout of the barrage, the
areas within afflux bank, flood embankments and the lines of communication
are shown in the plan annexed to this agreement as Annexure A.
(iii) For the purpose of clauses 3 and 8 of the agreement, the land under
the ponded areas and boundaries as indicated by the plan specified in
sub-clause (ii) above, shall be deemed to be submerged.

2. (i) PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION AND SURVEYS.-The Government
shall authorise and give necessary facilities to the canal and other officers
of the Union or other persons acting under the general or special orders of
such officers to enter upon such land as necessary with such men, animals
vehicles, equipment, plant, machinery and instruments as necessary and
undertake such surveys and investigations required in connection with the
said Project before, during and after the construction, as may be found
necessary from time to time by the Chief Engineer, Public Works Department
(Kosi Project) in the Irrigation Branch of the Bihar Government.
These surveys and investigations will comprise aerial and ground surveys,
hydraulic, hydrometric, hydrological and geological surveys including
construction of drillholes for surface and sub-surface explorations; investigations
for communication and for materials of construction; and all other
surveys and investigations necessary for the proper design, construction and
maintenance of the barrage and all its connected works mentioned
under the Project.

(ii) The Government will also authorise and give necessary facilities
for investigations of storage or detention dams on the Kosi or its tributaries,
soil conservation measures such as Check Dams, afforestation, etc., required
for a complete solution of the Kosi Problem in the future.

3. AUTHORITY FOR EXECUTION OF WORKS AND OCCUPATION OF LAND
AND OTHER PROPERTY.- (i) The Government will authorise the Union
to proceed with the execution of the said project as and when the Project or
a part of the Project receives sanction of the said Union and notice has been
given by the Union to the Government of its intention to commence work on
the Project and shall permit access by the engineer and all other officers,
servants and nominees of the Union with such men, animals, vehicles,
plants, machinery, equipment and instruments as may be necessary for
the direction and execution of the project to all such lands and places
and shall permit the occupation, for such period as may be necessary of all
such lands and places as may be required for the proper execution of the
Project.
(ii) The land required for the purposes mentioned in Clause 3 (i)
above shall be acquired by the Government and compensation therefor
shall be paid by the Union in accordance with provisions of clause 8 hereof.
(iii) The Government will authorise officers of the Union to enter on
land outside the limits or boundaries of the barrage and its connected
works in case of any accident happening or being apprehended to any of the
said works and to execute all works which may be necessary for the purpose
of repairing or preventing such accident: compensation, in every case, shall
be tendered by the Union to the proprietors or the occupiers of the said
land for all damages done to the same through the Government in order
that compensation may be awarded in accordance with clause 8 hereof.
(iv) The Government will permit the Union to quarry the construction
materials required for the project from the various deposits as Chatra
Dharan Bazar or other places in Nepal.
4. USE OF WATER AND POWER.- Without prejudice to the right of
Government to withdraw for irrigation or any other purpose in Nepal such
supplies of water as may be required from time to time, the Union will
have the right to regulate all the supplies in the Kosi River at the Barrage
site and to generate power at the same site for the purposes of the Project.
(ii) The Government shall be entitled to use up to 50 per cent of the
hydro-electric power generated at the Barrage site Power House on payment
of such tariff rates as may be fixed for the sale of power by the Union
in consultation with Government.

5. SOVEREIGNTY AND JURISDICTION.- The Union shall be the owner of
all lands acquired by the Government under the provisions of clause 3 hereof
which shall be transferred by them to the Union and of all water rights
secured to it under clause 4 (i).
Provided that the sovereignty rights and territorial jurisdiction of the
Government in respect of such lands shall continue unimpaired by such
transfer.
6. ROYALTIES.-(i) The Government will receive royalty in respect of
power generated and utilized in the Indian Union at rates to be settled by
agreement hereafter.
Provided that no royalty will be paid on the power sold to Nepal.
(ii) The Government shall be entitled to receive payment of royalties
from the Union in respect of stone, gravel and ballast obtained from the
Nepal territory and used in the construction and future maintenance of the
barrage and other connected works at rates to be settled by agreement
hereafter.
(iii) The Union shall be at liberty to use and remove clay, sand and soil
without lot or hindrance from lands acquired by the Government and transferred
to the Union.
(iv) Use of timber from Nepal forests, required for the construction, shall
be permitted on payment of compensation. Provided no compensation will
be payable to the Government for such quantities of timber as may be
decided upon by the Government and the Union to be necessary for use
on the spurs or other training works required for the prevention of caving
and erosion of the right bank in Nepal.

Provided likewise that no compensation will be payable by the Union for
any timber obtained from the forest lands acquired by the Government
and transferred to the Union.
7. CUSTOMS DUTIES.- The Government shall charge no customs duty or
duty of any kind, during construction and subsequent maintenance, on
any articles or materials required for the purpose of the project and the
work connected therewith or for the bona fide use of the Union.
8. COMPENSATION FOR LAND AND PROPERTY.- (i) For assessing the compensation
to be awarded by the Union to the Government in cash (a) lands
required for the execution of the various works as mentioned in clause 3
(ii) and (b) submerged lands, will be divided into the following classes:
1. Cultivated lands.
2. Forest lands.
3. Village lands and houses and other immovable property standing
on them.
4. Waste lands.
All lands recorded in the register of lands in the territory of Nepal as
actually cultivated shall be deemed to be cultivated lands for the purposes of
this clause.
(ii) The Union shall pay compensation (a) to the Government for the
loss of land revenue as at the time of acquisition in respect of the area
acquired and (b) to whomsoever it may be due for the Project and transferred
to the Union.
The assessment of such compensation, and the manner of payment, shall
be determined hereafter by mutual agreement between the Government
and the Union.
(iii) All lands required for the purposes of the Project shall be jointly
measured by the duly authorised officers of the Government and the Union
respectively.
9. COMMUNICATIONS.- (i) The Government agrees that the Union may
construct and maintain roads, tramways, ropeways etc., required for the
project in Nepal and shall provide land for these purposes on payment of
compensation as provided in clause 8.
(ii) Subject to the territorial jurisdiction of the Government the ownership
and the control of the metalled roads, tramways and railway shall
vest in the Union. The roads will be essentially departmental roads of the
Irrigation Department of the Union and any concession in regard to their
use by commercial and non-commercial vehicles of Nepal shall not be
deemed to confer any right of way.
(iii) The Government agrees to permit, on the same terms as for other
users, the use of all roads, waterways and other avenues of transport and
communications in Nepal for bonafide purposes of the construction and
maintenance of the barrage and other connected works.
(iv) The bridge over Hanuman Nagar Barrage will be open to public
traffic but the Union shall have the right to close the traffic over the bridge
for repairs, etc.
(v) The Government agrees to permit installation of telegraph, telephone
and telegraph in the project area to authorised servants of the Government
for business in emergencies provided such use does not in any way interfere
with the construction and operation of Projects.
10. USE OF RIVER CRAFT.- All navigation rights in the Kosi River in
Nepal will rest with the Government. The use of any watercraft like boat
launches and timber rafts within two miles of the Barrage and headworks
shall not be allowed except by special licence under special permits to be
issued by the Executive Engineer, Barrage. Any unauthorised watercraft
found within this limit shall be liable to prosecution.
11. FISHING RIGHTS.- All the fishing rights in the Kosi river in Nepal
except within two miles of the Barrage shall vest in the Government of
Nepal. No fishing will be permitted within two miles of the Barrage and
Headworks.
12. USE OF NEPALI LABOUR.- The Union shall give preference to Nepali
labour, personnel and contractors to the extent available and in its
opinion suitable for the construction of the project but shall be at liberty to
import labour of all classes to the extent necessary.
13. ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROJECT AREAS IN NEPAL.- The Union
shall carry out inside the project areas in the territory of Nepal functions
such as the establishment and administration of schools, hospitals, provision
of water-supply and electricity, drainage, tramway lines and other civic
amenities.
14. The Government shall be responsible for the maintenance of law
and order in the project areas within the territory of Nepal. The Government
and Union shall, from time to time consider and make suitable arrangements
calculated to achieve the above object.
15. If so desired by the Union, the Government agrees to establish
special court or courts in the project area to ensure expeditious disposal
of cases arising within the project area. The Union shall bear the cost involved
in the establishment of such courts, if the Government so desires.
16. FUTURE Kosi CONTROL WORKS.- If further investigations indicate
the necessity of storage or detention dams and other soil conservation
measures on the Kosi and its tributaries, the Government agree to grant
their consent to them on conditions similar to those mentioned herein.
17. ARBITRATION.- If any question, differences or objections whatever
shall arise in any way, connected with or arising out of this agreement or
the meaning or operation of any part thereof or the rights, duties or liabilities
of either party, except as to decisions of any such matter as thereinbefore
otherwise provided for, every such matter shall be referred for arbitration
to two persons-one to be appointed by the Government and the other
by the Union-whose decision shall be final and binding, provided that
in the event of disagreement between the two arbitrators, they shall refer
the matter under dispute for decision to an umpire to be jointly appointed
by the two arbitrators before entering on the reference.
