CONVENTION ON THE INTERNATIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PRE
VENTING COLLISIONS AT SEA, 1972
The Parties to the present Convention,
Desiring to maintain a high level of safety at sea,
Mindful of the need to revise and bring up to date the International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea annexed to the Final Act of the International Conference on
Safety of Life at Sea, I9602 ,
Having considered those Regulations in the light of developments since they were
approved,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I. GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
The Parties to the present Convention undertake to give effect to the Rules and other
Annexes constituting the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972
(hereinafter referred to as "the Regulations") attached hereto.
Article II. SIGNATURE, RATIFICATION, ACCEPTANCE, APPROVAL AND ACCESSION
1. The present Convention shall remain open for signature until 1 June 1973 and
shall thereafter remain open for accession.
2. States Members of the United Nations, or of any of the Specialized Agencies, or
the International Atomic Agency, or Parties to the Statute of the International Court of
Justice may become Parties to this Convention by:
(a) signature without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or approval;
(b) signature subject to ratification, acceptance or approval followed by ratification,
acceptance or approval; or
(c) accession.
3. Ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be effected by the deposit
of an instrument to that effect with the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative
Organization (hereinafter referred to as "the Organization") which shall inform the
Governments of States that have signed or acceded to the present Convention of the
deposit of each instrument and of the date of its deposit.
Article HI. TERRITORIAL APPLICATION
1. The United Nations in cases where they are the administering authority for a
territory or any Contracting Party responsible for the international relations of a territory
may at any time, by notification in writing to the Secretary-General of the Organization
(hereinafter referred to as "the Secretary-General"), extend the application of this
Convention to such a territory.
2. The present Convention shall, upon the date of receipt of the notification or from
such other date as may be specified in the notification, extend to the territory named
therein.
3. Any notification made in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article may be
withdrawn in respect of any territory mentioned in that notification and the extension of
this Convention to that territory shall cease to apply after one year or such longer period as
may be specified at the time of the withdrawal.
4. The Secretary-General shall inform all Contracting Parties of the notification of
any extension or withdrawal of any extension communicated under this Article.
Article IV. ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. (a) The present Convention shall enter into force twelve months after the date
on which at least 15 States, the aggregate of whose merchant fleets constitutes not less
than 65 per cent by number or by tonnage of the world fleet of vessels of 100 gross tons
and over have become Parties to it, whichever is achieved first.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph, the
present Convention shall not enter into force before 1 January 1976.
2. Entry into force for States which ratify, accept, approve or accede to this
Convention in accordance with Article II after the conditions prescribed in subparagraph
l(fl) have been met and before the Convention enters into force, shall be on the
date of entry into force of the Convention.
3. Entry into force for States which ratify, accept, approve or accede after the date
on which this Convention enters into force, shall be on the date of deposit of an instrument
in accordance with Article II.
4. After the date of entry into force of an amendment to this Convention in
accordance with paragraph 4 of Article VI, any ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession shall apply to the Convention as amended.
5. On the date of entry into force of this Convention, the Regulations replace and
abrogate the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, I960.
6. The Secretary-General shall inform the Governments of States that have signed
or acceded to this Convention of the date of its entry into force.
Article V. REVISION CONFERENCE
1. A conference for the purpose of revising this Convention or the Regulations or
both may be convened by the Organization.
2. The Organization shall convene a conference of Contracting Parties for the
purpose of revising this Convention or the Regulations or both at the request of not less
than one-third of the Contracting Parties.
Article VI. AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS
1. Any amendment to the Regulations proposed by a Contracting Party shall be
considered in the Organization at the request of that Party.
2. If adopted by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting in the Maritime
Safety Committee of the Organization, such amendment shall be communicated to all
Contracting Parties and Members of the Organization at least six months prior to its
consideration by the Assembly of the Organization. Any Contracting Party which is not a
Member of the Organization shall be entitled to participate when the amendment is
considered by the Assembly.
3. If adopted by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting in the Assembly,
the amendment shall be communicated by the Secretary-General to all Contracting Parties
for their acceptance.
4. Such an amendment shall enter into force on a date to be determined by the
Assembly at the time of its adoption unless, by a prior date determined by the Assembly at
the same time, more than one third of the Contracting Parties notify the Organization of
their objection to the amendment. Determination by the Assembly of the dates referred to
in this paragraph shall be by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting.
5. On entry into force any amendment shall, for all Contracting Parties which have
not objected to the amendment, replace and supersede any previous provision to which the
amendment refers.
6. The Secretary-General shall inform all Contracting Parties and Members of the
Organization of any request and communication under this Article and the date on which
any amendment enters into force.
Article VII. DENUNCIATION
1. The present Convention may be denounced by a Contracting Party at any time
after the expiry of five years from the date on which the Convention entered into force for
that Party.
2. Denunciation shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument with the
Organization. The Secretary-General shall inform all other Contracting Parties of the
receipt of the instrument of denunciation and of the date of its deposit.
3. A denunciation shall take effect one year, or such longer period as may be
specified in the instrument, after its deposit.
Article VIII. DEPOSIT AND REGISTRATION
1. The present Convention and the Regulations shall be deposited with the
Organization, and the Secretary-General shall transmit certified true copies thereof to all
Governments of States that have signed this Convention or acceded to it.
2. When the present Convention enters into force, the text shall be transmitted by
the Secretary-General to the Secretariat of the United Nations for registration and
publication in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article IX. LANGUAGES
The present Convention is established, together with the Regulations, in a single
copy in the English and French languages, both texts being equally authentic. Official
translations in the Russian and Spanish languages shall be prepared and deposited with the
signed original.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective
Governments for that purpose, have signed the present Convention.
DONE at London this twentieth day of October one thousand nine hundred and
seventy-two.



INTERNATIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PREVENTING COLLISIONS AT SEA, 1972
PART A. GENERAL
Ride 1. APPLICATION
(a) These Rules shall apply to all vessels upon the high seas and in all waters
connected therewith navigable by seagoing vessels.
(b) Nothing in these Rules shall interfere with the operation of special rules made
by an appropriate authority for roadsteads, harbours, rivers, lakes or inland waterways
connected with the high seas and navigable by seagoing vessels. Such special rules shall
conform as closely as possible to these Rules.
(c) Nothing in these Rules shall interfere with the operation of any special rules
made by the Government of any State with respect to additional station or signal lights or
whistle signals for ships of war and vessels proceeding under convoy, or with respect to
additional station or signal lights for fishing vessels engaged in fishing as a fleet. These
additional station or signal lights or whistle signals shall, so far as possible, be such that
they cannot be mistaken for any light or signal authorized elsewhere under these Rules.
(d) Traffic separation schemes may be adopted by the Organization for the purpose
of these Rules.
(e) Whenever the Government concerned shall have determined that a vessel of
special construction or purpose cannot comply fully with the provisions of any of these
Rules with respect to the number, position, range or arc of visibility of lights or shapes, as
well as to the disposition and characteristics of sound-signalling appliances, without
interfering with the special function of the vessel, such vessel shall comply with such
other provisions in regard to the number, position, range or arc of visibility of lights or
shapes, as well as to the disposition and characteristics of sound-signalling appliances, as
her Government shall have determined to be the closest possible compliance with these
Rules in respect to that vessel.
Rule 2. RESPONSIBILITY
(a) Nothing in these Rules shall exonerate any vessel, or the owner, master or crew
thereof, from the consequences of any neglect to comply with these Rules or of the neglect
of any precaution which may be required by the ordinary practice of seamen, or by the
special circumstances of the case.
(b) In construing and complying with these Rules due regard shall be had to all
dangers of navigation and collision and to any special circumstances, including the
limitations of the vessels involved, which may make a departure from these Rules
necessary to avoid immediate danger.
Rule 3. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these Rules, except where the context otherwise requires:
(a) The word "vessel" includes every description of water craft, including nondisplacement
craft and seaplanes, used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water.
(b) The term "power-driven vessel" means any vessel propelled by machinery.
(c) The term "sailing vessel" means any vessel under sail provided that propelling
machinery, if fitted, is not being used.
(d) The term "vessel engaged in fishing" means any vessel fishing with nets, lines,
trawls or other fishing apparatus which restrict manoeuvrability, but does not include a
vessel fishing with trolling lines or other fishing apparatus which do not restrict
manoeuvrability.
(e) The word "seaplane" includes any aircraft designed to manoeuvre on the water.
(/) The term "vessel not under command" means a vessel which through some
exceptional circumstance is unable to manoeuvre as required by these Rules and is
therefore unable to keep out of the way of another vessel.
(g) The term "vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre" means a vessel which
from the nature of her work is restricted in her ability to manoeuvre as required by these
Rules and is therefore unable to keep out of the way of another vessel.
The following vessels shall be regarded as vessels restricted in their ability to
manoeuvre:
(i) a vessel engaged in laying, servicing or picking up a navigation mark, submarine
cable or pipeline;
(ii) a vessel engaged in dredging, surveying or underwater operations;
(iii) a vessel engaged in replenishment or transferring persons, provisions or cargo while
underway;
(iv) a vessel engaged in the launching or recovery of aircraft;
(v) a vessel engaged in minesweeping operations;
(vi) a vessel engaged in a towing operation such as render her unable to deviate from hercourse.
(h) The term "vessel constrained by her draught" means a power-driven vessel
which because of her draught in relation to the available depth of water is severely
restricted in her ability to deviate from the course she is following.
(0 The word "underway" means that a vessel is not at anchor, or made fast to the
shore, or aground.
(/) The words "length" and "breadth" of a vessel mean her length overall and
greatest breadth.
(k) Vessels shall be deemed to be in sight of one another only when one can be
observed visually from the other.
(/) The term "restricted visibility" means any condition in which visibility is
restricted by fog, mist, falling snow, heavy rainstorms, sandstorms or any other similar
causes.
PART B. STEERING AND SAILING RULES
SECTION i. CONDUCT OF VESSELS IN ANY CONDITION OF VISIBILITY
Rule 4. APPLICATION
Rules in this Section apply in any condition of visibility.
Rule 5, LOOK-OUT
Every vessel shall at all times maintain a proper look-out by sight and hearing as well
as by all available means appropriate in the prevailing circumstances and conditions so as
to make a full appraisal of the situation and of the risk of collision.
Rule 6, SAFE SPEED
Every vessel shall at all times proceed at a safe speed so that she can take proper and
effective action to avoid collision and be stopped within a distance appropriate to the
prevailing circumstances and conditions.
In determining a safe speed the following factors shall be among those taken into
account:
(a) by all vessels:
(i) the state of visibility;
(ii) the traffic density including concentrations of fishing vessels or any other
vessels;
(iii) the manoeuvrability of the vessel with special reference to stopping distance
and turning ability in the prevailing conditions;
(iv) at night the presence of background light such as from shore lights or from back
scatter of her own lights;
(v) the state of wind, sea and current, and the proximity of navigational hazards;
(vi) the draught in relation to the available depth of water;
(b) additionally, by vessels with operational radar:
(i) the characteristics, efficiency and limitations of the radar equipment;
(ii) any constraints imposed by the radar range scale in use;
(iii) the effect on radar detection of the sea state, weather and other sources of
interference;
(iv) the possibility that small vessels, ice and other floating objects may not be
detected by radar at an adequate range;
(v) the number, location and movement of vessels detected by radar;
(vi) the more exact assessment of the visibility that may be possible when radar is
used to determine the range of vessels or other objects in the vicinity.
Rule 7. RISK OF COLLISION
(a) Every vessel shall use all available means appropriate to the prevailing
circumstances and conditions to determine if risk of collision exists. If there is any doubt
such risk shall be deemed to exist.
(b) Proper use shall be made of radar equipment if fitted and operational, including
long-range scanning to obtain early warning of risk of collision and radar plotting or
equivalent systematic observation of detected objects.
(c) Assumptions shall not be made on the basis of scanty information, especially
scanty radar information.
(d) In determining if risk of collision exists the following considerations shall be
among those taken into account:
(i) such risk shall be deemed to exist if the compass bearing of an approaching vessel
does not appreciably change;
(ii) such risk may sometimes exist even when an appreciable bearing change is evident,
particularly when approaching a very large vessel or a tow or when approaching a
vessel at close range.
Rule 8. ACTION TO AVOID COLLISION
(a) Any action taken to avoid collision shall, if the circumstances of the case admit,
be positive, made in ample time and with due regard to the observance of good
seamanship.
(b) Any alteration of course and/or speed to avoid collision shall, if the
circumstances of the case admit, be large enough to be readily apparent to another vessel
observing visually or by radar; a succession of small alterations of course and/or speed
should be avoided.
(c) If there is sufficient sea room, alteration of course alone may be the most
effective action to avoid a close-quarters situation provided that it is made in good time, is
substantial and does not result in another close-quarters situation.
(d) Action taken to avoid collision with another vessel shall be such as to result in
passing at a safe distance. The effectiveness of the action shall be carefully checked until
the other vessel is finally past and clear.
(e) If necessary to avoid collision or allow more time to assess the situation, a
vessel shall slacken her speed or take all way off by stopping or reversing her means of
propulsion.
Rule 9. NARROW CHANNELS
(a) A vessel proceeding along the course of a narrow channel or fairway shall keep
as near to the outer limit of the channel or fairway which lies on her starboard side as is
safe and practicable.
(b) A vessel of less than 20 metres in length or a sailing vessel shall not impede the
passage of a vessel which can safely navigate only within a narrow channel or fairway.
(c) A vessel engaged in fishing shall not impede the passage of any other vessel
navigating within a narrow channel or fairway.
(d) A vessel shall not cross a narrow channel or fairway if such crossing impedes
the passage of a vessel which can safely navigate only within such channel or fairway. The
latter vessel may use the sound signal prescribed in Rule 34(cf) if in doubt as to the
intention of the crossing vessel.
(e) (i) In a narrow channel or fairway when overtaking can take place only if the
vessel to be overtaken has to take action to permit safe passing, the vessel intending to
overtake shall indicate her intention by sounding the appropriate signal prescribed in
Rule 34(c)(i). The vessel to be overtaken shall, if in agreement, sound the appropriate
signal prescribed in Rule 34(c)(ii) and take steps to permit safe passing. If in doubt she
may sound the signals prescribed in Rule 34(d),
(ii) This Rule does not relieve the overtaking vessel of her obligation under
Rule 13.
(f) A vessel nearing a bend or an area of a narrow channel or fairway where other
vessels may be obscured by an intervening obstruction shall navigate with particular
alertness and caution and shall sound the appropriate signal prescribed in Rule 34(e).
(g) Any vessel shall, if the circumstances of the case admit, avoid anchoring in a
narrow channel.
Rule 10. TRAFFIC SEPARATION SCHEMES
(a) This Rule applies to traffic separation schemes adopted by the Organization.
(b) A vessel using a traffic separation scheme shall:
(i) proceed in the appropriate traffic lane in the general direction of traffic flow for that
lane;
(ii) as far as practicable keep clear of a traffic separation line or separation zone;
(iii) normally join or leave a traffic lane at the termination of the lane, but when joining or
leaving from the side shall do so at as small an angle to the general direction of traffic
flow as practicable.
(c) A vessel shall so far as practicable avoid crossing traffic lanes, but if obliged to
do so shall cross as nearly as practicable at right angles to the general direction of traffic
flow.
(d) Inshore traffic zones shall not normally be used by through traffic which can
safely use the appropriate traffic lane within the adjacent traffic separation scheme.
(e) A vessel, other than a crossing vessel, shall not normally enter a separation zone
or cross a separation line except:
(i) in cases of emergency to avoid immediate danger;
(ii) to engage in fishing within a separation zone.
(/) A vessel navigating in areas near the terminations of traffic separation schemes
shall do so with particular caution.
(g) A vessel shall so far as practicable avoid anchoring in a traffic separation
scheme or in areas near its terminations.
(h) A vessel not using a traffic separation scheme shall avoid it by as wide a margin
as is practicable.
(0 A vessel engaged in fishing shall not impede the passage of any vessel following
.a traffic lane.
(/) A vessel of less than 20 metres in length or a sailing vessel shall not impede the
safe passage of a power-driven vessel following a traffic lane.
SECTION ii. CONDUCT OF VESSELS IN SIGHT OF ONE ANOTHER
Rule 11. APPLICATION
Rules in this Section apply to vessels in sight of one another.
Rule 12. SAILING VESSELS
(a) When two sailing vessels are approaching one another, so as to involve risk of
collision, one of them shall keep out of the way of the other as follows:
(i) when each has the wind on a different side, the vessel which has the wind on the port
side shall keep out of the way of the other;
(ii) when both have the wind on the same side, the vessel which is to windward shall
keep out of the way of the vessel which is to leeward;
(iii) if a vessel with the wind on the port side sees a vessel to windward and cannot
determine with certainty whether the other vessel has the wind on the port or on the
starboard side, she shall keep out of the way of the other.
(b) For the purposes of this Rule the windward side shall be deemed to be the side
opposite to that on which the mainsail is carried or, in the case of a square-rigged vessel,
the side opposite to that on which the largest fore-and-aft sail is carried.
Rule 13. OVERTAKING
(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Rules of this Section, any vessel
overtaking any other shall keep out of the way of the vessel being overtaken.
(b) A vessel shall be deemed to be overtaking when coming up with another vessel
from a direction more than 22.5 degrees abaft her beam, that is, in such a position with
reference to the vessel she is overtaking, that at night she would be able to see only the
sternlight of that vessel but neither of her sidelights.
(c) When a vessel is in any doubt as to whether she is overtaking another, she shall
assume that this is the case and act accordingly.
(d) Any subsequent alteration of the bearing between the two vessels shall not
make the overtaking vessel a crossing vessel within a meaning of these Rules or relieve
her of the duty of keeping clear of the overtaken vessel until she is finally past and clear.
Rule 14. HEAD-ON SITUATION
(a) When two power-driven vessels are meeting on reciprocal or nearly reciprocal
courses so as to involve risk of collision, each shall alter her course to starboard so that
each shall pass on the port side of the other.
(b) Such a situation shall be deemed to exist when a vessel sees the other ahead or
nearly ahead and by night she could see the masthead lights of the other in a line or nearly
in a line and/or both sidelights and by day she observes the corresponding aspect of the
other vessel.
(c) When a vessel is in any doubt as to whether such a situation exists, she shall
assume that it does exist and act accordingly.
Rule 15. CROSSING SITUATION
When two power-driven vessels are crossing so as to involve risk of collision, the
vessel which has the other on her own starboard side shall keep out of the way and shall, if
the circumstances of the case admit, avoid crossing ahead of the other vessel.
Rule 16. ACTION BY GIVE-WAY VESSEL
Every vessel which is directed by these Rules to keep out of the way of another vessel shall, so
far as possible, take early and substantial action to keep well clear.
Rule 17. ACTION BY STAND-ON VESSEL
(a) (i) Where by these Rules one of the two vessels is to keep out of the way, the other shall
keep her course and speed.
(ii) The latter vessel may, however, take action to avoid collision by her manoeuvre
alone, as soon as it becomes apparent to her that the vessel required to keep out of the way
is not taking appropriate action in compliance with these Rules.
(b) When, from any cause, the vessel required to keep her course and speed finds
herself so close that collision cannot be avoided by the action of the give-way vessel
alone, she shall take such action as will best aid to avoid collision.
(c) A power-driven vessel which takes action in a crossing situation in accordance
with sub-paragraph (a)(ii) of this Rule to avoid collision with another power-driven vessel
shall, if the circumstances of the case admit, not alter course to port for a vessel on her
own port side.
(jf) This Rule does not relieve the give-way vessel of her obligation to keep out of
the way.
Rule 18. RESPONSIBILITIES BETWEEN VESSELS
Except where Rules 9, 10 and 13 otherwise require:
(a) A power-driven vessel underway shall keep out of the way of:
(i) a vessel not under command;
(ii) a vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre;
(iii) a vessel engaged in fishing;
(iv) a sailing vessel.
(b) A sailing vessel underway shall keep out of the way of:
(i) a vessel not under command;
(ii) a vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre;
(iii) a vessel engaged in fishing.
(c) A vessel engaged in fishing when underway shall, so far as possible, keep out of
the way of:
(i) a vessel not under command;
(ii) a vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre.
(d) (i) Any vessel other than a vessel not under command or a vessel restricted in
her ability to manoeuvre shall, if the circumstances of the case admit, avoid impeding the
safe passage of a vessel constrained by her draught, exhibiting the signals in Rule 28.
(ii) A vessel constrained by her draught shall navigate with particular caution
having full regard to her special condition.
(e) A seaplane on the water shall, in general, keep well clear of all vessels and
avoid impeding their navigation. In circumstances, however, where risk of collision
exists, she shall comply with the Rules of this Part.
SECTION in. CONDUCT OF VESSELS IN RESTRICTED VISIBILITY
Rule 19. CONDUCT OF VESSELS IN RESTRICTED VISIBILITY
(a) This Rule applies to vessels not in sight of one another when navigating in or
near an area of restricted visibility.
(b) Every vessel shall proceed at a safe speed adapted to the prevailing
circumstances and conditions of restricted visibility. A power-driven vessel shall have her
engines ready for immediate manoeuvre.
(c) Every vessel shall have due regard to the prevailing circumstances and
conditions of restricted visibility when complying with the Rules of Section I of this Part.
(d) A vessel which detects by radar alone the presence of another vessel shall
determine if a close-quarters situation is developing and/or risk of collision exists. If so,
she shall take avoiding action in ample time, provided that when such action consists of an
alteration of course, so far as possible the following shall be avoided:
(i) an alteration of course to port for a vessel forward of the beam, other than for a vessel
being overtaken;
(ii) an alteration of course towards a vessel abeam or abaft the beam.
(e) Except where it has been determined that a risk of collision does not exist, every
vessel which hears apparently forward of her beam the fog signal of another vessel, or
which cannot avoid a close-quarters situation with another vessel forward of her beam,
shall reduce her speed to the minimum at which she can be kept on her course. She shall if
necessary take all her way off and in any event navigate with extreme caution until danger
of collision is over.
PART c. LIGHTS AND SHAPES
Rule 20. APPLICATION
(a) Rules in this Part shall be complied with in all weathers.
(b) The Rules concerning lights shall be complied with from sunset to sunrise, and
during such times no other lights shall be exhibited, except such lights as cannot be
mistaken for the lights specified in these Rules or do not impair their visibility or
distinctive character, or interfere with the keeping of a proper look-out.
(c) The lights prescribed by these Rules shall, if carried, also be exhibited from
sunrise to sunset in restricted visibility and may be exhibited in all other circumstances
when it is deemed necessary.
(d) The Rules concerning shapes shall be complied with by day.
(e) The lights and shapes specified in these Rules shall comply with the provisions
of Annex I to these Regulations.
Rule 21. DEFINITIONS
(a) "Masthead light" means a white light placed over the fore and aft centreline of
the vessel showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 225 degrees and so
fixed as to show the light from right ahead to 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on either side of
the vessel.
(b) "Sidelights" means a green light on the starboard side and a red light on the
port side each showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 112.5 degrees and
so fixed as to show the light from right ahead to 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on its
respective side. In a vessel of less than 20 metres in length the sidelights may be combined
in one lantern carried on the fore and aft centreline of the vessel.
(c) "Sternlight" means a white light placed as nearly as practicable at the stern
showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 135 degrees and so fixed as to
show the light 67.5 degrees from right aft on each side of the vessel.
(d) "Towing light" means a yellow light having the same characteristics as the
"sternlight" defined in paragraph (c) of this Rule.
(e) "All-round light" means a light showing an unbroken light over an arc of the
horizon of 360 degrees.
(f) "Flashing light" means a light flashing at regular intervals at a frequency of
120 flashes or more per minute.
Rule 22. VISIBILITY OF LIGHTS
The lights prescribed in these Rules shall have an intensity as specified in Section 8
of Annex I to these Regulations so as to be visible at the following minimum ranges:
(a) in vessels of 50 metres or more in length:
a masthead light, 6 miles;
a sidelight, 3 miles;
a sternlight, 3 miles;
a towing light, 3 miles;
a white, red, green or yellow all-round light, 3 miles;
(b) in vessels of 12 metres or more in length but less than 50 metres in length:
a masthead light, 5 miles; except than where the length of the vessel is less than
20 metres, 3 miles;
a sidelight, 2 miles;
a sternlight, 2 miles;
a towing light, 2 miles;
a white, red, green or yellow all-round light, 2 miles;
(c) in vessels of less than 12 metres in length:
a masthead light, 2 miles;
a sidelight, 1 mile;
a sternlight, 2 miles;
a towing light, 2 miles;
a white, red, green or yellow all-round light, 2 miles.
Rule 23. POWER-DRIVEN VESSELS UNDERWAY
(a) A power-driven vessel underway shall exhibit:
(i) a masthead light forward;
(ii) a second masthead light abaft of and higher than the forward one; except that a vessel
of less than 50 metres in length shall not be obliged to exhibit such light but may do
so;
(iii) sidelights;
(iv) a sternlight.
(b) An air-cushion vessel when operating in the non-displacement mode shall, in
addition to the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) of this Rule, exhibit an all-round flashing
yellow light.
(c) A power-driven vessel of less than 7 metres in length and whose maximum
speed does not exceed 7 knots may, in lieu of the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) of this
Rule, exhibit an all-round white light. Such vessel shall, if practicable, also exhibit
sidelights.
Rule 24. TOWING AND PUSHING
(a) A power-driven vessel when towing shall exhibit:
(i) instead of the light prescribed in Rule 23(a)(i), two masthead lights forward in a
vertical line. When the length of the tow, measuring from the stern of the towing
vessel to the after end of the tow exceeds 200 metres, three such lights in a vertical
line;
(ii) sidelights;
(iii) a sternlight;
(iv) a towing light in a vertical line above the sternlight;
(v) when the length of the tow exceeds 200 metres, a diamond shape where it can best be
seen.
(b) When a pushing vessel and a vessel being pushed ahead are rigidly connected in
a composite unit they shall be regarded as a power-driven vessel and exhibit the lights
prescribed in Rule 23.
(c) A power-driven vessel when pushing ahead or towing alongside, except in the
case of a composite unit, shall exhibit:
(i) instead of the light prescribed in Rule 23(a)(i), two masthead lights forward in a
vertical line;
(ii) sidelights;
(iii) a sternlight.
(d) A power-driven vessel to which paragraphs (a) and (c) of this Rule apply shall
also comply with Rule 23(a)(ii).
(e) A vessel or object being towed shall exhibit:
(i) sidelights;
(ii) a sternlight;
(iii) when the length of the tow exceeds 200 metres, a diamond shape where it can best be
seen.
(f) Provided that any number of vessels being towed or pushed in a
group shall be lighted as one vessel,
(i) a vessel being pushed ahead, not being part of a composite unit, shall exhibit at the
forward end, sidelights;
(ii) a vessel being towed alongside shall exhibit a sternlight and at the forward end,
sidelights.
(g) Where from any sufficient cause it is impracticable for a vessel or object being
towed to exhibit the lights prescribed in paragraph (e) of this Rule, all possible measures
shall be taken to light the vessel or object towed or at least to indicate the presence of the
unlighted vessel or object.
Rule 25. SAILING VESSELS UNDERWAY AND VESSELS UNDER OARS
(a) A sailing vessel underway shall exhibit:
(i) sidelights;
(ii) a sternlight.
(b) In a sailing vessel of less than 12 metres in length the lights prescribed in
paragraph (a) of this Rule may be combined in one lantern carried at or near the top of the
mast where it can best be seen.
(c) A sailing vessel underway may, in addition to the lights prescribed in
paragraph (a) of this Rule, exhibit at or near the top of the mast, where they can best be
seen, two all-round lights in a vertical line, the upper being red and the lower green, but
these lights shall not be exhibited in conjunction with the combined lantern permitted by
paragraph (b) of this Rule.
(d) (i) A sailing vessel of less than 7 metres in length shall, if practicable, exhibit
the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) or (b) of this Rule, but if she does not, she shall have
ready at hand an electric torch or lighted lantern showing a white light which shall be
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
(ii) A vessel under oars may exhibit the lights prescribed in this Rule for sailing
vessels, but if she does not, she shall have ready at hand an electric torch or lighted lantern
showing a white light which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
(e) A vessel proceeding under sail when also being propelled by machinery shall
exhibit forward where it can best be seen a conical shape, apex downwards.
Rule 26. FISHING VESSELS
(a) A vessel engaged in fishing, whether underway or at anchor, shall exhibit only
the lights and shapes prescribed in this Rule.
(b) A vessel when engaged in trawling, by which is meant the dragging through the
water of a dredge net or other apparatus used as a fishing appliance, shall exhibit:
(i) two all-round lights in a vertical line, the upper being green and the lower white, or a
shape consisting of two cones with their apexes together in a vertical line one above
the other; a vessel of less than 20 metres in length may instead of this shape exhibit a
basket;
(ii) a masthead light abaft of and higher than the all-round green light; a vessel of less
than 50 metres in length shall not be obliged to exhibit such a light but may do so;
(iii) when making way through the water, in addition to the lights prescribed in this
paragraph, sidelights and a sternlight.
(c) A vessel engaged in fishing, other than trawling, shall exhibit:
(i) two all-round lights in a vertical line, the upper being red and the lower white, or a
shape consisting of two cones with apexes together in a vertical line one above the
other; a vessel of less than 20 metres in length may instead of this shape exhibit a
basket;
(ii) when there is outlying gear extending more than 150 metres horizontally from the
vessel, an all-round white light or a cone apex upwards in the direction of the gear;
(iii) when making way through the water, in addition to the lights prescribed in this
paragraph, sidelights and a sternlight.
(d) A vessel engaged in fishing in close proximity to other vessels may exhibit the additional signals described in Annex II to these Regulations.
(e) A vessel when not engaged in fishing shall not exhibit the lights or shapes
prescribed in this Rule, but only those prescribed for a vessel of her length.
Rule 27. VESSELS NOT UNDER COMMAND OR RESTRICTED
IN THEIR ABILITY TO MANOEUVRE
(a) A vessel not under command shall exhibit:
(i) two all-round red lights in a vertical line where they can best be seen;
(ii) two balls or similar shapes in a vertical line where they can best be seen;
(iii) when making way through the water, in addition to the lights prescribed in this
paragraph, sidelights and a sternlight.
(b) A vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre, except a vessel engaged in
minesweeping operations, shall exhibit:
(i) three all-round lights in a vertical line where they can best be seen. The highest and
lowest of these lights shall be red and the middle light shall be white;
(ii) three shapes in a vertical line where they can best be seen. The highest and lowest of
these shapes shall be balls and the middle one a diamond;
(iii) when making way through the water, masthead lights, sidelights and a sternlight, in
addition to the lights prescribed in sub-paragraph (i);
(iv) when at anchor, in addition to the lights or shapes prescribed in sub-paragraphs (i)
and (ii), the light, lights or shape prescribed in Rule 30.
(c) A vessel engaged in a towing operation such as renders her unable to deviate
from her course shall, in addition to the lights or shapes prescribed in sub-paragraph (&)(i)
and (ii) of this Rule, exhibit the lights or shape prescribed in Rule 24(a).
(d) A vessel engaged in dredging or underwater operations, when restricted in her
ability to manoeuvre, shall exhibit the lights and shapes prescribed in paragraph (b) of this
Rule and shall in addition, when an obstruction exists, exhibit:
(i) two all-round red lights or two balls in a vertical line to indicate the side on which the
obstruction exists;
(ii) two all-round green lights or two diamonds in a vertical line to indicate the side on
which another vessel may pass;
(iii) when making way through the water, in addition to the lights prescribed in this
paragraph, masthead lights, sidelights and a sternlight;
(iv) a vessel to which this paragraph applies when at anchor shall exhibit the lights or
shapes prescribed in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) instead of the lights or shape
prescribed in Rule 30.
(e) Whenever the size of a vessel engaged in diving operations makes it
impracticable to exhibit the shapes prescribed in paragraph (d) of this Rule, a rigid replica
of the International Code flag "A" not less than 1 metre in height shall be exhibited.
Measures shall be taken to ensure all-round visibility.
(f) A vessel engaged in minesweeping operations shall, in addition to the lights
prescribed for a power-driven vessel in Rule 23, exhibit three all-round green lights or
three balls. One of these lights or shapes shall be exhibited at or near the foremast head
and one at each end of the fore yard. These lights or shapes indicate that it is dangerous for
another vessel to approach closer than 1,000 metres astern or 500 metres on either side of
the minesweeper.
(g) Vessels of less than 7 metres in length shall not be required to exhibit the lights
prescribed in this Rule.
(h) The signals prescribed in this Rule are not signals of vessels in distress and
requiring assistance. Such signals are contained in Annex IV to these Regulations.
Rule 28. VESSELS CONSTRAINED BY THEIR DRAUGHT
A vessel constrained by her draught may, in addition to the lights prescribed for
power-driven vessels in Rule 23, exhibit where they can best be seen three all-round red
lights in a vertical line, or a cylinder.
Rule 29. PILOT VESSELS
(a) A vessel engaged on pilotage duty shall exhibit:
(i) at or near the masthead, two all-round lights in a vertical line, the upper being white
and the lower red;
(ii) when underway, in addition, sidelights and a sternlight;
(iii) when at anchor, in addition to the lights prescribed in sub-paragraph (i), the anchor
light, lights or shape.
(b) A pilot vessel when not engaged on pilotage duty shall exhibit the lights or
shapes prescribed for a similar vessel of her length.
Rule 30. ANCHORED VESSELS AND VESSELS AGROUND
(a) A vessel at anchor shall exhibit where it can best be seen:
(i) in the fore part, an all-round white light or one ball;
(ii) at or near the stern and at a lower level than the light prescribed in sub-paragraph (i),
an all-round white light.
(b) A vessel of less than 50 metres in length may exhibit an all-round white light
where it can best be seen instead of the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) of this Rule.
(c) A vessel at anchor may, and a vessel of 100 metres and more in length shall,
also use the available working or equivalent lights to illuminate her decks.
(d) A vessel aground shall exhibit the lights prescribed in paragraph (a) or (b) of
this Rule and in addition, where they can best be seen:
(i) two all-round red lights in a vertical line;
(ii) three balls in a vertical line.
(e) A vessel of less than 7 metres in length, when at anchor or aground, not in or
near a narrow channel, fairway or anchorage, or where other vessels normally navigate,
shall not be required to exhibit the lights or shapes prescribed in paragraphs (a), (b) or (d)
of this Rule.
Rule 31. SEAPLANES
Where it is impracticable for a seaplane to exhibit lights and shapes of the
characteristics or in the positions prescribed in the Rules of this Part she shall exhibit
lights and shapes as closely similar in characteristics and position as is possible.
PART D. SOUND AND LIGHT SIGNALS
Rule 32. DEFINITIONS
(a) The word "whistle" means any sound-signalling appliance capable of produc
ing the prescribed blasts and which complies with the specifications in Annex III to these
Regulations.
(b) The term "short blast" means a blast of about one second's duration.
(c) The term "prolonged blast" means a blast of from four to six seconds' duration.
Rule 33. EQUIPMENT FOR SOUND SIGNALS
(a) A vessel of 12 metres or more in length shall be provided with a whistle and a
bell and a vessel of 100 metres or more in length shall, in addition, be provided with a
gong, the tone and sound of which cannot be confused with that of the bell. The whistle,
bell and gong shall comply with the specifications in Annex III to these Regulations. The
bell or gong or both may be replaced by other equipment having the same respective
sound characteristics, provided that manual sounding of the required signals shall always
be possible.
(b) A vessel of less than 12 metres in length shall not be obliged to carry the soundsignalling
appliances prescribed in paragraph (a) of this Rule but if she does not, she shall
be provided with some other means of making an efficient sound signal.
Rule 34. MANOEUVRING AND WARNING SIGNALS
(a) When vessels are in sight of one another, a power-driven vessel underway, when
manoeuvring as authorized or required by these Rules, shall indicate that manoeuvre by
the following signals on her whistle:
one short blast to mean "I am altering my course to starboard";
two short blasts to mean "I am altering my course to port";
three short blasts to mean "I am operating astern propulsion".
(b) Any vessel may supplement the whistle signals prescribed in paragraph (a) of
this Rule by light signals, repeated as appropriate, whilst the manoeuvre is being carried
out:
(i) these light signals shall have the following significance;
one flash to mean "I am altering my course to starboard";
two flashes to mean "I am altering my course to port";
three flashes to mean "I am operating astern propulsion";
(ii) the duration of each flash shall be about one second, the interval between flashes
shall be about one second, and the interval between successive signals shall be not
less than ten seconds;
(iii) the light used for this signal shall, if fitted, be an all-round white light, visible at a
minimum range of 5 miles, and shall comply with the provisions of Annex I.
(c) When in sight of one another in a narrow channel or fairway:
(i) a vessel intending to overtake another shall in compliance with Rule 9(e)(i) indicate
her intention by the following signals on her whistle:
two prolonged blasts followed by one short blast to mean "I intend to overtake you
on your starboard side";
two prolonged blasts followed by two short blasts to mean "I intend to overtake
you on your port side";
(ii) the vessel about to be overtaken when acting in accordance with Rule 9(e)(i) shall
indicate her agreement by the following signal on her whistle:
one prolonged, one short, one prolonged and one short blast, in that order.
(d) When vessels in sight of one another are approaching each other and from any
cause either vessel fails to understand the intentions or actions of the other, or is in doubt
whether sufficient action is being taken by the other to avoid collision, the vessel in doubt
shall immediately indicate such doubt by giving at least five short and rapid blasts on the
whistle. Such signal may be supplemented by a light signal of at least five short and rapid
flashes.
(e) A vessel nearing a bend or an area of a channel or fairway where other vessels
may be obscured by an intervening obstruction shall sound one prolonged blast. Such
signal shall be answered with a prolonged blast by any approaching vessel that may be
within hearing around the bend or behind the intervening obstruction.
(f) If whistles are fitted on a vessel at a distance apart of more than 100 metres, one
whistle only shall be used for giving manoeuvring and warning signals.
Rule 35. SOUND SIGNALS IN RESTRICTED VISIBILITY
In or near an area of restricted visibility, whether by day or night, the signals
prescribed in this Rule shall be used as follows:
(a) A power-driven vessel making way through the water shall sound at intervals of
not more than 2 minutes one prolonged blast.
(b) A power-driven vessel underway but stopped and making no way through the
water shall sound at intervals of not more than 2 minutes two prolonged blasts in
succession with an interval of about 2 seconds between them.
(c) A vessel not under command, a vessel restricted in her ability to manoeuvre, a
vessel constrained by her draught, a sailing vessel, a vessel engaged in fishing and a vessel
engaged in towing or pushing another vessel shall, instead of the signals prescribed in
paragraphs (a) or (b) of this Rule, sound at intervals of not more than 2 minutes three
blasts in succession, namely one prolonged followed by two short blasts.
(d) A vessel towed or if more than one vessel is towed the last vessel of the tow, if
manned, shall at intervals of not more than 2 minutes sound four blasts in succession,
namely one prolonged followed by three short blasts. When practicable, this signal shall
be made immediately after the signal made by the towing vessel.
(e) When a pushing vessel and a vessel being pushed ahead are rigidly connected in
a composite unit, they shall be regarded as a power-driven vessel and shall give the signals
prescribed in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this Rule.
(/) A vessel at anchor shall at intervals of not more than one minute ring the bell
rapidly for about 5 seconds. In a vessel of 100 metres or more in length the bell shall be
sounded in the forepart of the vessel and immediately after the ringing of the bell the gong
shall be sounded rapidly for about 5 seconds in the after part of the vessel. A vessel at
anchor may in addition sound three blasts in succession, namely one short, one prolonged
and one short blast, to give warning of her position and of the possibility of collision to an
approaching vessel.
(g) A vessel aground shall give the bell signal and if required the gong signal
prescribed in paragraph (f) of this Rule and shall, in addition, give three separate and
distinct strokes on the bell immediately before and after the rapid ringing of the bell. A
vessel aground may in addition sound an appropriate whistle signal.
(h) A vessel of less than 12 metres in length shall not be obliged to give the abovementioned
signals but, if she does not, shall make some other efficient sound signal at
intervals of not more than 2 minutes.
(0 A pilot vessel when engaged on pilotage duty may in addition to the signals
prescribed in paragraphs (a), (b) or (/) of this Rule sound an identity signal consisting of
four short blasts.
Rule 36. SIGNALS TO ATTRACT ATTENTION
If necessary to attract the attention of another vessel, any vessel may make light or
sound signals that cannot be mistaken for any signal authorized elsewhere in these Rules,
or may direct the beam of her searchlight in the direction of the danger, in such a way as
not to embarrass any vessel.
Rule 37. DISTRESS SIGNALS
When a vessel is in distress and requires assistance she shall use or exhibit the signals
prescribed in Annex IV to these Regulations.
PART E. EXEMPTIONS
Ride 38. EXEMPTIONS
Any vessel (or class of vessels), provided that she complies with the requirements of
the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1960, the keel of which is
laid or which is at a corresponding stage of construction before the entry into force of
these Regulations may be exempted from compliance therewith as follows:
(a) the installation of lights with ranges prescribed in Rule 22, until four years after the
date of entry into force of these Regulations;
(b) the installation of lights with colour specifications as prescribed in Section 7 of
Annex I to these Regulations, until four years after the date of entry into force of these
Regulations;
(c) the repositioning of lights as a result of conversion from Imperial to metric units and
rounding off measurement figures, permanent exemption;
(d) (i) the repositioning of masthead lights on vessels of less than 150 metres in length,
resulting from the prescriptions of Section 3(a) of Annex I, permanent exemption;
(ii) the repositioning of masthead lights on vessels of 150 metres or more in length,
resulting from the prescriptions of Section 3(a) of Annex I to these Regulations, until
nine years after the date of entry into force of these Regulations;
(e) the repositioning of masthead lights resulting from the prescriptions of Section 2(b) of
Annex I, until nine years after the date of entry into force of these Regulations;
(f) the repositioning of sidelights resulting from the prescriptions of
3(b) of Annex I, until nine years after the date of entry into force of these Regulations;
(g) the requirements for sound signal appliances prescribed in Annex III, until nine years
after the date of entry into force of these Regulations.

ANNEX I
POSITIONING AND TECHNICAL DETAILS OF LIGHTS AND SHAPES
1. Definition
The term "height above the hull" means height above the uppermost continuous deck.
2. Vertical positioning and spacing of lights
(a) On a power-driven vessel of 20 metres or more in length the masthead lights shall be
placed as follows:
(i) the forward masthead light, or if only one masthead light is carried, then that light, at a height
above the hull of not less than 6 metres, and, if the breadth of the vessel exceeds 6 metres, then
at a height above the hull not less than such breadth, so, however, that the light need not be
placed at a greater height above the hull than 12 metres;
(ii) when two masthead lights are carried, the after one shall be at least 4.5 metres vertically higher
than the forward one.
(b) The vertical separation of masthead lights of power-driven vessels shall be such that in all
normal conditions of trim the after light will be seen over and separate from the forward light at a
distance of 1000 metres from the stem when viewed from sea level.
(c) The masthead light of a power-driven vessel of 12 metres but less than 20 metres in length
shall be placed at a height above the gunwale of not less than 2.5 metres.
(d) A power-driven vessel of less than 12 metres in length may carry the uppermost light at a
height of less than 2.5 metres above the gunwale. When, however, a masthead light is carried in
addition to sidelights and a sternlight, then such masthead light shall be carried at least 1 metre
higher than the sidelights.
(e) One of the two or three masthead lights prescribed for a power-driven vessel when
engaged in towing or pushing another vessel shall be placed in the same position as the forward
masthead light of a power-driven vessel.
(/) In all circumstances the masthead light or lights shall be so placed as to be above and clear
of all other lights and obstructions.
(g) The sidelights of a power-driven vessel shall be placed at a height above the hull not
greater than three quarters of that of the forward masthead light. They shall not be so low as to be
interfered with by deck lights.
(h) The sidelights, if in a combined lantern and carried on a power-driven vessel of less than
20 metres in length, shall be placed not less than 1 metre below the masthead light.
(0 When the Rules prescribe two or three lights to be carried in a vertical line, they shall be
spaced as follows:
(i) on a vessel of 20 metres in length or more such lights shall be spaced not less than 2 metres
apart, and the lowest of these lights shall, except where a towing light is required, not be less
than 4 metres above the hull;
(ii) on a vessel of less than 20 metres in length such lights shall be spaced not less than 1 metre
apart and the lowest of these lights shall, except where a towing light is required, not be less
than 2 metres above the gunwale;
(iii) when three lights are carried they shall be equally spaced.
(/) The lower of the two all-round lights prescribed for a fishing vessel when engaged in
fishing shall be at a height above the sidelights not less than twice the distance between the two
vertical lights.
(k) The forward anchor light, when two are carried, shall not be less than 4.5 metres above
the after one. On a vessel of 50 metres or more in length this forward anchor light shall not be less
than 6 metres above the hull.
3. Horizontal positioning and spacing of lights
(a) When two masthead lights are prescribed for a power-driven vessel, the horizontal
distance between them shall not be less than one half of the length of the vessel but need not be more
than 100 metres. The forward light shall be placed not more than one quarter of the length of the
vessel from the stem.
(b) On a vessel of 20 metres or more in length the sidelights shall not be placed in front of the
forward masthead lights. They shall be placed at or near the side of the vessel.
4. Details of location of direction-indicating lights for fishing vessels, dredgers and vessels
engaged in underwater operations
(a) The light indicating the direction of the outlying gear from a vessel engaged in fishing as
prescribed in Rule 26(c)(ii) shall be placed at a horizontal distance of not less than 2 metres and not
more than 6 metres away from the two all-round red and white lights. This light shall be placed not
higher than the all-round white light prescribed in Rule 26(c)(i) and not lower than the sidelights.
(b) The lights and shapes on a vessel engaged in dredging or underwater operations to
indicate the obstructed side and/or the side on which it is safe to pass, as prescribed in Rule 27(rf)(i)
and (ii), shall be placed at the maximum practical horizontal distance, but in no case less than
2 metres, from the lights or shapes prescribed in Rule 27(b)(i) and (ii). In no case shall the upper of
these lights or shapes be at a greater height than the lower of the three lights or shapes prescribed in
Rule 27(fc)(i) and (ii).
5. Screens for sidelights
The sidelights shall be fitted with inboard screens painted matt black, and meeting the
requirements of Section 9 of this Annex. With a combined lantern, using a single vertical filament
and a very narrow division between the green and red sections, external screens need not be fitted.
6. Shapes
(a) Shapes shall be black and of the following sizes:
(i) a ball shall have a diameter of not less than 0.6 metre;
(ii) a cone shall have a base diameter of not less than 0.6 metre and a height equal to its diameter;
(iii) a cylinder shall have a diameter of at least 0.6 metre and a height of twice its diameter;
(iv) a diamond shape shall consist of two cones as defined in (ii) above having a common base.
(b) The vertical distance between shapes shall be at least 1.5 metre.
(c) In a vessel of less than 20 metres in length shapes of lesser dimensions but commensurate
with the size of the vessel may be used and the distance apart may be correspondingly reduced.
7. Colour specification of lights
The chromaticity of all navigation lights shall conform to the following standards, which lie
within the boundaries of the area of the diagram specified for each colour by the International
Commission on Illumination (CIE).
The boundaries of the area for each colour are given by indicating the corner co-ordinates,
which are as follows:
(i) White
x 0.525 0.525 0.452 0.310 0.310 0.443
y 0.382 0.440 0.440 0.348 0.283 0.382
(ii) Green
x 0.028 0.009 0.300 0.203
y 0.385 0.723 0.511 0.356
(iii) Red
x 0.680 0.660 0.735 0.721
y 0.320 0.320 0.265 0.259
(iv) Yellow
x 0.612 0.618 0.575 0.575
y 0.382 0.382 0.425 0.406
8. Intensity of lights
(a) The minimum luminous intensity of lights shall be calculated by using the formula:
/ = 3.43 x 106 x T x D1 x K~ D
where / is luminous intensity in candelas under service conditions,
T is threshold factor 2 X 10" 7 lux,
D is range of visibility (luminous range) of the light in nautical miles,
K is atmospheric transmissivity.
For prescribed lights the value ofK shall be 0.8, corresponding to a meteorological visibility of
approximately 13 nautical miles.
(b) A selection of figures derived from the formula is given in the following table:
9. Horizontal sectors
(a) (i) In the forward direction, sidelights as fitted on the vessel must show the minimum
required intensities. The intensities must decrease to reach practical cut-off between 1 degree and
3 degrees outside the prescribed sectors.
(ii) For sternlights and masthead lights and at 22.5 degrees abaft the beam for sidelights, the
minimum required intensities shall be maintained over the arc of the horizon up to 5 degrees within
the limits of the sectors prescribed in Rule 21. From 5 degrees within the prescribed sectors the
intensity may decrease by 50 per cent up to the prescribed limits; it shall decrease steadily to reach
practical cut-off at not more than 5 degrees outside the prescribed limits.
(b) All-round lights shall be so located as not to be obscured by masts, topmasts or structures
within angular sectors of more than 6 degrees, except anchor lights, which need not be placed at an
impracticable height above the hull.
10. Vertical sectors
(a) The vertical sectors of electric lights, with the exception of lights on sailing vessels, shall
ensure that:
(i) at least the required minimum intensity is maintained at all angles from 5 degrees above to
5 degrees below the horizontal;
(ii) at least 60 per cent of the required minimum intensity is maintained from 7.5 degrees above to
7.5 degrees below the horizontal.
(b) In the case of sailing vessels the vertical sectors of electric lights shall ensure that:
(i) at least the required minimum intensity is maintained at all angles from 5 degrees above to
5 degrees below the horizontal;
(ii) at least 50 per cent of the required minimum intensity is maintained from 25 degrees above to
25 degrees below the horizontal.
(c) In the case of lights other than electric these specifications shall be met as closely as
possible.
11. Intensity of non-electric lights
Non-electric lights shall so far as practicable comply with the minimum intensities, as specified
in the Table given in Section 8 of this Annex.
12. Manoeuvring light
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2(/) of this Annex, the manoeuvring light
described in Rule 34(b) shall be placed in the same fore and aft vertical plane as the masthead light
or lights and, where practicable, at a minimum height of 2 metres vertically above the forward
masthead light, provided that it shall be carried not less than 2 metres vertically above or below the
after masthead light. On a vessel where only one masthead light is carried, the manoeuvring light, if
fitted, shall be carried where it can best be seen, not less than 2 metres vertically apart from the
masthead light.
13. Approval
The construction of lanterns and shapes and the installation of lanterns on board the vessel shall
be to the satisfaction of the appropriate authority of the State where the vessel is registered.

ANNEX II
ADDITIONAL SIGNALS FOR FISHING VESSELS FISHING IN CLOSE PROXIMITY
1. General
The lights mentioned herein shall, if exhibited in pursuance of Rule 26(d), be placed where
they can best be seen. They shall be at least 0.9 metre apart but at a lower level than lights prescribed
in Rule 26(fc)(i) and (c)(i). The lights shall be visible all round the horizon at a distance of at least
1 mile but at a lesser distance than the lights prescribed by these Rules for fishing vessels.
2. Signals for trawlers
(a) Vessels when engaged in trawling, whether using demersal or pelagic gear, may exhibit:
(i) when shooting their nets: two white lights in a vertical line;
(ii) when hauling their nets: one white light over one red light in a vertical line;
(iii) when the net has come fast upon an obstruction: two red lights in a vertical line.
(b) Each vessel engaged in pair trawling may exhibit:
(i) by night, a searchlight directed forward and in the direction of the other vessel of the pair;
(ii) when shooting or hauling their nets or when their nets have come fast upon an obstruction, the
lights prescribed in 2(<<) above.
3. Signals for purse seiners
Vessels engaged in fishing with purse seine gear may exhibit two yellow lights in a vertical
line. These lights shall flash alternately every second and with equal light and occultation duration.
These lights may be exhibited only when the vessel is hampered by its fishing gear.
ANNEX III
TECHNICAL DETAILS OF SOUND SIGNAL APPLIANCES
1. Whistles
(a) Frequencies and range of audibility. The fundamental frequency of the signal shall lie
within the range 70-700 Hz.
The range of audibility of the signal from a whistle shall be determined by those frequencies,
which may include the fundamental and/or one or more higher frequencies, which lie within the
range 180-700 Hz ( 1 per cent) and which provide the sound pressure levels specified in
paragraph l(c) below.
(b) Limits of fundamental frequencies. lb ensure a wide variety of whistle characteristics, the
fundamental frequency of a whistle shall be between the following limits:
(i) 70-200 Hz, for a vessel 200 metres or more in length;
(ii) 130-350 Hz, for a vessel 75 metres but less than 200 metres in length;
(iii) 250-700 Hz, for a vessel less than 75 metres in length.
(c) Sound signal intensity and range of audibility. A whistle fitted in a vessel shall provide, in
the direction of maximum intensity of the whistle and at a distance of 1 metre from it, a sound
pressure level in at least one Vsrd-octave band within the range of frequencies 180-700 Hz ( 1 per
cent) of not less than the appropriate figure given in the table below.
The range of audibility in the table above is for information and is approximately the range at
which a whistle may be heard on its forward axis with 90 per cent probability in conditions of still
air on board a vessel having average background noise level at the listening posts (taken to be 68 dB
in the octave band centred on 250 Hz and 63 dB in the octave band centred on 500 Hz).
In practice, the range at which a whistle may be heard is extremely variable and depends
critically on weather conditions; the values given can be regarded as typical but under conditions of
strong wind or high ambient noise level at the listening post the range may be much reduced,
(d) Directional properties. The sound pressure level of a directional whistle shall be not more
than 4 dB below the sound pressure level on the axis at any direction in the horizontal plane within
45 degrees of the axis. The sound pressure level at any other direction in the horizontal plane shall
be not more than 10 dB below the sound pressure level on the axis, so that the range in any direction
will be at least half the range on the forward axis. The sound pressure level shall be measured in that
Vkd-octave band which determines the audibility range.
(e) Positioning of whistles. When a directional whistle is to be used as the only whistle on a
vessel, it shall be installed with its maximum intensity directed straight ahead.
A whistle shall be placed as high as practicable on a vessel, in order to reduce interception of
the emitted sound by obstructions and also to minimize hearing damage risk to personnel. The sound
pressure level of the vessel's own signal at listening posts shall not exceed 110 dB (A) and so far as
practicable should not exceed 100 dB (A).
(f) Fitting of more than one whistle. If whistles are fitted at a distance apart of more than
100 metres, it shall be so arranged that they are not sounded simultaneously.
(g) Combined whistle systems. If due to the presence of obstructions the sound field of a
single whistle or of one of the whistles referred to in paragraph !(/) above is likely to have a zone of
greatly reduced signal level, it is recommended that a combined whistle system be fitted so as to
overcome this reduction. For the purposes of the Rules a combined whistle system is to be regarded
as a single whistle. The whistles of a combined system shall be located at a distance apart of not
more than 100 metres and arranged to be sounded simultaneously. The frequency of any one whistle
shall differ from those of the others by at least 10 Hz.
2. Bell or gong
(a) Intensity of signal. A bell or gong, or other device having similar sound characteristics
shall produce a sound pressure level of not less than 110 dB at 1 metre.
(b) Construction. Bells and gongs shall be made of corrosion-resistant material and designed
to give a clear tone. The diameter of the mouth of the bell shall be not less than 300 mm for vessels
of more than 20 metres in length, and shall be not less than 200 mm for vessels of 12 to 20 metres in
length. Where practicable, a power-driven bell striker is recommended to ensure constant force but
manual operation shall be possible. The mass of the striker shall be not less than 3 per cent of the
mass of the bell.
3. Approval
The construction of sound signal appliances, their performance and their installation on board
the vessel shall be to the satisfaction of the appropriate authority of the State where the vessel is
registered.
ANNEX IV
DISTRESS SIGNALS
1. The following signals, used or exhibited either together or separately, indicate distress and
need of assistance:
a) a gun or other explosive signal fired at intervals of about a minute;
b) a continuous sounding with any fog-signalling apparatus;
c) rockets or shells, throwing red stars fired one at a time at short intervals;
d) a signal made by radiotelegraphy or by any other signalling method consisting of the group
... ... (SOS) in the Morse Code;
e) a signal sent by radiotelephony consisting of the spoken word "Mayday";
f) the International Code Signal of distress indicated by N.C.;
g) a signal consisting of a square flag having above or below it a ball or anything resembling a ball;
h) flames on the vessel (as from a burning tar barrel, oil barrel, etc.);
i) a rocket parachute flare or a hand flare showing a red light;
j) a smoke signal giving off orange-coloured smoke;
k) slowly and repeatedly raising and lowering arms outstretched to each side;
0 the radiotelegraph alarm signal;
m) the radiotelephone alarm signal;
w) signals transmitted by emergency position-indicating radio beacons.
2. The use or exhibition of any of the foregoing signals except for the purpose of indicating
distress and need of assistance and the use of other signals which may be confused with any of the
above signals is prohibited.
3. Attention is drawn to the relevant sections of the International Code of Signals, the
Merchant Ship Search and Rescue Manual and the following signals:
(a) a piece of orange-coloured canvas with either a black square and circle or other appropriate
symbol (for identification from the air);
(b) a dye marker.

