INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR SAFE CONTAINERS (CSC)
PREAMBLE
The Contracting Parties,
Recognizing the need to maintain a high level of safety of human life in the handling,
stacking and transporting of containers,
Mindful of the need to facilitate international container transport,
Recognizing, in this context, the advantages of formalizing common international
safety requirements,
Considering that this end may best be achieved by the conclusion of a Convention,
Have decided to formalize structural requirements to ensure safety in the handling,
stacking and transporting of containers in the course of normal operations, and to this end
Have agreed as follows:
Article I. GENERAL OBLIGATION UNDER THE PRESENT CONVENTION
The Contracting Parties undertake to give effect to the provisions of the present
Convention and the Annexes hereto, which shall constitute an integral part of the present
Convention.
Article IL DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of the present Convention, unless expressly provided otherwise:
1. "Container" means an article of transport equipment:
(a) of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated
use;
(b) specially designed to facilitate the transport of goods, by one or more modes of
transport, without intermediate reloading;
(c) designed to be secured and/or readily handled, having corner fittings for these
purposes;
(d) of a size such that the area enclosed by the four outer bottom corners is either:
(i) at least 14 sq.m. (150 sq.ft.); or
(ii) at least 7 sq.m. (75 sq.ft.) if it is fitted with top corner fittings;
the term "container" includes neither vehicles nor packaging; however, containers when
carried on chassis are included.
2. "Corner fittings" means an arrangement of apertures and faces at the top and/or
bottom of a container for the purposes of handling, stacking and/or securing.
3. "Administration" means the Government of a Contracting Party under whose
authority containers are approved.
4. "Approved" means approved by the Administration.
5. "Approval" means the decision by an Administration that a design type or a
container is safe within the terms of the present Convention.
6. "International transport" means transport between points of departure and
destination situated in the territory of two countries to at least one of which the present
Convention applies. The present Convention shall also apply when part of a transport
operation between two countries takes place in the territory of a country to which the
present Convention applies.
7. "Cargo" means any goods, wares, merchandise and articles of every kind
whatsoever carried in the containers.
8. "New container" means a container the construction of which was commenced
on or after the date of entry into force of the present Convention.
9. "Existing container" means a container which is not a new container.
10. "Owner" means the owner as provided for under the national law of the
Contracting Party or the lessee or bailee, if an agreement between the parties provides for
the exercise of the owner's responsibility for maintenance and examination of the
container by such lessee or bailee.
11. "Type of container" means the design type approved by the Administration.
12. "Type-series container" means any container manufactured in accordance with
the approved design type.
13. "Prototype" means a container representative of those manufactured or to be
manufactured in a design type series.
14. "Maximum Operating Gross Weight or Rating" or "R" means the maximum
allowable combined weight of the container and its cargo.
15. "Tare Weight" means the weight of the empty container including permanently
affixed ancillary equipment.
16. "Maximum Permissible Payload" or "P" means the difference between
maximum operating gross weight or rating and tare weight.
Article III. APPLICATION
1. The pr sent Convention applies to new and existing containers used in
international transport, excluding containers specially designed for air transport.
2. Every new container shall be approved either in accordance with the provisions
for type-testing or for individual testing as contained in Annex I.
3. Every existing container shall be approved in accordance with the relevant
provisions for approval of existing containers set out in Annex I within 5 years from the
date of entry into force of the present Convention.
Article IV. TESTING, INSPECTION, APPROVAL AND MAINTENANCE
1. For the enforcement of the provisions in Annex I every Administration shall
establish an effective procedure for the testing, inspection and approval of containers in
accordance with the criteria established in the present Convention, provided however that
an Administration may entrust such testing, inspection and approval to organizations duly
authorized by it.
2. An Administration which entrusts such testing, inspection and approval to an
organization shall inform the Secretary-General of the Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organization (hereinafter referred to as "the Organization") for communica
tion to Contracting Parties.
3. Application for approval may be made to the Administration of any Contracting
Party.
4. Every container shall be maintained in a safe condition in accordance with the
provisions of Annex I.
5. If an approved container does not in fact comply with the requirements of
Annexes I and II the Administration concerned shall take such steps as it deems necessary
to bring the container into compliance with such requirements or to withdraw the
approval.
Article V. ACCEPTANCE OF APPROVAL
1. Approval under the authority of a Contracting Party, granted under the terms of
the present Convention, shall be accepted by the other Contracting Parties for all purposes
covered by the present Convention. It shall be regarded by the other Contracting Parties as
having the same force as an approval issued by them.
2. A Contracting Party shall not impose any other structural safety requirements or
tests on containers covered by the present Convention, provided however that nothing in
the present Convention shall preclude the application of provisions of national regulations
,or legislation or of international agreements, prescribing additional structural safety
requirements for tests for containers specially designed for the transport of dangerous
goods, or for those features unique to containers carrying bulk liquids or for containers
when carried by air. The term "dangerous goods" shall have that meaning assigned to it by
international agreements.
Article VI. CONTROL
1. Every container which has been approved under article III shall be subject to
control in the territory of the Contracting Parties by officers duly authorized by such
Contracting Parties. This control shall be limited to verifying that the container carries a
valid Safety Approval Plate as required by the present Convention, unless there is
significant evidence for believing that the condition of the container is such as to create an
obvious risk to safety. In that case the officer carrying out the control shall only exercise it
in so far as it may be necessary to ensure that the container is restored to a safe condition
before it continues in service.
2. Where the container appears to have become unsafe as a result of a defect which
may have existed when the container was approved, the Administration responsible for
that approval shall be informed by the Contracting Party which detected the defect.
Article VII. SIGNATURE, RATIFICATION, ACCEPTANCE, APPROVAL AND ACCESSION
1. The present Convention shall be open for signature until 15 January 1973 at the
Office of the United Nations at Geneva and subsequently from 1 February 1973 until 31
December 1973 inclusive at the Headquarters of the Organization at London by all States
Members of the United Nations or Members of any of the Specialized Agencies or of the
International Atomic Energy Agency or Parties to the Statute of the International Court of
Justice, and by any other State invited by the General Assembly of the United Nations to
become a Party to the present Convention.
2. The present Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States
which have signed it.
3. The present Convention shall remain open for accession by any State referred to
in paragraph 1.
4. Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the Organization (hereinafter referred to as "the Secretary-
    General").
Article VIII. ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. The present Convention shall enter into force twelve months from the date of the
deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
2. For each State ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the present
Convention after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval
or accession, the present Convention shall enter into force twelve months after the date of
the deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession.
3. Any State which becomes a Party to the present Convention after the entry into
force of an amendment shall, failing an expression of a different intention by that State,
(a) be considered as a Party to the Convention as amended; and
(b) be considered as a Party to the unamended Convention in relation to any Party to the
Convention not bound by the amendment.
Article IX. PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING ANY PART OR PARTS OF THE PRESENT CONVENTION
1. The present Convention may be amended upon the proposal of a Contracting
Party by any of the procedures specified in this article.
2. Amendment after consideration in the Organization:
(a) Upon the request of a Contracting Party, any amendment proposed by it to the present
Convention shall be considered in the Organization. If adopted by a majority of twothirds
of those present and voting in the Maritime Safety Committee of the
Organization, to which all Contracting Parties shall have been invited to participate
and vote, such amendment shall be communicated to all Members of the Organization
and all Contracting Parties at least six months prior to its consideration by the
Assembly of the Organization. Any Contracting Party which is not a Member of the
Organization shall be entitled to participate and vote when the amendment is
considered by the Assembly.
(b) If adopted by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting in the Assembly, and if
such majority includes a two-thirds majority of the Contracting Parties present and
voting, the amendment shall be communicated by the Secretary-General to all
Contracting Parties for their acceptance.
(c) Such amendment shall come into force twelve months after the date on which it is
accepted by two-thirds of the Contracting Parties. The amendment shall come into
force with respect to all Contracting Parties except those which, before it comes into
force, make a declaration that they do not accept the amendment.
3. Amendment by a Conference:
Upon the request of a Contracting Party, concurred in by at least one-third of the
Contracting Parties, a Conference to which the States referred to in article VII shall be
invited will be convened by the Secretary-General.
Article X. SPECIAL PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING THE ANNEXES
1. Any amendment to the Annexes proposed by a Contracting Party shall be
considered in the Organization at the request of that Party.
2. If adopted by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting in the Maritime
Safety Committee of the Organization to which all Contracting Parties shall have been
invited to participate and to vote, and if such majority includes a two-thirds majority of the
Contracting Parties present and voting, such amendment shall be communicated by the
Secretary-General to all Contracting Parties for their acceptance.
3. Such an amendment shall enter into force on a date to be determined by the
Maritime Safety Committee at the time of its adoption, unless by a prior date determined
by the Maritime Safety Committee at the same time one-fifth or five of the Contracting
Parties, whichever number is less, notify the Secretary-General of their objection to the
amendment. Determination by the Maritime Safety Committee of the dates referred to in
this paragraph shall be by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting, which
majority shall include a two-thirds majority of the Contracting Parties present and voting.
4. On entry into force any amendment shall, for all Contracting Parties which have
not objected to the amendment, replace and supersede any previous provision to which the
amendment refers; an objection made by a Contracting Party shall not be binding on other
Contracting Parties as to acceptance of containers to which the present Convention
applies.
5. The Secretary-General shall inform all Contracting Parties and Members of the
Organization of any request and communication under this article and the date on which
any amendment enters into force.
6. Where a proposed amendment to the Annexes has been considered but not
adopted by the Maritime Safety Committee, any Contracting Party may request the
convening of a Conference to which the States referred to in article VII shall be invited.
Upon receipt of notification of concurrence by at least one-third of the other Contracting
Parties such a Conference shall be convened by the Secretary-General to consider
amendments to the Annexes.
Article XI. DENUNCIATION
1. Any Contracting Party may denounce the present Convention by effecting the
deposit of an instrument with the Secretary-General. The denunciation shall take effect
one year from the date of such deposit with the Secretary-General.
2. A Contracting Party which has communicated an objection to an amendment to
the Annexes may denounce the present Convention and such denunciation shall take effect
on the date of entry into force of such an amendment.
Article XII. TERMINATION
The present Convention shall cease to be in force if the number of Contracting Parties
is less than five for any period of twelve consecutive months.
Article XIII. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
1. Any dispute between two or more Contracting Parties concerning the interpreta
tion or application of the present Convention which cannot be settled by negotiation or
other means of settlement shall, at the request of one of them, be referred to an arbitration
tribunal composed as follows: each party to the dispute shall appoint an arbitrator and
these two arbitrators shall appoint a third arbitrator, who shall be the Chairman. If three
months after receipt of a request one of the parties shall have failed to appoint an arbitrator
or if the arbitrators shall have failed to elect the Chairman, any of the parties may request
the Secretary-General to appoint an arbitrator or the Chairman of the arbitration tribunal.
2. The decision of the arbitration tribunal designated under the provisions of para
graph 1 shall be binding on the parties to the dispute.
3. The arbitration tribunal shall decide its own rules of procedure.
4. Decisions of the arbitration tribunal both as to its procedure and its place of
meeting and as to any controversy laid before it, shall be taken by majority vote.
5. Any controversy which may arise between the parties to the dispute as regards the
interpretation and execution of the award may be submitted by either party for judgment to
the arbitration tribunal which made the award.
Article XIV. RESERVATIONS
1. Reservations to the present Convention shall be permitted, excepting those
relating to the provisions of articles I-VI, XIII and of the present article and of those
contained in the Annexes, on condition that such reservations are communicated in
writing and, if communicated before the deposit of the instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession, are confirmed in that instrument. The Secretary-
General shall communicate such reservations to all States referred to in article VII.
2. Any reservations made in accordance with paragraph 1:
(a) modifies for the Contracting Party which made the reservation the provisions of the
present Convention to which the reservation relates to the extent of the reservation;
and
(b) modifies those provisions to the same extent for the other Contracting Parties in their
relations with the Contracting Party which entered the reservation.
3. Any Contracting Party which has formulated a reservation under paragraph 1 may
withdraw it at any time by notification to the Secretary-General.
Article XV. NOTIFICATION
In addition to the notifications and communications provided for in articles IX, X
and XIV, the Secretary-General shall notify all the States referred to in article VII of the
following:
(a) signatures, ratifications, acceptances, approvals and accessions, under article VII;
(b) the dates of entry into force of the present Convention in accordance with article VIII;
(c) the date of entry into force of amendments to the present Convention in accordance
with articles IX and X;
(d) denunciations under article XI;
(e) the termination of the present Convention under article XII.
Article XVI. AUTHENTIC TEXTS
The original of the present Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-
General who shall communicate certified true copies to all States referred to in article VII.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized thereto
by their respective Governments, have signed the present Convention.
DONE at Geneva this second day of December, one thousand nine hundred and
seventy-two.
ANNEX 1
REGULATIONS FOR THE TESTING, INSPECTION, APPROVAL
AND MAINTENANCE OF CONTAINERS
Chapter I. REGULATIONS COMMON TO ALL SYSTEMS OF APPROVAL
Regulation 1. SAFETY APPROVAL PLATE
1. A Safety Approval Plate conforming to the specifications set out in the Appendix to this
Annex shall be permanently affixed to every approved container at a readily visible place adjacent to
any other approval plate issued for official purposes where it would not be easily damaged.
2. (a) The Plate shall contain the following information in at least the English or French
language:
- "CSC SAFETY APPROVAL"
- Country of approval and approval reference
- Date (month and year) of manufacture
- Manufacturer's identification number of the container or, in the case of existing containers, for
which that number is unknown, the number allotted by the Administration
- Maximum operating gross weight (kilogrammes and Ibs)
- Allowable stacking weight for 1.8 g (kilogrammes and Ibs)
- Transverse racking test load value (kilogrammes and Ibs).
(b) A blank space should be reserved on the Plate for insertion of end and/or side-wall strength
values (factors) in accordance with Regulation 1, paragraph 3 and Annex II, tests 6 and 7. A blank
space should also be reserved on the Plate for first and subsequent maintenance examination dates
(month and year) when used.
3. Where the Administration considers that a new container satisfies the requirements of the
present Convention in respect of safety and if, for such container, the end and/or side-wall strength
value (factor) is designed to be greater or less than that stipulated in Annex II such value shall be
indicated on the Safety Approval Plate.
4. The presence of the Safety Approval Plate does not remove the necessity of displaying such
labels or other information as may be required by other regulations which may be in force.
Regulation 2. MAINTENANCE
1. The owner of the container shall be responsible for maintaining it in safe condition.
2. The owner of an approved container shall examine the container or have it examined in
accordance with the procedure either prescribed or approved by the Contracting Party concerned, at
intervals appropriate to operating conditions. The date (month and year) before which a new
container shall undergo its first examination shall be marked on the Safety Approval Plate.
3. The date (month and year) before which the container shall be re-examined shall be clearly
marked on the container on or as close as practicable to the Safety Approval Plate and in a manner
acceptable to that Contracting Party which prescribed or approved the particular maintenance
procedure involved.
4. The interval from the date of manufacture to the date of the first examination shall not
exceed five years. Subsequent examination of new containers and re-examination of existing
containers shall be at intervals of not more than 24 months. All examinations shall determine
whether the container has any defects which could place any person in danger.
5. For the purpose of this Regulation "the Contracting Party concerned" is the Contracting
Party of the territory in which the owner is domiciled or has his head office.
Chapter II. REGULATIONS FOR APPROVAL OF NEW CONTAINERS BY DESIGN TYPE
Regulation 3. APPROVAL OF NEW CONTAINERS
To qualify for approval for safety purposes under the present Convention all new containers
shall comply with the requirements set out in Annex II.
Regulation 4. DESIGN TYPE APPROVAL
In the case of containers for which an application for approval has been submitted, the
Administration will examine designs and witness testing of a prototype container to ensure that the
containers will conform with the requirements set out in Annex II. When satisfied, the
Administration shall notify the applicant in writing that the container meets the requirements of the
present Convention and this notification shall entitle the manufacturer to affix the Safety Approval
Plate to every container of the design type series.
Regulation 5. PROVISIONS FOR APPROVAL BY DESIGN TYPE
1. Where the containers are to be manufactured by design type series, application made to an
Administration for approval by design type shall be accompanied by drawings, a design
specification of the type of container to be approved, and such other data as may be required by the
Administration.
2. The applicant shall state the identification symbols which will be assigned by the
manufacturer to the type of container to which the application for approval relates.
3. The application shall also be accompanied by an assurance from the manufacturer that he
shall:
(a) produce to the Administration such containers of the design type concerned as the
Administration may wish to examine;
(b) advise the Administration of any change in the design or specification and await its approval
before affixing the Safety Approval Plate to the container;
(c) affix the Safeiy Approval Plate to each container in the design type series and to no others;
(d) keep a record of containers manufactured to the approved design type. This record shall at least
contain the manufacturer's identification numbers, dates of delivery and names and addresses of
customers to whom the containers are delivered.
4. Approval may be granted by the Adminstration to containers manufactured as modifications
of an approved design type if the Administration is satisfied that the modifications do not affect the
validity of tests conducted in the course of design type approval.
5. The Administration shall not confer on a manufacturer authority to affix Safety Approval
Plates on the basis of design type approval unless satisfied that the manufacturer has instituted
internal production-control features to ensure that the containers produced will conform to the
approved prototype.
Regulation 6. EXAMINATION DURING PRODUCTION
In order to ensure that containers of the same design type series are manufactured to the
approved design, the Administration shall examine or test as many units as it considers necessary, at
any stage during production of the design type series concerned.
Regulation 7. NOTIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATION
The manufacturer shall notify the Administration prior to commencement of production of each
new series of containers to be manufactured in accordance with an approved design type.
Chapter III. REGULATIONS FOR APPROVAL OF NEW CONTAINERS BY INDIVIDUAL APPROVAL
Regulation 8. APPROVAL OF INDIVIDUAL CONTAINERS
Approval of individual containers may be granted where the Administration, after examination
and witnessing of tests, is satisfied that the container meets the requirements of the present
Convention; the Administration, when so satisfied, shall notify the applicant in writing of approval
and this notification shall entitle him to affix the Safety Approval Plate to such container.
Chapter IV. REGULATIONS FOR APPROVAL OF EXISTING CONTAINERS
Regulation 9. APPROVAL OF EXISTING CONTAINERS
1. If, within 5 years from the date of entry into force of the present Convention, the owner of
an existing container presents the following information to an Administration:
(a) date and place of manufacture;
(b) manufacturer's identification number of the container if available;
(c) maximum operating gross weight capability;
(d) (i) evidence that a container of this type has been safely operated in maritime and/or inland
transport for a period of at least two years; or
(ii) evidence to the satisfaction of the Administration that the container was manufactured to a
design type which had been tested and found to comply with the technical conditions set
out in Annex II with the exception of those technical conditions relating to the end-wall and
side-wall strength tests; or
(iii) evidence that the container was constructed to standards which, in the opinion of the
Administration, were equivalent to the technical conditions set out in Annex II with the
exception of those technical conditions relating to the end-wall and and side-wall strength
tests;
(e) allowable stacking weight for 1.8 g (kilogrammes and Ibs); and
(f) such other data as required for the Safety Approval Plate,
granted; and if so, this notification shall entitle the owner to affix the Safety Approval Plate after an
examination of the container concerned has been carried out in accordance with Regulation 2.
2. Existing containers which do not qualify for approval under paragraph 1 of this Regulation
may be presented for approval under the provisions of Chapter II or Chapter HI of this Annex. For
such containers the requirements of Annex II relating to end and/or side-wall strength tests shall not
apply. The Administration may, if it is satisfied that the containers in question have been in service,
waive such of the requirements in respect of presentation of drawings and testing, other than the
lifting and floor-strength tests, as it may deem appropriate.


Appendix
The Safety Approval Plate, conforming to the model reproduced below, shall take the form of a
permanent, non-corrosive, fire-proof rectangular plate measuring not less than 200 mm by 100 mm.
The words "esc SAFETY APPROVAL" of a minimum letter height of 8 mm and all other words and
numbers of a minimum height of 5 mm shall be stamped into, embossed on or indicated on its
surface in any other permanent and legible way.


ANNEX II
STRUCTURAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS
INTRODUCTION
In setting the requirements of this Annex, it is implicit that in all phases of the operation of
containers the forces as a result of motion, location, stacking and weight of the loaded container and
external forces will not exceed the design strength of the container. In particular, the following
assumptions have been made:
(a) the container will so be restrained that it is not subjected to forces in excess of those for which it
has been designed;
(b) the container will have its cargo stowed in accordance with the recommended practices of the
trade so that the cargo does not impose upon the container forces in excess of those for which it
has been designed.
CONSTRUCTION
1. A container made from any suitable material which satisfactorily performs the following
tests without sustaining any permanent deformation or abnormality which would render it incapable
of being used for its designed purpose, shall be considered safe.
2. The dimensions, positioning and associated tolerances of corner fittings shall be checked
having regard to the lifting and securing systems in which they will function.
3. When containers are provided with special fittings for use only when such containers are
empty, this restriction shall be marked on the container.
TEST LOADS AND TEST PROCEDURES
Where appropriate to the design of the container, the following test loads and test procedures
shall be applied to all kinds of containers under test:
TEST LOADINGS AND APPLIED FORCES TEST PROCEDURES
1. LIFTING
The container, having the prescribed INTERNAL LOADING, shall be lifted in such a way that no
significant acceleration forces are applied. After lifting, the container shall be suspended or
supported for five minutes and then lowered to the ground.

