INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE
SAFETY OF LIFE AT SEA, 1960. SIGNED AT LONDON,
ON 17 JUNE 1960
The Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Commonwealth of Australia,
the Kingdom of Belgium, the United States of Brazil, the People's Republic of Bulga
ria, Cameroun, Canada, the Republic of China, the Republic of Cuba, the Czechoslovak
Republic, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Dominican Republic, the Republic of Fin
land, the French Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Kingdom of Greece,
the Hungarian People's Republic, the Republic of Iceland, the Republic of India,
Ireland, the State of Israel, the Italian Republic, Japan, the Republic of Korea,
Kuwait, the Republic of Liberia, the United Mexican States, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, New Zealand, the Kingdom of Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of Pana
ma, the Republic of Peru, the Republic of the Philippines, the Polish People's Republic,
the Portuguese Republic, the Spanish State, the Kingdom of Sweden, the Swiss
Confederation, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Arab Republic,
the United Kingdom of Geat Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, the Republic of Venezuela, and the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia,
being desirous of promoting safety of life at sea by establishing in common agreement
uniform principles and rules directed thereto :
Considering that this end may best be achieved by the conclusion of a Convention
to replace the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1948:
Have appointed their Plenipotentiaries, namely :
The Argentine Republic
Captain Carlos A. Sanchez Sanudo, Naval Attach , Argentine Embassy, London.
Prefect Inspector General Marcos H. C. Calzolari, National Maritime Sub-Prefect
of the Argentine Republic.
Mr. Nicolas G. Palacios, National Sub-Director of the Argentine Merchant Navy.
The Commonwealth of Australia
Mr. Thomas Norris, Assistant Secretary (Marine), Department of Shipping and
Transport.
The Kingdom of Belgium
His Excellency M. R. L. van Meerbeke, Belgian Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary at London.
Mr. R. E. Vancraeynest, Director of Marine Administration, Ministry of Commu
nications.
The United States of Brazil
Rear Admiral Luis Clovis de Oliveira, Deputy Chief of Naval Staff, Brazilian
Navy and Representative of Brazilian Merchant Marine Commission.
The People's Republic of Bulgaria
His Excellency Mr. Georgi Petrov Zenguilekov, Bulgarian Envoy Extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary at London.
Engineer Mr. Petko Dokov Doynov, Chief Engineer of the Department of Sea
and Water Transport, Ministry of Transport.
Cameroun
Mr. Chariot Saguez, Chief Administrator (Second Class) of the Shipping Admin
istration.
Canada
His Excellency the Honourable George A. Drew, High Commissioner for Canada
in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Alan Cumyn, Director, Marine Regulations, Department of Transport,
Ottawa.
The Republic of China
His Excellency Mr. Nan-Ju Wu, Ambassador of the Republic of China to Iran.
The Republic of Cuba
The Czechoslovak Republic
His Excellency Mr. Miroslav GaluSka, Czechoslovak Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary at London.
The Kingdom of Denmark
Mr. J0rgen Worm, Head of Shipping Department, Royal Ministry of Trade.
Mr. Anders Bache, Deputy Head of Section, Royal Ministry of Trade.
The Dominican Republic
His Excellency Senor Dr. Hector Garc a-Godoy, Dominican Ambassador Extra
ordinary and Plenipotentiary at London.
The Republic of Finland
Mr. Volmari S rkk , Chief Ship Surveyor at Board of Navigation.
The French Republic
Mr. Gilbert Grandval, Secretary-General of the Merchant Marine.
The Federal Republic of Germany
His Excellency Herr Hans Herwarth von Bittenfeld, G. C. V. 0., Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Federal Republic of Germany
at London.
Herr Dr. Karl Schubert, Head of Shipping Department, Federal Ministry of
Transport.
The Kingdom of Greece
Captain Panayiotis S. Pagonis, R. H. P. C., Director, Ministry of Mercantile
Marine.
The Hungarian People's Republic
His Excellency Mr. B la Szil gyi, Minister of the Hungarian People's Republic
at London.
The Republic of Iceland
Mr. Hj lmar R. B rdarson, Director of Shipping.
Mr. Pall Ragnarsson, Deputy Director of Shipping.
The Republic of India
Mr. R. L. Gupta, Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Transport
and Communications.
Ireland
Mr. Valentin Iremonger, Counsellor, Embassy of Ireland, London.
The State of Israel
Mr Izaac Josef Mintz, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Transport and Communications ;
Lecturer, Hebrew University, Jerusalem.
Mr. Moshe Ofer, First Secretary, Embassy of Israel, London.
The Italian Republic
Dr. Fernando Ghiglia, General Director, Ministry of Merchant Marine, Rome.
Japan
Mr. Toru Nakagawa, Minister Plenipotentiary, Embassy of Japan, London.
Mr. Masao Mizushina, Director, Ship Bureau, Ministry of Transportation.
The Republic of Korea
Mr. Tong Jin Park, Counsellor, Embassy of Korea, London.
Kuwait
Mr. Mohammad Qabazard, Director General, Port of Kuwait.
The Republic of Liberia
His Excellency Geo. T. Brewer, Jr., Liberian Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary at London.
The Honourable Edward R. Moore, Assistant Attorney-General of Liberia.
Mr. George Buchanan, Assistant Chief Ship Surveyor, Lloyd's Register of Ship
ping.
Mr. E. B. McCrohan, Jr., Architect, Marine Engineer and Surveyor.
The United Mexican States
The Kingdom of the Netherlands
Captain C. Moolenburgh, R. N. N. (Retd.), Inspector-General of Shipping.
Mr. Jr. E. Smit, Fzn., Naval Architect, Technical Adviser to the Inspector-
General of Shipping.
New Zealand
Mr. William Arthur Fox, Minister of Marine.
Mr. Victor George Boivin, Chief Surveyor of Ships, Marine Department.
The Kingdom of Norway
Captain K. J. Neuberth Wie, Inspector-General of Shipping and Navigation,
Royal Ministry of Commerce and Shipping.
Mr. Modolv Hareide, Chief of Division, Royal Ministry of Commerce and Shipping.
Pakistan
His Excellency Lieut.-General Mohammed Yousuf, High Commissioner for Paki
stan in the United Kingdom.
The Republic of Panama
Mr. Joel Medina, Chief of Shipping Direction of the Republic of Panama.
The Republic of Peru
His Excellency Senor Dr. Don Ricardo Rivera Schreiber, K. B. E., Peruvian
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at London.
The Republic of the Philippines
Commissioner Eleuterio Capapas, Commissioner of Customs.
Engineer Agustin Mathay, Chief, Hull and Boiler Inspection Division, Bureau
of Customs.
Attorney Casimiro Caluag, Chief Legal Counsel, Bureau of Customs.
The Polish People s Republic
Mr. Ludwik Szymanski, Member of the Board of the Ministry of Shipping.
Mr. Wladyslaw Milewski, Director of Polish Shipping Register.
The Portuguese Republic
His Excellency General Adolfo Abranches Pinto, Portuguese Ambassador Extra
ordinary and Plenipotentiary at London.
Commander Joaquin Carlos Esteves Cardoso, Inspector-General of the Merchant
Marine ; Naval Architect to the Head Commission on Fisheries.
Lieut.-Commander Antonio J. Belo de Carvalho, Electrical Engineer, Chief Sur
veyor for Electrical and Radio Installations.
Lieut.-Commander Manuel Antunes da Mota, Hydrographical Engineer, Chief
Surveyor for Safety of Navigation.
The Spanish State
The Kingdom of Sweden
Dr. Carl Gosta Widell, Director General of the National Board of Shipping and
Navigation.
The Swiss Confederation
His Excellency Mr. Armin Daeniker, Swiss Ambassador Extraordinary and Pleni
potentiary at London.
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
His Excellency Mr. Alexander A. Soldatov, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at London.
Captain Alexander A. Saveliev, Member of the Board of the Ministry of Merchant
. Marine of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The United Arab Republic
Comm. (Retd.) Adnan Loustan, Deputy Director General, Ports and Lighthouses
: Administration.
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Sir Gilmour Jenkins, K. C. B., K. B. E., M. C.
Mr. Percy Faulkner, C. B., Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Transport.
Mr. Dennis C. Haselgrove, Under Secretary, Ministry of Transport.
The United States of America
Admiral Alfred C. Richmond, Commandant of the United States Coast Guard.
Mr. Robert T. Merrill, Chief of the Shipping Division, Department of State.
The Republic of Venezuela
His Excellency Dr. Ignacio Iribarren Borges, Venezuelan Ambassador Extra
ordinary and Plenipotentiary at London.
Capit n de Navio Antonio Picardi, Head of Technical Services and Inspection
Division of the Merchant Marine, Ministry of Communications.
Captain Armando de Pedraza Pereira, Naval Attach , Venezuelan Embassy,
London.
The Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia
Mr. LjubiSa Veselinovie, Assistant Secretary of the Federal Council for Transport
and Communications.
Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form, have
agreed as follows :
Article I
(a) The Contracting Governments undertake to give effect to the provisions
of the present Convention and of the Regulations annexed thereto, which shall be
deemed to constitute an integral part of the present Convention. Every reference
to the present Convention implies at the same tune a reference to these Regulations.
(&) The Contracting Governments undertake to promulgate all laws, decrees,
orders and regulations and to take all other steps which may be necessary to give
the present Convention full and complete effect, so as to ensure that, from the point
of view of safety of life, a ship is fit for the service for which it is intended.
Article II
The ships to which the present Convention applies are ships registered in coun
tries the Governments of which are Contracting Governments, and ships registered
in territories to which the present Convention is extended under Article XIII.
Article III
LAWS, REGULATIONS
The Contracting Governments undertake to communicate to and deposit with
the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (hereinafter called the
Organization) :
(a) a list of non-governmental agencies which are authorised to act in their behalf
in the administration of measures for safety of life at sea for circulation to the
Contracting Governments for the information of their officers ;
(b) the text of laws, decrees, orders and regulations which shall have been promulgated
on the various matters within the scope of the present Convention ;
(c) a sufficient number of specimens of their Certificates issued under the provisions
of the present Convention for circulation to the Contracting Governments for
the information of their officers.
Article IV
CASES OF "FORCE MAJEURE"
(a) No ship, which is not subject to the provisions of the present Convention
at the time of its departure on any voyage, shall become subject to the provisions of
the present Convention on account of any deviation from its intended voyage due
to stress of weather or any other cause of force majeure.
(b) Persons who are on board a ship by reason of force majeure or in consequence
of the obligation laid upon the master to carry shipwrecked or other persons shall
not be taken into account for the purpose of ascertaining the application to a ship
of any provisions of the present Convention.
Article V
CARRIAGE OF PERSONS IN EMERGENCY
(a) For the purpose of moving persons from any territory in order to avoid a
threat to the security of their lives a Contracting Government may permit the carriage
of a larger number of persons in its ships than is otherwise permissible under the pre
sent Convention.
(&) Such permission shall not deprive other Contracting Governments of any
right of control under the present Convention over such ships which come within
their poits.
(c) Notice of any such permission, together with a statement of the circumstances,
shall be sent to the Organization by the Contracting Government granting such
permission.
Article VI
SUSPENSION IN THE CASE OF WAR
(<<) In case of war or other hostilities, a Contracting Government which considers
that it is affected, whether as a belligerent or as a neutral, may suspend the operation
of the whole or any part of the Regulations annexed hereto. The suspending Govern
ment shall immediately give notice of any such suspension to the Organization.
(6) Such suspension shall not deprive other Contracting Governments of any
right of control under the present Convention over the ships of the suspending Govern
ment when such ships aie within their ports.
(c) The suspending Government may at any time terminate such suspension
and shall immediately give notice of such termination to the Organization.
(d) The Organization shall notify all Contracting Governments of any suspension
or termination under this Article.
Article VII
PRIOR TREATIES AND CONVENTIONS
(a) As between the Contracting Governments the present Convention replaces
and abrogates the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea which was
signed in London on 10 June 1948.
(b) All other treaties, conventions and arrangements relating to safety of life
at sea, or matters appertaining thereto, at present in force between Governments
parties to the present Convention, shall continue to have full and complete effect
during the terms thereof as regards :
(i) ships to which the present Convention does not apply ;
(ii) ships to which the present Convention applies, in respect of matters for which
it has not expressly provided.
(c) To the extent, however, that such treaties, conventions or arrangements
conflict with the provisions of the present Convention, the provisions of the present
Convention shall prevail.
(d) All matters which are not expressly provided for in the present Convention
remain subject to the legislation of the Contracting Governments.
Article VIII
SPECIAL RULES DRAWN UP BY AGREEMENT
When in accordance with the present Convention special rules are drawn up
by agreement between all or some of the Contracting Governments, such rules shall be
communicated to the Organization for circulation to all Contracting Governments.
Article IX
AMENDMENTS
(a) (i) The present Convention may be amended by unanimous agreement be
tween the Contracting Governments.
(ii) Upon the request of any Contracting Government a proposed amendment
shall be communicated by the Organization to all Contracting Governments for con
sideration and acceptance under this paragraph.
(b) (i) An amendment to the present Convention may be proposed to the Organi
zation at any time by any Contracting Government and such proposal, if adopted
by a two-thirds majority of the Assembly of the Organization (hereinafter called
the Assembly), upon recommendation adopted by a two-thirds majority of the Maritune
Safety Committee of the Organization (hereinafter called the Maritime Safety
Committee), shall be communicated by the Organization to all Contracting Govern
ments for their acceptance.
(ii) Any such recommendation by the Maritime Safety Committee shall be
communicated by the Organization to all Contracting Governments for their con
sideration at least six months before it is considered by the Assembly.
(c) (i) A conference of Governments to consider amendments to the present
Convention proposed by any Contracting Government shall at any time be convened
by the Organization upon the request of one-third of the Contracting Governments.
(ii) Every amendment adopted by such conference by a two-thirds majority of
the Contracting Governments shall be communicated by the Organization to all
Contracting Governments for their acceptance.
(d) Any amendment communicated to Contracting Governments for their accept
ance under paragraph (b) or (c) of this Article shall come into force for all Contracting
Governments, except those which before it comes into force make a declaration that
they do not accept the amendment, twelve months after the date on which the amend
ment is accepted by two-thirds of the Contracting Governments including two-thirds
of the Governments represented on the Maritime Safety Committee.
(e) The Assembly, by a two-thirds majority vote, including two-thirds of the
Governments represented on the Maritime Safety Committee, and subject to the
concurrence of two-thirds of the Contracting Governments to the present Convention,
or a conference convened under paragraph (c) of this Article by a two-thirds majority
vote, may determine at the time of its adoption that the amendment is of such an
important nature that any Contracting Government which makes a declaration under
paragraph (d) of this Article and which does not accept the amendment within a period
of twelve months after the amendment comes into force, shall, upon the expiry of
this period, cease to be a party to the present Convention.
(/) Any amendment to the present Convention made under this Article which
relates to the structure of a ship shall apply only to ships the keels of which are laid
after the date on which the amendment comes into force.
(g) The Organization shall inform all Contracting Governments of any amend
ments which come into force under this Article, together with the date on which such
amendments shall come into force.
(h) Any acceptance or declaration under this Article shall be made by a notifi
cation in writing to the Organization, which shall notify all Contracting Governments
-of the receipt of the acceptance or declaration.
Article X
SIGNATURE AND ACCEPTANCE
(a) The present Convention shall remain open for signature for one month from
this day's date and shall thereafter remain open for acceptance. Governments of
States may become parties to the Convention by :
(i) signature without reservation as to acceptance ;
(ii) signature subject to acceptance followed by acceptance ; or
(iii) acceptance.
(b) Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument with the Organ
ization, which shall inform all Governments that have already accepted the Conven
tion of each acceptance received and of the date of its receipt.
Article XI
COMING INTO FORCE
(a) The present Convention shall come into force twelve months after the date
on which not less than fifteen acceptances, including seven by countries each with
not less than one million gross tons of shipping, have been deposited in accordance
with Article X. The Organization shall inform all Governments which have signed
or accepted the present Convention of the date on which it comes into force.
(b) Acceptances deposited after the date on which the present Convention comes
into force shall take effect three months after the date of their deposit.
Article XII
DENUNCIATION
(a) The present Convention may be denounced by any Contracting Government
at any time after the expiry of five years from the date on which the Convention
comes into force for that Government.
(b) Denunciation shall be effected by a notification in writing addressed to the
Organization which shall notify all the other Contracting Governments of any denun
ciation received and of the date of its receipt.
(c) A denunciation shall take effect one year, or such longer period as may be
specified in the notification after its receipt by the Organization.
Article XIII
TERRITORIES
(<<) (i) The United Nations in cases where they are the administering authority
for a territory or any Contracting Government responsible for the international rela
tions of a territory shall as soon as possible consult with such territory in an endeavour
to extend the present Convention to that territory and may at any time by notifica
tion in writing given to the Organization declare that the present Convention shall
extend to such territory.
(ii) The present Convention shall from the date of the receipt of the notification
or from such other date as may be specified in the notification extend to the terri
tory named therein.
(V) (i) The United Nations or any Contracting Government which has made
a declaration under paragraph (a) of this Article, at any time after the expiry of a
period of five years from the date on which the Convention has been so extended
to any territory, may by a notification in writing given to the Organization declare
that the present Convention shall cease to extend to any such territory named in the
notification.
(ii) The present Convention shall cease to extend to any territory mentioned in
such notification one year, or such longer period as may be specified therein, after the
date of receipt of the notification by the Organization.
(c) The Organization shall inform all the Contracting Governments of the exten
sion of the present Convention to any territories under paragraph (a) of this Article,
and of the termination of any such extension under the provisions of paragraph (b),
stating in each case the date from which the present Convention has been or will
cease to be so extended.
Article XIV
REGISTRATION
(a) The present Convention shall be deposited in the archives of the Organization
and the Secretary-General of the Organization shall transmit certified true copies
thereof to all Signatory Governments and to all other Governments which accept
the present Convention.
(b) As soon as the present Convention comes into force it shall be registered
by the Organization with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention.
DONE in London this seventeenth day of June, 1960, in a single copy in English
and French, each text being equally authoritative.
The original texts will be deposited with the Inter-Governmental Maritime Con
sultative Organization, together with texts in the Russian and Spanish languages
which will be translations.


REGULATIONS
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Part A
APPLICATION, DEFINITIONS, &<c.
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
(a) Unless expressly provided otherwise, the present Regulations apply only to ships
engaged on international voyages.
(b) The classes of ships to which each Chapter applies are more precisely defined,
and the extent of the application is shown, in each Chapter.
Regulation 2
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of the present Regulations, unless expressly provided otherwise :
(a) "Regulations" means the Regulations referred to in Article I (a) of the present
Convention.
(b) "Administration" means the Government of the country in which the ship is
registered.
(c) "Approved" means approved by the Administration.
(d) "International voyage" means a voyage from a country to which the present
Convention applies to a port outside such country, or conversely ; and for this purpose
every territory for the international relations of which a Contracting Government is respon
sible or for which the United Nations are the administering authority is regarded as a
separate country.
(e) A passenger is every person other than :
(i) the master and the members of the crew or other persons employed or engaged in
any capacity on board a ship on the business of that ship ; and
(ii) a child under one year of age.
(/) A passenger ship is a ship which carries more than twelve passengers,
(g) A cargo ship is any ship which is not a passenger ship.
(h) A tanker is a cargo ship constructed or adapted for the carriage in bulk of liquid
cargoes of an inflammable nature.
(i) A fishing vessel is a vessel used for catching fish, whales, seals, walrus or other
living resources of the sea.
(/) A nuclear ship is a ship provided with a nuclear power plant.
(k) "New ship" means a ship the keel of which is laid on or after the date of coming
into force of the present Convention.
(1) "Existing ship" means a ship which is not a new ship.
(m) A mile is 6,080 feet or 1,852 metres.
Regulation 3
EXCEPTIONS
(a) The present Regulations, unless expressly provided otherwise, do not apply to :
(i) Ships of war and troopships.
(ii) Cargo ships of less than 500 tons gross tonnage.
(iii) Ships not propelled by mechanical means,
(iv) Wooden ships of primitive build, such as dhows, junks, &c.
(v) Pleasure yachts not engaged in trade,
(vi) Fishing vessels.
(b) Except as expressly provided in Chapter V, nothing herein shall apply to ships
solely navigating the Great Lakes of North America and the River St. Lawrence as far
east as a straight line drawn from Cap des Rosiers to West Point, Anticosti Island and,
on the north side of Anticosti Island, the 63rd Meridian.
Regulation 4
EXEMPTIONS
A ship which is not normally engaged on international voyages but which, in excep
tional circumstances, is required to undertake a single international voyage may be
 exempted by the Administration from any of the requirements of the present Regulations
provided that it complies with safety requirements which are adequate in the opinion
of the Administration for the voyage which is to be undertaken by the ship.
Regulation 5
EQUIVALENTS
(a) Where the present Regulations require that a particular fitting, material, appliance
or apparatus, or type thereof, shall be fitted or carried in a ship, or that any particular
provision shall be made, the Administration may allow any other fitting, material, ap
pliance or apparatus, or type thereof, to be fitted or carried, or any other provision to be
made in that ship, if it is satisfied by trial thereof or otherwise that such fitting, material,
appliance or apparatus, or type thereof, or provision, is at least as effective as that required
by the present Regulations.
(b) Any Administration which so allows, in substitution, a fitting, material, appliance
or apparatus, or type thereof, or provision, shall communicate to the Organization
particulars thereof together with a report on any trials made and the Organization shall
circulate such particulars to other Contracting Governments for the information of
their officers.
Part B
SURVEYS AND CERTIFICATES
Regulation 0
INSPECTION AND SURVEY
The inspection and survey of ships, so far as regards the enforcement of the provisions
of the present Regulations and the granting of exemptions therefrom, shall be carried
out by officers of the country in which the ship is registered, provided that the Government
of each country may entrust the inspection and survey either to surveyors nominated
for the purpose or to organizations recognised by it. In every case the Government con
cerned fully guarantees the completeness and efficiency of the inspection and survey.
Regulation 7
INITIAL AND SUBSEQUENT SURVEYS OF PASSENGER SHIPS
(a) A passenger ship shall be subjected to the surveys specified below :
(i) A survey before the ship is put in service.
(ii) A periodical survey once every twelve months,
(iii) Additional surveys, as occasion arises.
(b) The surveys referred to above shall be carried out as follows :
(i) The survey before the ship is put in service shall include a complete inspection of its
structure, machinery and equipments, including the outside of the ship's bottom and
the inside and outside of the boilers. This survey shall be such as to ensure that
the arrangements, material, and scantlings of the structure, boilers and other pressure
vessels and their appurtenances, main and auxiliary machinery, electrical installa
tion, radio installation, radiotelegraph installations in motor lifeboats, portable
radio apparatus for survival craft, life-saving appliances, fire detecting and extin
guishing appliances, pilot ladders and other equipments, fully comply with the
requirements of the present Convention, arid of the laws, decrees, orders and regula
tions promulgated as a result thereof by the Administration for ships of the service
for which it is intended. The survey shall also be such as to ensure that the work
manship of all parts of the ship and its equipments is in all respects satisfactory, and
that the ship is provided with the lights, means of making sound signals and distress
signals as required by the provisions of the present Convention and the International
Collision Regulations.
(ii) The periodical survey shall include an inspection of the structure, boilers and other
pressure vessels, machinery and equipments, including the outside of the ship's
bottom. The survey shall be such as to ensure that the ship, as regards the structure,
boilers and other pressure vessels and their appurtenances, main and auxiliary ma
chinery, electrical installation, radio installation, radiotelegraph installations in
motor lifeboats, portable radio apparatus for survival craft, life-saving appliances,
fire detecting and extinguishing appliances, pilot ladders and other equipments, is
in satisfactory condition and fit for the service for which it is intended, and that it
complies with the requirements of the present Convention, and of the laws, decrees,
orders and regulations promulgated as a result thereof by the Administration. The
lights and means of making sound signals and the distress signals carried by the ship
shall also be subject to the above-mentioned survey for the purpose of ensuring that
they comply with the requirements of the present Convention and of the International
Collision Regulations.
(iii) A survey either general or partial, according to the circumstances, shall be made
every time an accident occurs or a defect is discovered which affects the safety of
the ship or the efficiency or completeness of its life-saving appliances or other equip
ments, or whenever any important repairs or renewals are made. The survey
shall be such as to ensure that the necessary repairs or renewals have been effectively
made, that the material and workmanship of such repairs or renewals are in all re
spects satisfactory, and that the ship complies in all respects with the provisions of
the present Convention and of the International Collision Regulations, and of the
laws, decrees, orders and regulations promulgated as a result thereof by the Ad
ministration.
(c) (i) The laws, decrees, orders and regulations referred to in paragraph (b) of this
Regulation shall be in all respects such as to ensure that, from the point of view of safety
of life, the ship is fit for the service for which it is intended.
(ii) They shall among other things prescribe the requirements to be observed as to
the initial and subsequent hydraulic or other acceptable alternative tests to which the
main and auxiliary boilers, connections, steam pipes, high pressure receivers and fuel
tanks for internal combustion engines are to be submitted, including the test procedures
to be followed and the intervals between two consecutive tests.
Regulation 8
SURVEYS OF LIFE-SAVING APPLIANCES AND OTHER EQUIPMENTS OF CARGO SHIPS
The life-saving appliances, except a radiotelegraph installation in a motor lifeboat
or a portable radio apparatus for survival craft, and the fire extinguishing appliances of
cargo ships to which Chapters II and III of the present Regulations apply shall be subject
to initial and subsequent surveys as provided for passenger ships in Regulation 7 of this
Chapter with the substitution of 24 months for 12 months in sub-paragraph (a) (ii) of that
Regulation. The fire control plans in new ships and the pilot ladders, lights and means
of making sound signals carried by new and existing ships shall be included in the surveys
for the purpose of ensuring that they comply fully with the requirements of the present
Convention and, where applicable, the International Collision Regulations.
Regulation 9
SURVEYS OF RADIO INSTALLATIONS OF CARGO SHIPS
The radio installations of cargo ships to which Chapter IV of the present Regulations
applies and any radiotelegraph installation in a motor lifeboat or portable radio apparatus
for survival craft which is carried in compliance with the requirements of Chapter III of
the present Regulations shall be subject to initial and subsequent surveys as provided
for passenger ships in Regulation 7 of this Chapter.
Regulation 10
SURVEY OF HULL, MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT OF CARGO SHIPS
The hull, machinery and equipment (other than items in respect of which Cargo
Ship Safety Equipment Certificates, Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelegraphy Certificates or
Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelephony Certificates are issued) of a cargo ship shall be surveyed
on completion and thereafter in such manner and at such intervals as the Administration
may consider necessary in order to ensure that their condition is in all respects satis
factory. The survey shall be such as to ensure that the arrangements, material, and
scantlings of the structure, boilers and other pressure vessels and their appurtenances,
main and auxiliary machinery, electrical installations and other equipments are in all
respects satisfactory for the service for which the ship is intended.
Regulation 11
MAINTENANCE OF CONDITIONS AFTER SURVEY
After any survey of the ship under Regulations 7, 8, 9 or 10 has been completed, no
change shall be made in the structural arrangements, machinery, equipments, &c.
covered by the survey, without the sanction of the Administration.
Regulation 12
ISSUE OF CERTIFICATES
(a) (i) A certificate called a Passenger Ship Safety Certificate shall be issued after
inspection and survey to a passenger ship which complies with the requirements of
Chapters II, III and IV and any other relevant requirements of the present Regulations.
(ii) A certificate called a Cargo Ship Safety Construction Certificate shall be issued
after survey to a cargo ship which satisfies the requirements for cargo ships on survey
set out in Regulation 10 of this Chapter and complies with the applicable requirements of
Chapter II, other than those relating to fire extinguishing appliances and fire control
plans.
(iii) A certificate called a Cargo Ship Safety Equipment Certificate shall be issued
after inspection to a cargo ship which complies with the relevant requirements of Chapters
II and III and any other relevant requirements of the present Regulations.
(iv) A certificate called a Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelegraphy Certificate shall be issued
after inspection to a cargo ship, fitted with a radiotelegraph installation, which complies
with the requirements of Chapter IV and any other relevant requirements of the present
Regulations.
(v) A certificate called a Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelephony Certificate shall be
issued after inspection to a cargo ship, fitted with a radiotelephone installation, which
complies with the requirements of Chapter IV and any other relevant requirements of
the present Regulations.
(vi) When an exemption is granted to a ship under and in accordance with the pro
visions of the present Regulations, a certificate called an Exemption Certificate shall be
issued in addition to the certificates prescribed in this paragraph.
(vii) Passenger Ship Safety Certificates, Cargo Ship Safety Construction Certificates,
Cargo Ship Safety Equipment Certificates, Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelegraphy Certificates,
Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelephony Certificates and Exemption Certificates shall be issued
either by the Administration or by any person or organization duly authorised by it.
In every case, that Administration assumes full responsibility for the Certificate.
(b) Nothwithstanding any other provision of the present Convention any certificate
issued under, and in accordance with, the provisions of the International Convention for
the Safety of Life at Sea, 1948, which is current when the present Convention comes
into force in respect of the Administration by which the certificate is issued, shall remain
valid until it expires under the terms of Regulation 13 of Chapter I of that Convention.
(c) A Contracting Government shall not issue Certificates under, and in accordance
with, the provisions of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1948
or 1929, after the date on which acceptance of the present Convention by the Govern
ment takes effect.
Regulation 13
ISSUE OF CERTIFICATE BY ANOTHER GOVERNMENT
A Contracting Government may, at the request of the Administration, cause a ship
to be surveyed and, if satisfied that the requirements of the present Regulations are
complied with, shall issue certificates to the ship in accordance with the present Regula
tions. Any certificate so issued must contain a statement to the effect that it has been
issued at the request of the Government of the country in which the ship is or will be
registered, and it shall have the same force and receive the same recognition as a certificate
issued under Regulation 12 of this Chapter.
Regulation 14
DURATION OF CERTIFICATES
(a) Certificates other than Cargo Ship Safety Construction Certificates, Cargo Ship
Safety Equipment Certificates and Exemption Certificates shall be issued for a period
of not more than 12 months. Cargo Ship Safety Equipment Certificates shall be isssued
for a period of not more than 24 months. Exemption Certificates shall not be valid for
longer than the period of the certificates to which they refer.
(6) If a survey takes place within two months before the end of the period for which
a Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelegraphy Certificate or a Cargo Ship Safety Radiotelephony
Certificate issued in respect of cargo ships of 300 tons gross tonnage and upwards, but less
than 500 tons gross tonnage, was originally issued, that certificate may be withdrawn,
and a new certificate may be issued which shall expire 12 months after the end of the said
period.
(c) If a ship at the time when its certificate expires is not in a port of the country
in which it is registered, the certificate may be extended by the Administration, but such
extension shall be granted only for the purpose of allowing the ship to complete its voyage
to the country in which it is registered or is to be surveyed, and then only in cases where
it appears proper and reasonable so to do.
(a) No certificate shall be thus extended for a longer period than five months, and
a ship to which such extension is granted shall not, on its arrival in the country in which
it is registered or the port in which it is to be surveyed, be entitled by virtue of such
extension to leave that port or country without having obtained a new certificate.
(e) A certificate which has not been extended under the foregoing provisions of this
Regulation may be extended by the Administration for a period of grace of up to one
month from the date of expiry stated on it.
Regulation 15
FORM OF CERTIFICATES
(a) All certificates shall be drawn up in the official language or languages of the coun
try by which they are issued.
(b) The form of the certificates shall be that of the models given in the Appendix
to the present Regulations. The arrangement of the printed part of the model certificates
shall be exactly reproduced in the certificates issued, or in certified copies thereof, and
the particulars inserted in the certificates issued, or in certified copies thereof, shall be
in Roman characters and Arabic figures.
Regulation 16
POSTING UP OF CERTIFICATES
All certificates or certified copies thereof issued under the present Regulations shall
be posted up in a prominent and accessible place in the ship.
Regulation 17
ACCEPTANCE OF CERTIFICATES
Certificates issued under the authority of a Contracting Government shall be accepted
by the other Contracting Governments for all purposes covered by the present Con
vention. They shall be regarded by the other Contracting Governments as having the
same force as certificates issued by them.
Regulation 18
QUALIFICATION OF CERTIFICATES
(a) If in the course of a particular voyage a ship has on board a number of persons
less than the total number stated in the Passenger Ship Safety Certificate and is in conse
quence, in accordance with the provisions of the present Regulations, free to carry a
smaller number of lifeboats and other life-saving appliances than that stated in the Cer
tificate, an annex may be issued by the Government, person, or organization referred
to in Regulation 12 or 13.
(b) This annex shall state that in the circumstances there is no infringement of the
provisions of the present Regulations. It shall be annexed to the Certificate and shall
be substituted for it in so far as the life-saving appliances are concerned. It shall be
valid only for the particular voyage for which it is issued.
Regulation 19
CONTROL
Every ship holding a certificate issued under Regulation 12 or Regulation 13 is
subject in the ports of the other Contracting Governments to control by officers duly
authorised by such Governments in so far as this control is directed towards verifying
that there is on board a valid certificate. Such certificate shall be accepted unless there
are clear grounds for believing that the condition of the ship or of its equipment does not
correspond substantially with the particulars of that certificate. In that case, the officer
carrying out the control shall take such steps as will ensure that the ship shall not sail
until it can proceed to sea without danger to the passengers or the crew. In the event
of this control giving rise to intervention of any kind, the officer carrying out the control
shall inform the Consul of the country in which the ship is registered in writing forthwith
of all the circumstances in which intervention was deemed to be necessary, and the facts
shall be reported to the Organization.
Regulation 20
PRIVILEGES
The privileges of the present Convention may not be claimed in favour of any ship
unless it holds appropriate valid certificates.
Part C .
CASUALTIES
Regulation 21
CASUALTIES
(a) Each Administration undertakes to conduct an investigation of any casualty
occurring to any of its ships subject to the provisions of the present Convention when it
judges that such an investigation may assist in determining what changes in the present
Regulations might be desirable.
(b) Each Contracting Government undertakes to supply the Organization with per
tinent information concerning the findings of such investigations. No reports or recom
mendations of the Organizations based upon such information shall disclose the identity
or nationality of the ships concerned or in any manner fix or imply responsibility upon
any ship or person.
CHAPTER II
CONSTRUCTION
Part A
GENERAL
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
(a) (i) Unless expressly provided otherwise, this Chapter applies to new ships.
(ii) In the case of existing passenger ships and cargo ships the keels of which were
laid on or after the date of coming into force of the International Convention for the
Safety of Life at Sea, 1948, the Administration shall ensure that the requirements which
were applied under Chapter II of that Convention to new ships as defined in that Chapter
are complied with. In the case of existing passenger ships and cargo ships the keels of
 which were laid before the date of coming into force of that Convention, the Administra
tion shall ensure that the requirements which were applied under Chapter II of that
Convention to existing ships as defined in that Chapter are complied with. As regards
those requirements of Chapter II of the present Convention which are not contained in
Chapter II of the 1948 Convention the Administration shall decide which of these require
ments shall be applied to existing ships as defined in the present Convention.
(6) For the purpose of this Chapter :
(i) A new passenger ship is a passenger ship the keel of which is laid on or after the date
of coming into force of the present Convention, or a cargo ship which is converted
to a passenger ship on or after that date, all other passenger ships being described
as existing passenger ships.
(ii) A new cargo ship is a cargo ship the keel of which is laid on or after the date of coming
into force of the present Convention.
(c) The Administration may, if it considers that the sheltered nature and conditions
of the voyage are such as to render the application of any specific requirements of this
Chapter unreasonable or unnecessary, exempt from those requirements individual ships
or classes of ships belonging to its country which, in the course of their voyage, do not
proceed more than 20 miles from the nearest land.
(d) In the case of a passenger ship which is permitted under paragraph (c) of Regula
tion 27 of Chapter III to carry a number of persons on board in excess of the lifeboat
capacity provided, it shall comply with the special standards of subdivision set out in
paragraph (e) of Regulation 5 of this Chapter, and the associated special provisions
regarding permeability in paragraph (d) of Regulation 4 of this Chapter, unless the
Administration is satisfied that, having regard to the nature and conditions of the voyage,
compliance with the other provisions of the Regulations of this Chapter is sufficient.
(e) In the case of passenger ships which are employed in the carriage of large num
bers of unberthed passengers in special trades, such, for example, as the pilgrim trade,
the Administration, if satisfied that it is impracticable to enforce compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter, may exempt such ships, when they belong to its country,
from those requirements on the following conditions :
(i) That the fullest provision which the circumstances of the trade will permit shall
be made in the matter of construction.
(ii) That steps shall be taken to formulate general rules which shall be applicable to the
particular circumstances of these trades. Such rules shall be formulated in concert
with such other Contracting Governments, if any, as may be directly interested in the
carriage of such passengers in such trades.
Notwithstanding any provisions of the present Convention, the Simla Rules, 1931,
shall continue in force as between the parties to those Rules until the rules formulated
under sub-paragraph (e) (ii) of this Regulation shall come into force.
Regulation 2
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, unless expressly provided otherwise :
(a) (i) A subdivision loadline is a waterline used in determining the subdivision of
the ship.
(ii) The deepest subdivision loadline is the waterline which corresponds to the greatest
draught permitted by the subdivision requirements which are applicable.
(b) The length of the ship is the length measured between perpendiculars taken at
the extremities of the deepest subdivision loadline.
(c) The breadth of the ship is the extreme width from outside of frame to outside of
frame at or below the deepest subdivision loadline.
(d) The draught is the vertical distance from the moulded base line amidships to tinsubdivision
loadline in question.
(e) The bulkhead deck is the uppermost deck up to which the transverse watertight
bulkheads are carried.
(/) The margin line is a line drawn at least 3 inches (or 76 millimetres) below theupper
surface of the bulkhead deck at side.
(g) The permeability of a space is the percentage of that space which can be occupied
by water.
The volume of a space which extends above the margin line shall be measured only
to the height of that line.
(h) The machinery space is to be taken as extending from, the moulded base line to
the margin line and between the extreme main transverse watertight bulkheads bounding
the spaces containing the main and auxiliary propelling machinery, boilers serving the
needs of propulsion, and all permanent coal bunkers.
In the case of unusual arrangements, the Administration may define the limits of
the machinery spaces.
(i) Passenger spaces are those which are provided for the accommodation and use of
passengers, excluding baggage, store, provision and mail rooms.
For the purposes of Regulations 4 and 5 of this Chapter, spaces provided below
the margin line for the accommodation and use of the crew shall be regarded as passenger
spaces.
(;') In all cases volumes and areas shall be calculated to moulded lines.
Part B
SUBDIVISION AND STABILITY
(Part B applies to passenger ships only, except that Regulation 19 also applies to cargo
ships.)
Regulation 3
FLOODABLE LENGTH
(a) The floodable length at any point of the length of a ship shall be determined by a
method of calculation which takes into consideration the form, draught and other charac
teristics of the ship in question.
(b) In a ship with a continuous bulkhead deck, the floodable length at a given point
is the maximum portion of the length of the ship, having its centre at the point in question,
which can be flooded under the definite assumptions set forth in Regulation 4 of this
Chapter without the ship being submerged beyond the margin line.
(E) (i) In the case of a ship not having a continuous bulkhead deck, the floodable
length at any point may be determined to an assumed continuous margin line which at
no point is less than 3 inches (or 76 millimetres) below the top of the deck (at side) to
which the bulkheads concerned and the shell are carried watertight.
(ii) Where a portion of an assumed margin line is appreciably below the deck to
which bulkheads are carried, the Administration may permit a limited relaxation in the
watertightness of those portions of the bulkheads which are above the margin line and
immediately under the higher deck.
Regulation 4
PERMEABILITY
(a) The definite assumptions referred to in Regulation 3 of this Chapter relate to the
permeabilities of the spaces below the margin line.
In determining the floodable length, a uniform average permeability shall be used
throughout the whole length of each of the following portions of the ship below the margin
line:
(i) the machinery space as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter ;
(ii) the portion forward of the machinery space ; and
(iii) the portion abaft the machinery space.
(b) (i) The uniform average permeability throughout the machinery space shall be
determined from the formula- 85+10(a-c/v)
where :
a = volume of the passenger spaces, as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter,
which are situated below the margin line within the limits of the machinery
space.
c = volume of between deck spaces below the margin line within the limits of the
machinery space which are appropriated to cargo, coal or stores.
v = whole volume of the machinery space below the margin line.
(ii) Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Administration that the average
permeability as determined by detailed calculation is less than that given by the formula,
the detailed calculated value may be used. For the purpose of such calculation, the
permeabilities of passenger spaces, as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter, shall be
taken as 95, that of all cargo, coal and store spaces as 60, and that of double bottom,
oil fuel and other tanks at such values as may be approved in each case.
(c) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this Regulation, the uniform average
permeability throughout the portion of the ship before (or abaft) the machinery space
shall be determined from the formula- 63+35(a/v)
where :
a = volume of the passenger spaces, as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter,
which are situated below the margin line, before (or abaft) the machinery
space, and
v = whole vplume of the portion of the ship below the margin line before (or abaft)
the machinery space.
(d) In the case of a ship which is permitted under paragraph (c) of Regulation 27
of Chapter III to carry a number of persons on board in excess of the lifeboat capacity
provided, and is required under paragraph (d) of Regulation 1 of this Chapter to comply
with special provisions, the uniform average permeability throughout the portion of the
ship before (or abaft) the machinery space shall be determined from the formula- 95-35(b/v)
where :
b = the volume of the spaces below the margin line and above the tops of floors,
inner bottom, or peak tanks, as the case may be, which arc appropriated to
and used as cargo spaces, coal or oil fuel bunkers, store rooms, baggage and
mail rooms, chain lockers and fresh water tanks, before (or abaft) the machinery
space ; and
v = whole volume of the portion of the ship below the margin line before (or abaft)
the machinery space.
In the case of ships engaged on services where the cargo holds are not generally
occupied by any substantial quantities of cargo, no part of the cargo spaces is to be
included in calculating "b".
(e) In the case of unusual arrangements the Administration may allow, or require,
a detailed calculation of average permeability for the portions before or abaft the machin
ery space. For the purpose of such calculation, the permeability of passenger spaces as
defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter shall be taken as 95, that of spaces containing
machinery as 85, that of all cargo, coal and store spaces as 60, and that of double bottom,
oil fuel and other tanks at such value as may be approved in each case.
(/) Where a between deck compartment between two watertight transverse bulk
heads contains any passenger or crew space, the whole of that compartment, less any
space completely enclosed within permanent steel bulkheads and appropriated to other
purposes, shall be regarded as passenger space. Where, however, the passenger or crew
space in question is completely enclosed within permanent steel bulkheads, only the space
so enclosed need be considered as passenger space.
Regulation 5
PERMISSIBLE LENGTH OF COMPARTMENTS
(a) Ships shall be as efficiently subdivided as is possible having regard to the nature
of the service for which they are intended. The degree of subdivision shall vary with the
length of the ship and with the service, in such manner that the highest degree of sub
division corresponds with the ships of greatest length, primarily engaged in the carriage
of passengers.
(b) Factor of Subdivision.-The maximum permissible length of a compartment hav
ing its centre at any point in the ship's length is obtained from the floodable length by
multiplying the latter by an appropriate factor called the factor of subdivision.
The factor of subdivision shall depend on the length of the ship, and for a given length
shall vary according to the nature of the service for which the ship is intended. It
shall decrease in a regular and continuous manner-
(i) as the length of the ship increases, and
(ii) from a factor A, applicable to ships primarily engaged in the carriage of cargo, to a
factor B, applicable to ships primarily engaged in the carriage of passengers.
The variations of the factors A and B shall be expressed by the following formulae (I)
and (II) where L is the length of the ship as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter :
L in feet
A = (190/L-198) + 18 (L = 430 and upwards)
L in metres
A = (58*2/L-60) + 18 (L = 131 and upwards).. (I)
L in feet
B = (100/L-138) + 18 (L = 260 and upwards)
L in metres
B = (30*3/L-42) + 18 (L = 79 and upwards).. (II)
(c) Criterion of Service.-For a ship of given length the appropriate factor of sub
division shall be determined by the Criterion of Service Numeral (hereinafter called the
Criterion Numeral) as given by the following formulae (III) and (IV) where :
Cs = the Criterion Numeral ;
L = length of the ship, as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter ;
M = the volume of the machinery space, as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter ;
with the addition thereto of the volume of any permanent oil fuel bunkers
which may be situated above the inner bottom and before or abaft the machin
ery space ;
P = the whole volume of the passenger spaces below the margin line, as denned
in Regulation 2 of this Chapter ;
V = the whole volume of the ship below the margin line ;
Pl = KN where :
N = number of passengers for which the ship is to be certified, and
K has the following values :
Value of K
Length in feet and volumes in cubic feet .. 6L
Length in metres and volumes in cubic metres.. 056L
Where the value of KN is greater than the sum of P and the whole volume of the
actual passenger spaces above the margin line, the figure to be taken as P! is that sum
or 2/3 KN, whichever is the greater.
When P1 is greater than P-
Cs = 72(M+2P1)/(V+P1-P).. (III)
and in other cases.
Cs = 72(M+2P)/V.. (IV)
For ships not having a continuous bulkhead deck the volumes are to be taken up
to the actual margin lines used in determining the floodable lengths.
(d) Rules for Subdivision of Ships other than those covered by paragraph (e) of this
Regulation
(i) The subdivision abaft the forepeak of ships 430 feet (or 131 metres) in length and
upwards having a criterion numeral of 23 or less shall be governed by the factor A given
by formula (I) ; of those having a criterion numeral of 123 or more by the factor B given
by formula (II) ; and of those having a criterion numeral between 23 and 123 by the
tactor F obtained by linear interpolation between the factors A and B, using the formula :
F = A-((A-B)(C-23)/100)..(V)
Nevertheless, where the criterion numeral is equal to 45 or more and simultaneously the
computed factor of subdivision as given by formula (V) is -65 or less, but more than
 50, the subdivision abaft the forepeak shall be governed by the factor -50.
Where the factor F is less than 40 and it is shown to the satisfaction of the Ad
ministration to be impracticable to comply with the factor F in a machinery compart
ment of the ship, the subdivision of such compartment may be governed by an increased
factor, which, however, shall not exceed -40.
(ii) The subdivision abaft the forepeak of ships less than 430 feet (or 131 metres) but
not less than 260 feet (or 79 metres) in length having a criterion numeral equal to S,
where -
S= (9382-20L)/34 (L in feet) = (3,574-25L)/13 (L in metres)
shall be governed by the factor unity ; of those having a criterion numeral of 123 or
more by the factor B given by the formula (II) ; of those having a criterion numeral
between S and 123 by the factor F obtained by linear interpolation between unity and
the factor B using the formula :
F = 1 - ((1-B)(Cs-S)/123-S).. (VI)
(iii) The subdivision abaft the forepeak of ships less than 430 feet (or 131 metres)
but not less than 260 feet (or 79 metres) in length and having a criterion numeral less
than S, and of all ships less than 260 feet (or 79 metres) in length shall be governed by
the factor unity, unless, in either case, it is shown to the satisfaction of the Administra
tion to be impracticable to comply with this factor in any part of the ship, in which case
the Administration may allow such relaxation as may appear to be justified, having regard
to all the circumstances.
(iv) The provisions of sub-paragraph (iii) of this paragraph shall apply also to ships
of whatever length, which are to be certified to carry a number of passengers exceeding
12 but not exceeding -
(L^2 (in feet) / 7,000) = (L^2 (in metres) / 650) or 50, whichever is the less.
(e) Special Standards of Subdivision for Ships which are permitted under paragraph (c)
of Regulation 27 of Chapter III to carry a number of persons on board in excess of the life
boat capacity provided and are required under paragraph (d) of Regulation 1 of this Chapter
to comply with special provisions.
(1) (1) In the case of ships primarily engaged in the carriage of passengers, the sub
division abaft the forepeak shall be governed by a factor of -50 or by the factor determined
according to paragraphs (c) and (d) of this Regulation, if less than -50.
(2) In the case of such ships less than 300 feet (or 91-5 metres) in length, if the
Administration is satisfied that compliance with such factor would be impracticable in
a compartment, it may allow the length of that compartment to be governed by a higher
factor provided the factor used is the lowest that is practicable and reasonable in the
circumstances.
(ii) Where, in the case of any ship whether less than 300 feet (or 91-5 metres) or
not, the necessity of carrying appreciable quantities of cargo makes it impracticable to
require the subdivision abaft the forepeak to be governed by a factor not exceeding -50,
the standard of subdivision to be applied shall be determined in accordance with the
following sub-paragraphs (1) to (5), subject to the condition that where the Administra
tion is satisfied that insistence on strict compliance in any respect would be unreasonable,
it may allow such alternative arrangement of the watertight bulkheads as appears to
be justified on merits and will not diminish the general effectiveness of the subdivision.
(1) The provisions of paragraph (c) of this Regulation relating to the criterion numeral
shall apply with the exception that in calculating the value of "Pl for berthed passengers
K is to have the value defined in paragraph (c) of this Regulation or 125 cubic feet (or
3-55 cubic metres), whichever is the greater, and for unberthed passengers K is to have
the value 125 cubic feet (or 3-55 cubic metres).
(2) The factor B in paragraph (b) of this Regulation shall be replaced by the factor
BB determined by the following formula :
L in feet
BB = (57*6)/(L-108) + 20 (L = 180 and upwards)
L in metres
BB = (17*6)/(L-33) + 20 (L = 55 and upwards)
(3) The subdivision abaft -the forepeak of ships 430 feet (or 131 metres) in length and
upwards having a criterion numeral of 23 or less shall be governed by the factor A given
by formula (I) in paragraph (6) of this Regulation ; of those having a criterion numeral
of 123 or more by the factor BB given by the formula in sub-paragraph (ii) (2) of this
paragraph ; and of those having a criterion numeral between 23 and 123 by the factor F
obtained by linear interpolation between the factors A and BB, using the formula :
F = A - ((A-BB)(Cs-23)/100)
except that if the factor F so obtained is less than -50 the factor to be used shall be either
 50 or the factor calculated according to the provisions of paragraph (d) (i) of this Regula
tion, whichever is the smaller.
(4) The subdivision abaft the forepeak of ships less than 430 feet (or 131 metres) but not less than 180 feet (or 55 metres) in length having a criterion numeral equal to
S1 where-
S1 = (1,950-4L)/10 (L in feet)
S1 = (3,712-25L)/19 (L in metres)
shall be governed by the factor unity ; of those having a criterion numeral of 123 or more
by the factor BB given by the formula in sub-paragraph (ii) (2) of this paragraph ; of
those having a criterion numeral between St and 123 by the factor F obtained by linear
interpolation between unity and the factor BB using the formula :
F = 1 - ((1-BB)(Cs-S1)/123-S1)
except that in either of the two latter cases if the factor so obtained is less than -50
the subdivision may be governed by a factor not exceeding -50.
(5) The subdivision abaft the forepeak of ships less than 430 feet (or 131 metres)
but not less than 180 feet (or 55 metres) in length and having a criterion numeral less
than St and of all ships less than 180 feet (or 55 metres) in length shall be governed by the
factor unity, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Administration to be imprac
ticable to comply with this factor in particular compartments, in which event the Ad
ministration may allow such relaxations in respect of those compartments as appear
to be justified, having regard to all the circumstances, provided that the aftermost
compartment and as many as possible of the forward compartments (between the fore
peak and the after end of the machinery space) shall be kept within the floodable length.
Regulation 6
SPECIAL RULES CONCERNING SUBDIVISION
(a) Where in a portion or portions of a ship the watertight bulkheads are carried to
a higher deck than in the remainder of the ship and it is desired to take advantage of this
higher extension of the bulkheads in. calculating the floodable length, separate margin
lines may be used for each such portion of the ship provided that-
(i) the sides of the ship are extended throughout the ship's length to the deck corre
sponding to the upper margin line and all openings in the shell plating below this
deck throughout the length of the ship are treated as being below a margin line,
for the purposes of Regulation 14 of this Chapter ; and
(ii) the two compartments adjacent to the "step" in the bulkhead deck are each within
the permissible length corresponding to their respective margin lines, and, in addi
tion, their combined length does not exceed twice the permissible length based on
the lower margin line.
(b) (i) A compartment may exceed the permissible length determined by the rules
of Regulation 5 of this Chapter provided the combined length of each pair of adjacent
compartments to which the compartment in question is common does not exceed either
the floodable length or twice the permissible length, whichever is the less.
(ii) If one of the two adjacent compartments is situated inside the machinery space,
and the second is situated outside the machinery space, and the average permeability of
the portion of the ship in which the second is situated differs from that of the machinery
space, the combined length of the two compartments shall be adjusted to the mean
average permeability of the two portions of the ship in which the compartments are
situated.
(iii) Where the two adjacent compartments have different factors of subdivision,
the combined length of the two compartments shall be determined proportionately.
(c) In ships 33,0 feet (or 100 metres) in length and upwards, one of the main transverse
bulkheads abaft the forepeak shall be fitted at a distance from forward perpendicular
which is not greater than the permissible length.
(d) A main transverse bulkhead may be recessed provided that all parts of the recess
lie inboard of vertical surfaces on both sides of the ship, situated at a distance from the
shell plating equal to one-fifth the breadth of the ship, as defined in Regulation 2 of this
Chapter, and measured at right angles to the centre line at the level of the deepest sub
division loadline.
Any part of a recess which lies outside these limits shall be dealt with as a step in
accordance with paragraph (e) of this Regulation.
(e) A main transverse bulkhead may be stepped provided that it meets one of the
following conditions :
(i) the combined length of the two compartments, separated by the bulkhead in question,
does not exceed either 90 per cent, of the floodable length or twice the permissible
length, except that in ships having a factor of subdivision greater than -9, the com
bined length of the two compartments in question shall not exceed the permissible
length ;
(ii) additional subdivision is provided in way of the step to maintain the same measure
of safety as that secured by a plane bulkhead ;
(iii) the compartment over which the step extends does not exceed the permissible
length corresponding to a margin line taken 3 inches (or 76 millimetres) below the
step.
(/) Where a main transverse bulkhead is recessed or stepped, an equivalent piano
bulkhead shall be used in determining the subdivision.
(g) If the distance between two adjacent main transverse bulkheads, or their equiv
alent plane bulkheads, or the distance between the transverse planes passing through
the nearest stepped portions of the bulkheads, is less than 10 feet (or 3-05 metres) plus
3 per cent, of the length of the ship, or 35 feet (or 10-67 metres) whichever is the less,
only one of these bulkheads shall be regarded as forming part of the subdivision of the
ship in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 5 of this Chapter.
(h) Where a main transverse watertight compartment contains local subdivision
and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Administration that, after any assumed
side damage extending over a length of 10 feet (or 3-05 metres) plus 3 per cent, of the
length of the ship, or 35 feet (or 10-67 metres) whichever is the less, the whole volume of
the main compartment will not be flooded, a proportionate allowance may be made in
the permissible length otherwise required for such compartment. In such a case the
volume of effective buoyancy assumed on the undamaged side shall not be greater than
that assumed on the damaged side.
(t) Where the required factor of subdivision is -50 or less, the combined length of
any two adjacent compartments shall not exceed the floodable length.
Regulation 7
STABILITY OF SHIPS IN DAMAGED CONDITION
(a) Sufficient intact stability shall be provided in all service conditions so as to enable
the ship to withstand the final stage of flooding of any one main compartment which is
required to be within the floodable length.
Where two adjacent main compartments are separated by a bulkhead which is
stepped under the conditions of sub-paragraph (e) (i) of Regulation 6 of this Chapter the
intact stability shall be adequate to withstand the flooding of those two adjacent main
compartments.
Where the required factor of subdivision is -50 or less but more than -33 intact
stability shall be adequate to withstand the flooding of any two adjacent main compart
ments.
Whore the required factor of subdivision is -33 or less the intact stability shall be
adequate to withstand the flooding of any three adjacent main compartments.
(b) (i) The requirements of paragraph (a) of this Regulation shall be determined
by calculations which are in accordance with paragraphs (c), (d) and (/) of this Regulation
and which take into consideration the proportions and design characteristics of the ship
and the arrangement and configuration of the damaged compartments. In making
these calculations the ship is to be assumed in the worst anticipated service condition as
regards stability.
(ii) Where it is proposed to fit decks, inner skins or longitudinal bulkheads of sufficient
tightness to seriously restrict the flow of water, the Administration shall be satisfied that
proper consideration is given to such restrictions in the calculations.
(iii) In cases where the Administration considers the range of stability in the damaged
condition to be doubtful, it may require investigation thereof.
(c) For the purpose of making damage stability calculations the volume and surface
permeabilities shall be in general as follows :
Spaces Permeability
Appropriated to Cargo, Coal or Stores ........... 60
Occupied by Accommodation ................ 95
Occupied by Machinery .................. 85
Intended for Liquids ................... 0 or 95*
*Whichever results in the more severe requirements.
Higher surface permeabilities are to be assumed in respect of spaces which, in the
vicinity :of the damage waterplane, contain no substantial quantity of accommodation
or machinery and spaces which are not generally occupied by any substantial quantity
of cargo or stores.
(d) Assumed extent of damage shall be as follows :
(i) longitudinal extent : 10 feet (or 3-05 metres) plus 3 per cent, of the length of the ship,
or 35 feet (or 10-67 metres) whichever is the less. Where the required factor of sub
division is -33 or less the assumed longitudinal extent of damage shall be increased
as necessary so as to include any two consecutive main transverse watertight bulk
heads ;
(ii) transverse extent (measured inboard from the ship's side, at right angles to the centre
line at the level of the deepest subdivision loadline) : a distance of one-fifth of the
breadth of the ship, as defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter ; and
(iii) vertical extent : from the base line upwards without limit.
(iv) If any damage of lesser extent than that indicated in sub-paragraphs (i), (ii) and
(iii) of this paragraph would result in a more severe condition regarding heel or loss
of metacentric height, such damage shall be assumed in the calculations.
(<<) Unsymmetrical flooding is to be kept to a minimum consistent with efficient
arrangements. Where it is necessary to correct large angles of heel, the means adopted
shall, where practicable, be self-acting, but in any case where controls to cross-flooding
fittings are provided they shall be operable from above the bulkhead deck. These fittings
together with their controls as well as the maximum heel before equalisation shall be
acceptable to the Administration. Where cross-flooding fittings are required the time
for equalisation shall not exceed 15 minutes. Suitable information concerning the use
of cross-flooding fittings shall be supplied to the master of the ship.
(/) The final conditions of the ship after damage and, in the case of unsymmetrical
flooding, after equalisation measures have been taken shall be as follows :
(i) in the case of symmetrical flooding there shall be a positive residual metacentric
height of at least 2 inches (or 0.05 metres) as calculated by the constant displace
ment method ;
(ii) in the case of unsymmetrical flooding the total heel shall not exceed seven degrees,
except that, in special cases, the Administration may allow additional heel due to
the unsymmetrical moment, but in no case shall the final heel exceed fifteen degrees ;
(iii) in no case shall the margin line be submerged in the final stage of flooding. If
it is considered that the margin Une may become submerged during an intermediate
stage of flooding, the Administration may require such investigations and arrange
ments as it considers necessary for the safety of the ship.
(g) The master of the ship shall be supplied with the data necessary to maintain
sufficient intact stability under service conditions to enable the ship to withstand the
critical damage. In the case of ships requiring cross-flooding the master of the ship shall
be informed of the conditions of stability on which the calculations of heel are based and
be warned that excessive heeling might result should the ship sustain damage when in
a less favourable condition.
(k) (i) No relaxation from the requirements for damage stability may be considered
by the Administration unless it is shown that the intact metacentric height in any service
condition necessary to meet these requirements is excessive for the service intended.
(ii) Relaxations from the requirements for damage stability shall be permitted
only in exceptional cases and subject to the condition that the Administration is to be
satisfied that the proportions, arrangements and other characteristics of the ship are the
most favourable to stability after damage which can practically and reasonably be
adopted in the particular circumstances.
Regulation 8
BALLASTING
When ballasting with water is necessary, the water ballast should not in general be
carried in tanks intended for oil fuel. In ships in which it is not practicable to avoid
putting water in oil fuel tanks, oily-water separator equipment to the satisfaction of the
Administration shall be fitted, or other alternative means acceptable to the Administra
tion shall be provided for disposing of the oily-water ballast.
Regulation 9
PEAK AND MACHINERY SPACE BULKHEADS, SHAFT TUNNELS, &c.
(a) (i) A ship shall have a forepeak or collision bulkhead, which shall be watertight
up to the bulkhead deck. This bulkhead shall be fitted not less than 5 per cent, of the
length of the ship, and not more than 10 feet (or 3-05 metres) plus 5 per cent, of the length
of the ship from the forward perpendicular.
(ii) If the ship has a long forward superstructure, the forepeak bulkhead shall be
extended weathertight to the deck next above the bulkhead deck. The extension need
not be fitted directly over the bulkhead below, provided it is at least 5 per cent, of the
length of the ship from the forward perpendicular, and the part of the bulkhead deck
which forms the step is made effectively weathertight.
(V) An afterpeak bulkhead, and bulkheads dividing the machinery space, as defined
in Regulation 2 of this Chapter, from the cargo and passenger spaces forward and aft,
shall also be fitted and made watertight up to the bulkhead deck. The afterpeak bulk
head may, however, be stopped below the bulkhead deck, provided the degree of safety
of the ship as regards subdivision is not thereby diminished.
(c) In all cases stern tubes shall be enclosed in watertight spaces of moderate volume.
The stern gland shall be situated in a watertight shaft tunnel or other watertight space
separate from the stern tube compartment and of such volume that, if flooded by leakage
through the stern gland, the margin line will not be submerged.
Regulation 10
DOUBLE BOTTOMS
(a) A double bottom shall be fitted extending from the forepeak bulkhead to the
afterpeak bulkhead as far as this is practicable and compatible with the design and proper
working of the ship,
(i) In ships 165 feet (or 50 metres) and under 200 feet (or 61 metres) in length a double
bottom shall be fitted at least from the machinery space to the forepeak bulkhead,
or as near thereto as practicable.
(ii) In ships 200 feet (or 61 metres) and under 249 feet (or 76 metres) in length a double
bottom shall be fitted at least outside the machinery space, and shall extend to the
fore and after peak bulkheads, or as near thereto as practicable.
(iii) In ships 249 feet (or 76 metres) in length and upwards a double bottom shall be
fitted amidships, and shall extend to the fore and after peak bulkheads, or as near
thereto as practicable.
(&) Where a double bottom is required to be fitted its depth shall be to the satis
faction of the Administration and the inner bottom shall be continued out to the ship's
sides in such a manner as to protect the bottom to the turn of the bilge. Such protection
will be deemed satisfactory if the line of intersection of the outer edge of the margin plate
with the bilge plating is not lower at any part than a horizontal plane passing through
the point of intersection with the frame line amidships of a transverse diagonal line
inclined at 25 degrees to the base line and cutting it at a point one-half the ship's moulded
breadth from the middle line.
(c) Small wells constructed in the double bottom in connection with drainage arrange
ments of holds, &c., shall not extend downwards more than necessary. The depth of the
well shall in no case be more than the depth less 18 inches (or 457 millimetres) of the double
bottom at the centreline, nor shall the well extend below the horizontal plane referred
to in paragraph (6) of this Regulation. A well extending to the outer bottom is, howeyer,
permitted at the after end of the shaft tunnel of screw ships. Other wells (e.g., for lubri-
eating oil under main engines) may be permitted by the Administration if satisfied that
the arrangements give protection equivalent to that afforded by a double bottom com
plying with this Regulation.
(d) A double bottom need not be fitted in way of watertight compartments of mod
erate size used exclusively for the carriage of liquids, provided the safety of the ship, in
the event of bottom or side damage, is not, in the opinion of the Administration, thereby
impaired.
(e) In the case of ships to which the provisions of paragraph (d) of Regulation 1 of
this Chapter apply and which are engaged on regular service within the limits of a short
international voyage as defined in Regulation 2 of Chapter III, the Administration may
permit a double bottom to be dispensed with in any part of the ship which is subdivided
by a factor not exceeding -50, if satisfied that the fitting of a double bottom in that
part would not be compatible with the design and proper working of the ship.
Regulation 11
ASSIGNING, MARKING AND RECORDING OF SUBDIVISION LOADLINES
(a) In order that the required degree of subdivision shall be maintained, a loadline
corresponding to the approved subdivision draught shall be assigned and marked on the
ship's sides. A ship having spaces which are specially adapted for the accommodation of
passengers and the carriage of cargo alternatively may, if the owners desire, have one or
more additional leadlines assigned and marked to correspond with the subdivision draughts
which the Administration may approve for the alternative service conditions.
(6) The subdivision leadlines assigned and marked shall be recorded in the Passenger
Ship Safety Certificate, and shall be distinguished by the notation C.I for the principal
passenger condition, and C.2, C.3, &c., for the alternative conditions.
(c) The freeboard corresponding to each of these leadlines shall be measured at the
same position and from the same deck line as the freeboards determined in accordance
with the International Convention respecting Load Lines in force.
(d) The freeboard corresponding to each approved subdivision loadline and the condi
tions of service for which it is approved, shall be clearly indicated on the Passenger Ship
Safety Certificate.
(e) In no case shall any subdivision loadline mark be placed above the deepest loadline
in salt water as determined by the strength of the ship and/or the International Con
vention respecting Load Lines in force.
(/) Whatever may be the position of the subdivision loadline marks, a ship shall in
no case be loaded so as to submerge the loadline mark appropriate to the season and locality
as determined in accordance with the International Convention respecting Load Lines
in force.
(g) A ship shall in no case be so loaded that when she is in salt water the subdivision
loadline mark appropriate to the particular voyage and condition of service is sub
merged.
Regulation 12
CONSTRUCTION AND INITIAL TESTING OF WATERTIGHT BULKHEADS, &c.
(a) Each watertight subdivision bulkhead, whether transverse or longitudinal, shall
be constructed in such a manner that it shall be capable of supporting, with a proper
margin of resistance, the pressure due to the maximum head of water which it might
have to sustain in the event of damage to the ship but at least the pressure due to a head
of water up to the margin line. The construction of these bulkheads shall be to the satis
faction of the Administration.
(b) (i) Steps and recesses in bulkheads shall be watertight and as strong as the bulk
head at the place where each occurs.
(ii) Where frames or beams pass through a watertight deck or bulkhead, such deck
or bulkhead shall be made structurally watertight without the use of wood or cement.
(e) Testing main compartments by filling them with water is not compulsory.
When testing by filling with water is not carried out, a hose test is compulsory ; this test
shall be carried out in the most advanced stage of the fitting out of the ship. In any
case, a thorough inspection of the watertight bulkheads shall be carried out.
(d) The forepeak, double bottoms (including duct keels) and inner skins shall be
tested with water to a head corresponding to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this
Regulation.
(e) Tanks which are intended to hold liquids, and which form part of the subdivision
of the ship, shall be tested for tightness with water to a head up to the deepest sub
division loadline or to a head corresponding to two-thirds of the depth from the top of
keel to the margin line in way of the tanks', whichever is the greater ; provided that in no
case shall the test head be less than 3 feet (or 0-92 metres) above the top of the tank.
(/) The tests referred to in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this Regulation are for the pur
pose of ensuring that the subdivision structural arrangements are watertight and are
not to be regarded as a test of the fitness of any compartment for the storage of oil fuel
or for other special purposes for which a test of a superior character may be required
depending on the height to which the liquid has access in the tank or its connections.
Regulation 13
OPENINGS IN WATERTIGHT BULKHEADS
(a) The number of openings in watertight bulkheads shall be reduced to the minimum
compatible with the design and proper working of the ship ; satisfactory means shall
be provided for closing these openings.
(6) (i) Where pipes, scuppers, electric cables, &c., are carried through watertight
'subdivision bulkheads, arrangements shall be made to ensure the integrity of the watertightness
of the bulkheads.
(ii) Valves and cocks not forming part of a piping system shall not be permitted
in watertight subdivision bulkheads.
(iii) Lead or other heat sensitive materials shall not be used in systems which pene
trate watertight subdivision bulkheads, where deterioration of such systems in the event
of fire would impair the watertight integrity of the bulkheads.
(c) (i) No doors, manholes, or access openings are permitted :
(1) in the collision bulkhead below the margin line ;
(2) in watertight transverse bulkheads dividing a cargo space from an adjoining cargo
space or from a permanent or reserve bunker, except as provided in paragraph (/)
of this Regulation.
(ii) Except as provided in sub-paragraph (iii) of this paragraph, the collision bulk
head may be pierced below the margin line by not more than one pipe for dealing with
fluid in the forepeak tank, provided that the pipe is fitted with a screwdown valve capable
of being operated from above the bulkhead deck, the valve chest being secured inside the
forepeak to the collision bulkhead.
(iii) If the forepeak is divided to hold two different kinds of liquids the Administra
tion may allow the collision bulkhead to be pierced below the margin line by two pipes,
each of which is fitted as required by subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, provided the
Administration is satisfied that there is no practical alternative to the fitting of such a
second pipe and that, having regard to the additional subdivision provided in the forepeak,
the safety of the ship is maintained.
(d) (i) Watertight doors fitted in bulkheads between permanent and reserve bunkers
shall be always accessible, except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (k) of
this Regulation for between deck bunker doors.
(ii) Satisfactory arrangements shall be made by means of screens or otherwise to
prevent the coal from interfering with the closing of watertight bunker doors.
(<<) Within spaces containing the main and auxiliary propelling machinery including
boilers serving the needs of propulsion and all permanent bunkers, not more than one door
apart from the doors to bunkers and shaft tunnels may be fitted in each main transverse
bulkhead. Where two or more shafts are fitted the tunnels shall be connected by an
inter-communicating passage. There shall be only one door between the machinery
space and the tunnel spaces where two shafts are fitted and only two doors where there
are more than two shafts. All these doors shall be of the sliding type and shall be located
so as to have their sills as high as practicable. The hand gear for operating these doors
from above the bulkhead deck shall be situated outside the spaces containing the machin
ery if this is consistent with a satisfactory arrangement of the necessary gearing.
(/) (i) Watertight doors shall be sliding doors or hinged doors or doors of an equivalent
type. Plate doors secured only by bolts and doors required to be closed by dropping or
by the action of a dropping weight are not permitted.
(ii) Sliding doors may be either :
hand operated only, or
power operated as well as hand operated.
(iii) Authorized watertight doors may therefore be divided into three Classes :
Class 1-hinged doors ;
Class 2-hand operated sliding doors ;
Class 3-sliding doors which are power operated as well as hand operated.
(iv) The means of operation of any watertight door whether power operated or not
shall be capable of closing the door with the ship listed to 15 degrees either way.
(v) In all classes of watertight doors indicators shall be fitted which show, at all
operating stations from which the doors are not visible, whether the doors are open or
closed. If any of the watertight doors, of whatever Class, is not fitted so as to enable it
to be closed from a central control station, it shall be provided with a mechanical, elec
trical, telephonic, or any other suitable direct means of communication, enabling the officer
of the watch promptly to contact the person who is responsible for closing the door in
question, under previous orders.
(g) Hinged doors (Class 1) shall be fitted with quick action closing devices, such as
catches, workable from each side of the bulkhead.
(h) Hand operated sliding doors (Class 2) may have a horizontal or vertical motion.
It shall be possible to operate the mechanism at the door itself from either side, and in
addition, from an accessible position above the bulkhead deck, with an all round crank
motion, or some other movement providing the same guarantee of safety and of an ap
proved type. Departures from the requirement of operation on both sides may be allowed,
if this requirement is impossible owing to the layout of the spaces. When operating
a hand gear the time necessary for the complete closure of the door with the vessel upright,
shall not exceed 90 seconds.
(i) (i) Power operated sliding doors (Class 3) may have a vertical or horizontal
motion. If a door is required to be power operated from a central control, the gearing
shall be so arranged that the door can be operated by power also at the door itself from
both sides. The arrangement shall be such that the door will close automatically if
opened by local control after being closed from the central control, and also such that
any door can be kept closed by local systems which will prevent the door from being opened
from the upper control. Local control handles in connection with the power gear shall
be provided each side of the bulkhead and shall be so arranged as to enable persons passing
through the doorway to hold both handles in the open position without being able to
set the closing mechanism in operation accidentally. Power operated sliding doors shall
be provided with hand gear workable at the door itself on either side and from an acces
sible position above the bulkhead deck, with an all-round crank motion or some other
movement provining the same guarantee of safety and of an approved type. Provision
shall be made to give warnings by sound signal that the door has begun to close and will
continue to move until it is completely closed. The door shall take a sufficient time to
close to ensure safety.
(ii) There shall be at least two independent power sources capable of opening and
closing all the doors under control, each of them capable of operating all the doors simul
taneously. The two power sources shall be controlled from the central station on the
bridge provided with all the necessary indicators for checking that each of the two power
sources is capable of giving the required service satisfactorily.
(iii) In the case of hydraulic operation, each power source shall consist of a pump
capable of closing all doors in not more than 60 seconds. In addition, there shall be for
the whole installation hydraulic accumulators of sufficient capacity to operate all the
doors at least three times, i.e., closed-open-closed. The fluid used shall be one which
does not freeze at any of the temperatures liable to be encountered by the ship during
its service.
(;') (i) Hinged watertight doors (Class 1) in passenger, crew and working spaces are
only permitted above a deck the underside of which, at its lowest point at side, is at least
7 feet (or 2-13 metres) above the deepest subdivision loadline.
(ii) Watertight doors, the sills of which are above the deepest loadline and below
the line specified in the preceding sub-paragraph shall be sliding doors and may be hand
operated (Class 2), except in vessels engaged on short international voyages and required
to have a factor of subdivision of -50 or less in which all such doors shall be power
operated. When trunkways in connection with refrigerated cargo and ventilation or
forced draught dvjcts are carried through more than one main watertight subdivision
bulkhead, the doors at such openings shall be operated by power.
(k) (i) Watertight doors which may sometimes be opened at sea, and the sills of
which are below the deepest subdivision leadline shall be sliding doors. The following
rules shall apply :
(1) when the number of such doors (excluding doors at entrances to shaft tunnels)
exceeds five, all of these doors and those at the entrance to shaft tunnels or ventila
tion or forced draught ducts, shall be power operated (Class 3) and shall be capable
of being simultaneously closed from a central station situated on the bridge ;
(2) when the number of such doors (excluding doors at entrances to shaft tunnels) is
greater than one, but does not exceed five,
(a) where the ship has no passenger spaces below the bulkhead deck, all the above
mentioned doors may be hand operated (Class 2) ;
(b) where the ship has passenger spaces below the bulkhead deck all the above men
tioned doors shall be power operated (Class 3) and shall be capable of being simul
taneously closed from a central station situated on the bridge ;
(3) in any ship where there are only two such watertight doors and they are into or
within the space containing machinery, the Administration may allow these two doors
to be hand operated only (Class 2).
(ii) If sliding watertight doors which have sometimes to be open at sea for the purpose
of trimming coal are fitted between bunkers in the between decks below the bulkhead
deck, these doors shall be operated by power. The opening and closing of these doors
shall be recorded in such log book as may be prescribed by the Administration.
(/) (i) If the Administration is satisfied that such doors are essential, watertight
doors of satisfactory construction may be fitted in watertight bulkheads dividing cargo
between deck spaces. Such doors may be hinged, rolling or sliding doors but shall not
be remotely controlled. They shall be fitted at the highest level and as far from the shell
plating as practicable, but in no case shall the outboard vertical edges be situated at a
distance from the shell plating which is less than one-fifth of the breadth of the ship, as
defined in Regulation 2 of this Chapter, such distance being measured at right angles
to the centre line of the ship at the level of the deepest subdivision loadline.
(ii) Such doors shall be closed before the voyage commences and shall be kept closed
during navigation ; and the time of opening such doors in port and of closing them before
the ship leaves port shall be entered in the log book. Should any of the doors be accessible
during the voyage, they shall be fitted with a device which prevents unauthorized opening.
When it is proposed to fit such doors, the number and arrangements shall receive the
special consideration of the Administration.
(m) Portable plates on bulkheads shall not be permitted except in machinery spaces.
Such plates shall always be in place before the ship leaves port, and shall not be removed
during navigation except in case of urgent necessity. The necessary precautions shall
be taken in replacing them to ensure that the joints shall be watertight.
(<<) All watertight doors shall be kept closed during navigation except when neces
sarily opened for the working of the ship, and shall always be ready to be immediately
closed.
(o) (i) Where trunkways or tunnels for access from crew accommodation to the stoke
hold, for piping, or for any other purpose are carried through main transverse watertight
bulkheads, they shall be watertight and in accordance with the requirements of Regula
tion 16 of this Chapter. The access to at least one end of each such tunnel or trunkway,
if used as a passage at sea, shall be through a trunk extending watertight to a height
sufficient to permit access above the margin line. The access to the other end of the trunkway
or tunnel may be through a watertight door of the type required by its location in
the ship. Such trunkways or tunnels shall not extend through the first subdivision
bulkhead abaft the collision bulkhead.
(ii) Where it is proposed to fit tunnels or trunkways for forced draught, piercing
main transverse watertight bulkheads, these shall receive the special consideration of
the Administration.
Regulation 14
OPENINGS IN THE SHELL PLATING BELOW THE MARGIN LINE
(a) The number of openings in the shell plating shall be reduced to the minimum
compatible with the design and proper working of the ship.
(b) The arrangement and efficiency of the means for closing any opening in the shell
plating shall be consistent with its intended purpose and the position in which it is fitted
and generally to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(c) (i) If in a between decks, the sills of any sidescuttles are below a line drawn
parallel to the bulkhead deck at side and having its lowest point 2 % per cent, of the breadth
of the ship above the deepest subdivision leadline, all sidescuttles in that between deck
shall be of the non-opening type.
(ii) All sidescuttles the sills of which are below the margin line, other than those
required to be of a non-opening type by sub-paragraph (i) of this paragraph, shall be of
such construction as will effectively prevent any person opening them without the consent
of the master of the ship.
(iii) (1) Where in a between decks, the sills of any of the sidescuttles referred to in
sub-paragraph (ii) of this paragraph are below a line drawn parallel to the bulkhead deck
at side and having its lowest point 4 % feet (or 1 -37 metres) plus 2 l/z per cent, of the breadth
of the ship above the water when the ship departs from any port, all the sidescuttles in
that between decks shall be closed watertight and locked before the ship leaves port,
and they shall not be opened before the ship arrives at the next port. In the application
of this sub-paragraph the appropriate allowance for fresh water may be made when
applicable.
(2) The time of opening such sidescuttles in port and of closing and locking them
before the ship leaves port shall be entered in such log book as may be prescribed by the
Administration.
(3) For any ship that has one or more sidescuttles so placed that the requirements of
clause (1) of this sub-paragraph would apply when she was floating at her deepest sub
division loadline, the Administration may indicate the limiting mean draught at which
these sidescuttles will have their sills above the line drawn parallel to the bulkhead deck
at side, and having its lowest point 4% feet (or 1-37 metres) plus 2 l/2 per cent, of the
breadth of the ship above the waterline corresponding to the limiting mean draught,
and at which it will therefore be permissible to depart from port without previously
closing and locking them and to open them at sea on the responsibility of the master
during the voyage to the next port. In tropical zones as defined in the International
Convention respecting Load Lines in force, this limiting draught may be increased by
1 foot (or 0-305 metres).
(d) Efficient hinged inside deadlights arranged so that they can be easily and effec
tively closed and secured watertight shall be fitted to all sidescuttles except that abaft
one-eighth of the ship's length from the forward perpendicular and above a line drawn
parallel to the bulkhead deck at side and having its lowest point at a height of 12 feet
(or 3-66 metres) plus 2% Per cent, of the breadth of the ship above the deepest sub
division loadline, the deadlights may be portable in passenger accommodation other than
that for steerage passengers, unless the deadlights are required by the International
Convention respecting Load Lines in force to be permanently attached in their proper
positions. Such portable deadlights shall be stowed adjacent to the sidescuttles they
serve.
(e) Sidescuttles and their deadlights, which will not be accessible during navigation,
shall be closed and secured before the ship leaves port.
(/) (i) No sidescuttles shall be fitted in any spaces which are appropriated exclusively
to the carriage of cargo or coal.
(ii) Sidescuttles may, however, be fitted in spaces appropriated alternatively to
the carriage of cargo or passengers, but they shall be of such construction as will effectively
prevent any person opening them or their deadlights without the consent of the master
of the ship.
(iii) If cargo is carried in such spaces, the sidescuttles and their deadlights shall be
closed watertight and locked before the cargo is shipped and such closing and locking shall
be recorded in such log book as may be prescribed by the Administration.
(g) Automatic ventilating sidescuttles shall not be fitted in the shell plating below
the margin line without the special sanction of the Administration.
(h) The number of scuppers, sanitary discharges and other similar openings in the
shell plating shall be reduced to the minimum either by making each discharge serve
for as many as possible of the sanitary and other pipes, or in any other satisfactory
manner.
(i) (i) All inlets and discharges in the shell plating shall be fitted with efficient and
accessible arrangements for preventing the accidental admission of water into the ship.
Lead or other heat sensitive materials shall not be used for pipes fitted outboard of shell
valves in inlets or discharges, or any other application where the deterioration of such
pipes in the event of fire would give rise to danger of flooding.
(ii) (1) Except as provided in sub-paragraph (iii) of this paragraph, each separate
discharge led through the shell plating from spaces below the margin line shall be provided
either with one automatic non-return valve fitted with a positive means of closing it
from above the bulkhead deck, or, alternatively, with two automatic non-return valves
without such means, the upper of which is so situated above the deepest subdivision
loadline as to be always accessible for examination under service conditions, and is of
a type which is normally closed.
(2) Where a valve with positive means of closing is fitted, the operating position
above the bulkhead deck shall always be readily accessible, and means shall be provided
for indicating whether the valve is open or closed.
(iii) Main and auxiliary sea inlets and discharges in connection with machinery
shall be fitted with readily accessible cocks or valves between the pipes and shell plating
or between the pipes and fabricated boxes attached to the shell plating.
(;') (i) Gangway, cargo and coaling ports fitted below the margin line shall be of suf
ficient strength. They shall be effectively closed and secured watertight before the ship
leaves port, and shall be kept closed during navigation.
(ii) Such ports shall be in no case fitted so as to have their lowest point below the
deepest subdivision loadline.
(k) (i) The inboard opening of each ash-shoot, rubbish-shoot, &c. shall be fitted
with an efficient cover.
(ii) If the inboard opening is situated below the margin line, the cover shall be water
tight, and in addition an automatic non-return valve shall be fitted in the shoot in an
easily accessible position above the deepest subdivision loadline. When the shoot is
not in use both the cover and the valve shall be kept closed and secured.
Regulation 15
CONSTRUCTION AND INITIAL TESTS OF WATERTIGHT DOORS, SIDESCUTTLES, &c.
(a) (i) The design, materials and construction of all watertight doors, sidescuttles,
gangway, cargo and coaling ports, valves, pipes, ash-shoots and rubbish-shoots referred
to in these Regulations shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(ii) The frames of vertical watertight doors shall have no groove at the bottom in
which dirt might lodge and prevent the door closing properly.
(iii) All cocks and valves for sea inlets and discharges below the bulkhead deck and
all fittings outboard of such cocks and valves shall be made of steel, bronze or other ap
proved ductile material. Ordinary cast iron or similar materials shall not be used.
(b) Each watertight door shall be tested by water pressure to a head up to the bulk
head deck. The test shall be made before the ship is put in service, either before or after
the door is fitted.
Regulation 16
CONSTRUCTION AND INITIAL TESTS OF WATERTIGHT DECKS, TRUNKS, &c.
(a) Watertight decks, trunks, tunnels, duct keels and ventilators shall be of the same
strength as watertight bulkheads at corresponding levels. The means used for making
them watertight, and the arrangements adopted for closing openings in them, shall be
to the satisfaction of the Administration. Watertight ventilators and trunks shall be
carried at least up to the bulkhead deck.
(b) After completion, a hose or flooding test shall be applied to watertight decks
and a hose test to watertight trunks, tunnels and ventilators.
Regulation 17
WATERTIGHT INTEGRITY ABOVE THE MARGIN LINE
(a) The Administration may require that all reasonable and practicable measures
shall be taken to limit the entry and spread of water above the bulkhead deck. Such
measures may include partial bulkheads or webs. When partial watertight bulkheads
and webs are fitted on the bulkhead deck, above or in the immediate vicinity of main
subdivision bulkheads, they shall have watertight shell and bulkhead deck connections
so as to restrict the flow of water along the deck when the ship is in a heeled damaged
condition. Where the partial watertight bulkhead does not line up with the bulkhead
below, the bulkhead deck between shall be made effectively watertight.
(b) The bulkhead deck or a deck above it shall be weathertight in the sense that in
ordinary sea conditions water will not penetrate in a downward direction. All openings
in the exposed weather deck shall have coamings of ample height and strength and shall
be provided with efficient means for expeditiously closing them weathertight. Freeing
ports, open rails and/or scuppers shall be fitted as necessary for rapidly clearing the weather
deck of water under all weather conditions.
(c) Sidescuttles, gangway, cargo and coaling ports and other means for closing open
ings in the shell plating above the margin line shall be of efficient design and construction
and of sufficient strength having regard to the spaces in which they are fitted and their
positions relative to the deepest subdivision loadline.
(d) Efficient inside deadlights, arranged so that they can be easily and effectively
closed and secured watertight, shall be provided for all sidescuttles to spaces below the
first deck above the bulkhead deck.
Regulation 18
BILGE PUMPING ARRANGEMENTS IN PASSENGER SHIPS
(a) Ships shall be provided with an efficient bilge pumping plant capable of pumping
from and draining any watertight compartment which is neither a permanent oil com
partment nor a permanent water compartment under all practicable conditions after a
casualty whether the ship is upright or listed. For this purpose wing suctions will gener
ally be necessary except in narrow compartments at the ends of the ship, where one
suction may be sufficient. In compartments of unusual form, additional suctions may be
required. Arrangements shall be made whereby water in the compartment may find
its way to the suction pipes. Where in relation to particular compartments the Adminis
tration is satisfied that the provision of drainage may be undesirable, it may allow such
provision to be dispensed with if calculations made in accordance with the conditions
laid down in paragraph (b) of Regulation 7 of this Chapter show that the safety of the
ship will not be impaired. Efficient means shall be provided for draining water from
insulated holds.
(6) (i) Ships shall have at least three power pumps connected to the bilge main,
one of which may be attached to the propelling unit. Where the criterion numeral is
30 or more, one additional independent power pump shall be provided.
(ii) The requirements are summarised in the following table :
Criterion numeral Less than 30 30 and over
Main engine pump (may be replaced by one independent
pump) .................... 1 1
Independent pumps ............... 2 , 3
(iii) Sanitary, ballast and general service pumps may be accepted as independent
power bilge pumps if fitted with the necessary connections to the bilge pumping system.
(c) Where practicable, the power bilge pumps shall be placed in separate watertight
compartments so arranged or situated that these compartments will not readily be
flooded by the same damage. If the engines and boilers are in two or more watertight
compartments, the pump available for bilge service shall be distributed throughout these
compartments as far as is possible.
(d) On ships 300 feet (or 91-5 metres) or more in length or having a criterion numeral
of 30 or more, the arrangements shall be such that at least one power pump shall be
available for use in all ordinary circumstances in which a ship may be flooded at sea.
This requirement will be satisfied if :
(i) one of the required pumps is an emergency pump of a reliable submersible type
having a source of power situated above the bulkhead deck ; or
(ii) the pumps and their sources of power are so disposed throughout the length of the
ship that under any condition of flooding which the ship is required to withstand, at
least one pump in an undamaged compartment will be available.
(e) With the exception of additional pumps which may be provided for peak com
partments only, each required bilge pump shall be arranged to draw water from any space
required to be drained by paragraph (a) of this Regulation.
(/) (i) Each power bilge pump shall be capable of giving a speed of water through th<<
required main bilge pipe of not less than 400 feet (or 122 metres) per minute. Indepen
dent power bilge pumps situated in machinery spaces shall have direct suctions from these
spaces, except that not more than two such suctions shall be required in any one space.
Where two or more such suctions are provided there shall be at least one on the port side
and one on the starboard side. The Administration may require independent power
bilge pumps situated in other spaces to have separate direct suctions. Direct suctions
shall be suitably arranged and those in a machinery space shall be of a diameter not
less than that required for the bilge main.
(ii) In coal-burning ships there shall be provided in the stokehold, in addition to
the other suctions required by this Regulation, a flexible suction hose of suitable diameter
and sufficient length, capable of being connected to the suction side of an independent
power pump.
(g) (i) In addition to the direct bilge suction or suctions required by paragraph (/)
of this Regulation there shall be in the machinery space a direct suction from the main
circulating pump leading to the drainage level of the machinery space and fitted with a
non-return valve. The diameter of this direct suction pipe shall be at least two-thirds
of the diameter of the pump inlet in the case of steamships, and of the same diameter as
the pump inlet in the case of motorships.
(ii) Where in the opinion of the Administration the main circulating pump is not
suitable for this purpose, a direct emergency bilge suction shall be led from the largest
available independent power driven pump to the drainage level of the machinery space ;
the suction shall be of the same diameter as the main inlet of the pump used. Thecapacity
of the pump so connected shall exceed that of a required bilge pump by an
amount satisfactory to the Administration.
(iii) The spindles of the sea inlet and direct suction valves shall extend well above
the engine room platform.
(iv) Where the fuel is, or may be, coal and there is no watertight bulkhead between
the engines and the boilers, a direct discharge overboard or alternatively a by-pass to the
circulating pump discharge, shall be fitted from any circulating pump used in compliance
with sub-paragraph (i) of this paragraph.
(h) (i) All pipes from the pumps which are required for draining cargo or machinery
spaces shall be entirely distinct from pipes which may be used for filling or emptying
spaces where water or oil is carried.
(ii) All bilge pipes used in or under coal bunkers or fuel storage tanks or in boiler
or machinery spaces, including spaces in which oil-settling tanks or oil fuel pumping units
are situated, shall be of steel or other approved material.
(i) The diameter of the bilge main shall be calculated according to the following
formulae provided that the actual internal diameter of the bilge main may be of the nearest
standard size acceptable to the Administration :
d = sqrt(L(B+D)/2,500)+1
where d = internal diameter of the bilge main in inches
L = length of ship in feet
B = breadth of ship in feet
D = moulded depth of ship to bulkhead deck in feet ;
or
d = 1.68sqrt(L(B+D))+25
where d = internal diameter of the bilge main in millimetres
L = length of ship in metres
B = breadth of ship in metres
D = moulded depth of ship to bulkhead deck in metres.
The diameter of the bilge branch pipes shall be determined by rules to be made by the
Administration.
(/) The arrangement of the bilge and ballast pumping system shall be such as to
prevent the possibility of water passing from the sea and from water ballast spaces into
the cargo and machinery spaces, or from one compartment to another. Special provision
shall be made to prevent any deep tank having bilge and ballast connections being in
advertently run up from the sea when containing cargo, or pumped out through a bilge
pipe when containing water ballast.
(k) Provision shall be made to prevent the compartment served by any bilge suction
pipe being flooded in the event of the pipe being severed, or otherwise damaged by col
lision or grounding in any other compartment. For this purpose, where the pipe is at
any part situated nearer the side of the ship than one-fifth the breadth of the ship (meas
ured at right angles to the centre line at the level of the deepest subdivision leadline),
or in a duct keel, a non-return valve shall be fitted to the pipe in the compartment con
taining the open end.
(/) All the distribution boxes, cocks and valves in connection with the bilge pumping
arrangements shall be in positions which are accessible at all times under ordinary
circumstances. They shall be so arranged that, in the event of flooding, one of the bilge
pumps may be operative on any compartment ; in addition, damage to a pump or its
pipe connecting to the bilge main outboard of a line drawn at one-fifth of the breadth
of the ship shall not put the bilge system out of action. If there is only one system of
pipes common to all the pumps, the necessary cocks or valves for controlling the bilge
suctions must be capable of being operated from above the bulkhead deck. Where
in addition to the main bilge pumping system an emergency bilge pumping system is
provided, it shall be independent of the main system and so arranged that a pump is
capable of operating on any compartment under flooding conditions ; in that case only
the cocks and valves necessary for the operation of the emergency system need be capable
of being operated from above the bulkhead deck.
(m) All cocks and valves mentioned in paragraph (/) of this Regulation which can be
operated from above the bulkhead deck shall have their controls at their place of opera
tion clearly marked and provided with means to indicate whether they are open or
closed.
Regulation 19
STABILITY INFORMATION FOR PASSENGER SHIPS AND CARGO SHIPS
(a) Every passenger ship and cargo ship shall be inclined upon its completion and
the elements of its stability determined. The master shall be supplied with such reliable
information as is necessary to enable him by rapid and simple processes to obtain accurate
guidance as to the stability of the ship under varying conditions of service, and a copy
shall be furnished to the Administration.
(b) Where any alterations are made to a ship so as to materially affect the stability
information supplied to the master, amended stability information shall be provided.
If necessary the ship shall be re-inclined.
(c) The Administration may allow the inclining test of an individual ship to be dis
pensed with provided basic stability data are available from the inclining test of a sister
ship and it is shown to the satisfaction of the Administration that reliable stability infor
mation for the exempted ship can be obtained from such basic data.
(d) The Administration may also allow the inclining test of an individual ship or
class of ships, especially designed for the carriage of liquids or ore in bulk, to be dispensed
with when reference to existing data for similar ships clearly indicate that due to the ship's
proportions and arrangements more than sufficient metacentric height will be available
in all probable loading conditions.
Regulation 20
DAMAGE CONTROL PLANS
There shall be permanently exhibited, for the guidance of the officer in charge of the
ship, plans showing clearly for each deck and hold the boundaries of the watertight
compartments, the openings therein with the means of closure and position of any controls
thereof, and the arrangements for the correction of any list due to flooding. In addition,
booklets containing the aforementioned information shall be made available to the officers
of the ship.
Regulation 21
MARKING, PERIODICAL OPERATION AND INSPECTION OF WATERTIGHT DOORS, &c.
(a) This Regulation applies to new and existing ships.
(b) Drills for the operating of watertight doors, sidescuttles, valves and closing
mechanisms of scuppers, ash-shoots and rubbish-shoots shall take place weekly. In
ships in which the voyage exceeds one week in duration a complete drill shall be held
efore leaving port, and others thereafter at least once a week during the voyage. In
all ships all watertight power doors and hinged doors, in main transverse bulkheads, in
use at sea, shall be operated daily.
(c) (i) The watertight doors and all mechanisms and indicators connected therewith,
all valves the closing of which is necessary to make a compartment watertight, and all
valves the operation of which is necessary for damage control cross connections shall be
periodically inspected at sea at least once a week.
(ii) Such valves, doors and mechanisms shall be suitably marked to ensure that
they may be properly used to provide maximum safety.
Regulation 22
ENTRIES IN LOG
(a) This Regulation applies to new and existing ships.
(b) Hinged doors, portable plates, sidescuttles, gangway, cargo and coaling ports
and other openings, which are required by these Regulations to be kept closed during
navigation, shall be closed before the ship leaves port. The time of closing and the time
of opening (if permissible under these Regulations) shall be recorded in such log book as
may be prescribed by the Administration.
(c) A record of all drills and inspections required by Regulation 21 of this Chapter
shall be entered in the log book with an explicit record of any defects which may be
disclosed.
PartC
MACHINERY AND ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
(Part C applies to passenger ships and cargo ships)
Regulation 23
GENERAL
(a) Electrical installations in passenger ships shall be such that :
(i) services essential for safety will be maintained under various emergency conditions ;
and
(ii) the safety of passengers, crew and ship from electrical hazards will be assured.
(b) Cargo ships shall comply with Regulations 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 33 of this Chapter.
Regulation 24
MAIN SOURCE OF ELECTRICAL POWER IN PASSENGER SHIPS
(a) Every passenger ship, the electrical power of which constitutes the only means
of maintaining the auxiliary services indispensable for the propulsion and the safety of
the ship, shall be provided with at least two main generating sets. The power of these
sets shall be such that it shall still be possible to ensure the functioning of the services
referred to in subparagraph (a) (i) of Regulation 23 of this Chapter in the event of any
one of these generating sets being stopped.
(o) In a passenger ship where there is only one main generating station, the main
switchboard shall be located in the same main fire zone. Where there is more than one
main generating station, it is permissible to have only one main switchboard.
Regulation 25
EMERGENCY SOURCE OF ELECTRICAL POWER IN PASSENGER SHIPS
(a) There shall be above the bulkhead deck and outside the machinery casings a
self-contained emergency source of electrical power. Its location in relation to the main
source or sources of electrical power shall be such as to ensure to the satisfaction of the
Administration that a fire or other casualty to the machinery space as defined in para
graph (h) of Regulation 2 of this Chapter will not interfere with the supply or distribution
of emergency power. It shall not be forward of the collision bulkhead.
(6) The power available shall be sufficient to supply all those services that are, in
the opinion of the Administration, necessary for the safety of the passengers and the crew
in an emergency, due regard being paid to such services as may have to be operated
simultaneously. Special consideration shall be given to emergency lighting at every
boat station on deck and oversides, in all alleyways, stairways and exits, in the machinery
spaces and in the control stations as defined in paragraph (/) of Regulation 35 of this
Chapter, to the sprinkler pump, to navigation lights, and to the daylight signalling lamp
if operated from the main source of power. The power shall be adequate for a period
of 36 hours, except that, in the case of ships engaged regularly on voyages of short duration,
the Administration may accept a lesser supply if satisfied that the same standard of safety
would be attained.
(c) The emergency source of power may be either :
(i) a generator driven by a suitable prime-mover with an independent fuel supply and
with approved starting arrangements ; the fuel used shall have a flash point of not
less than 110  &#186;F. (or 43  &#186;C.) ; or
(ii) an accumulator (storage) battery capable of carrying the emergency load without
recharging or excessive voltage drop.
(d) (i) Where the emergency source of power is a generator there shall be provided
a temporary source of emergency power consisting of an accumulator battery of sufficient
capacity :
(1) to supply emergency lighting continuously for half an hour ;
(2) to close the watertight doors (if electrically operated) but not necessarily to close them
all simultaneously ;
(3) to operate the indicators (if electrically operated) which show whether power oper
ated watertight doors are open or closed ; and
i(4) to operate the sound signals (if electrically operated) which give warning that power
operated watertight doors are about to close.
The arrangements shall be such that the temporary source of emergency power will come
into operation automatically in the event of failure of the main electrical supply.
(ii) Where the emergency source of power is an accumulator battery, arrangements
shall be made to ensure that emergency lighting will automatically come into operation
in the event of failure of the main lighting supply.
(e) An indicator shall be mounted in the machinery space, preferably on the main
switchboard, to indicate when any accumulator battery fitted in accordance with this
Regulation is being discharged.
(/) (i) The emergency switchboard shall be installed as near as is practicable to the
emergency source of power.
(ii) Where the emergency source of power is a generator, the emergency switchboard
shall be located in the same space as the emergency source of power, unless the operation
of the emergency switchboard would thereby be impaired.
(iii) No accumulator battery fitted in accordance with this Regulation shall be in
stalled in the same space as the emergency switchboard.
(iv) The Administration may permit the emergency switchboard to be supplied from
the main switchboard in normal operation.
(g) Arrangements shall be such that the complete emergency installation will func
tion when the ship is inclined 22*4 degrees and/or when the trim of the ship is 10 degrees.
(h) Provision shall be made for the periodic testing of the emergency source of power
and the temporary source of power, if provided, which shall include the testing of auto
matic arrangements.
Regulation 26
EMERGENCY SOURCE OF ELECTRICAL POWER IN CARGO SHIPS
(a) Cargo ships of 5,000 Tons Gross Tonnage and upwards
(i) In cargo ships of 5,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards there shall be a selfcontained
emergency source of power,'located to the satisfaction of the Administration
above the uppermost continuous deck and outside the machinery casings, to ensure its
functioning in the event of fire or other casualty causing failure to the main electrical
installation.
(ii) The power available shall be sufficient to supply all those services which are, in
the opinion of the Administration, necessary for the safety of all on board in an emergency,
due regard being paid to such services as may have to be operated simultaneously.
Special consideration shall be given to :
(1) emergency lighting at every boat station on deck and oversides, in all alleyways,
stairways and exits, in the main machinery space and main generating set space,
on the navigating bridge and in the chartroom ;
(2) the general alarm ; and
(3) navigation lights if solely electric, and the daylight signalling lamp if operated by
the main source of electrical power.
The power shall be adequate for a period of 6 hours.
(iii) The emergency source of power may be either :
(1) an accumulator (storage) battery capable of carrying the emergency load without
recharging or excessive voltage drop ; or
(2) a generator driven by a suitable prime-mover with an independent fuel supply and
with starting arrangements to the satisfaction of the Administration. The fuel
used shall have a flash point of not less than 110  &#186;F. (or 43  &#186;C.).
(iv) Arrangements shall be such that the complete emergency installation will
function when the ship is inclined 22% degrees and/or when the trim of the ship is 10
degrees.
(v) Provision shall be made for the periodic testing of the complete emergency instal
lation.
(b) Cargo ships of less than 5,000 Tons Gross Tonnage
(i) In cargo ships of less than 5,000 tons gross tonnage there shall be a self-contained
emergency source of power located to the satisfaction of the Administration, and capable
of supplying the illumination at launching stations and stowage positions of survival
craft prescribed in sub-paragraphs (a) (ii), (b) (ii) and (b) (iii) of Regulation 19 of Chap
ter III, and in addition such other services as the Administration may require, due regard
being paid to Regulation 38 of Chapter III.
(ii) The power available shall be adequate for a period of at least 3 hours.
(iii) These ships shall also be subject to sub-paragraphs (iii), (iv), and (v) of paragraph
(a) of this Regulation.
Regulation 27
PRECAUTIONS AGAINST SHOCK, FIRE AND OTHER HAZARDS OF ELECTRICAL ORIGIN
(a) Passenger Ships and Cargo Ships
(1) (1) All exposed metal parts of electrical machines or equipment which are not
intended to be "live", but are liable to become "live" under fault conditions, shall be earthed
(grounded) ; and all electrical apparatus shall be so constructed and so installed that danger
of injury in ordinary handling shall not exist.
(2) Metal frames of all portable electric lamps, tools and similar apparatus, supplied
as ship's equipment and rated in excess of a safety voltage to be prescribed by the Ad
ministration shall be earthed (grounded) through a suitable conductor, unless equivalent
provisions are made such as by double insulation or by an isolating transformer. The
Administration may require additional special precautions for electric lamps, tools or
similar apparatus for use in damp spaces.
(ii) Main and emergency switchboards shall be so arranged as to give easy access
back and front, without danger to attendants. The sides and backs and, where neces
sary, the fronts of switchboards shall be suitably guarded. There shall be non-conducting
mats or gratings front and rear where necessary. Exposed current carrying parts at
voltages to earth (ground) exceeding a voltage to be specified by the Administration shall
not be installed on the face of any switchboard or control panel.
(iii) (1) Where the hull return system of distribution is used, special precautions
shall be taken to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(2) Hull return shall not be used in tankers.
(iv) (1) All metal sheaths and armour of cables shall be electrically continuous
and shall be earthed (grounded).
(2) Where the cables are neither sheathed nor armoured and there might be a risk
of fire in the event of an electrical fault, precautions shall be required by the Adminis
tration.
(v) Lighting fittings shall be arranged to prevent temperature rises that would bo
injurious to the wiring, and to prevent surrounding material from becoming excessively
hot.
(vi) Wiring shall be supported in such a manner as to avoid chafing or other injury.
(vii) Each separate circuit shall be protected against short circuit. Each separate
circuit shall also be protected against overload, except in accordance with Regulation 30
of this Chapter or where the Administration grants an exemption. The current-carrying
capacity of each circuit shall be permanently indicated, together with the rating or setting
of the appropriate overload protective device.
(viii) Accumulator batteries shall be suitably housed, and compartments used
primarily for their accommodation shall be properly constructed and efficiently ventilated.
(b) Passenger Ships only
(i) Distribution systems shall be so arranged that fire in any main fire zone will
not interfere with essential services in any other main fire zone. This requirement will
be met if main and emergency feeders passing through any zone are separated both
vertically and horizontally as widely as is practicable.
(ii) Electric cables shall be of a flame retarding type to the satisfaction of the Admin
istration. The Administration may require additional safeguards for electric cables in
particular spaces of the ship with a view to the prevention of fire or explosion.
(iii) In spaces where inflammable mixtures are liable to collect, no electrical equip
ment shall be installed unless it is of a type which will not ignite the mixture concerned,
such as flameproof (explosion proof) equipment.
(iv) A lighting circuit in a bunker or hold shall be provided with an isolating switch
outside the space.
(v) Joints in all conductors except for low voltage communication circuits shall be
made only in junction or outlet boxes. All such boxes or wiring devices shall be so con
structed as to prevent the spread of fire from the box or device. Where splicing is
employed, it shall only be by an approved method such that it retains the original mechan
ical and electrical properties of the cable.
(c) Cargo Ships only
Devices liable to arc shall not be installed in any compartment assigned principally
to accumulator batteries unless the devices are flameproof (explosion proof).
Regulation 28
MEANS OF GOING ASTERN
(a) Passenger Ships and Cargo Ships
Ships shall have sufficient power for going astern to secure proper control of the ship
in all normal circumstances.
(b) Passenger Ships only
The ability of the machinery to reverse the direction of thrust of the propeller in
sufficient time, under normal manoeuvring conditions, and so to bring the ship to rest
from maximum ahead service speed shall be demonstrated at the initial survey.
Regulation 29
STEERING GEAR
(a) Passenger Ships and Cargo Ships
(i) Ships shall be provided with a main steering gear and an auxiliary steering
gear to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(ii) The main steering gear shall be of adequate strength and sufficient to steer
the ship at maximum service speed. The main steering gear and rudder stock shall be
so designed that they are not damaged at maximum astern speed.
(iii) The auxiliary steering gear shall be of adequate strength and sufficient to steer
the ship at navigable speed and capable of being brought speedily into action in an
emergency. '
(iv) The exact position of the rudder, if power operated, shall be indicated at the
principal steering station.
(b) Passenger Ships only
(i) The main steering gear shall be capable of putting the rudder over from 35 degrees
on one side to 35 degrees on the other side with the ship running ahead at maximum service
speed. The rudder shall be capable of being put over from 35 degrees on either side to
30 degrees on the other side in 28 seconds at maximum service speed.
(ii) The auxiliary steering gear shall be operated by power in any case in which thv,
Administration would require a rudder stock of over 9 inches (or 22-86 centimetres)
diameter in way of the tiller.
(iii) Where main steering gear power units and their connections are fitted in dupli
cate to the satisfaction of the Administration, and each power unit enables the steering
gear to meet the requirements of sub-paragraph (i) of this paragraph, no auxiliary steering
gear need be required.
(iv) Where the Administration would require a rudder stock with a diameter in way
of the tiller exceeding 9 inches (or 22-86 centimetres) there shall be provided an alter
native steering station located to the satisfaction of the Administration. The remote
steering control systems from the principal and alternative steering stations shall be so
arranged to the satisfaction of the Administration that failure of either system would
not result in inability to steer the ship by means of the other system.
(v) Means satisfactory to the Administration shall be provided to enable orders to
be transmitted from the bridge to the alternative steering station.
(c) Cargo Ships only
(i) The auxiliary steering gear shall be operated by power in any case in which the
Administration would require a rudder stock of over 14 inches (or 35-56 centimetres)
diameter in way of the tiller.
(ii) Where power operated steering gear units and connections are fitted in duplicate
to the satisfaction of the Administration, and each unit complies with sub-paragraph (iii)
of paragraph (a) of this Regulation, no auxiliary steering gear need be required, provided
that the duplicate units and connections operating together comply with sub-paragraph (ii)
of paragraph (a) of this Regulation.
Regulation 30
ELECTRIC AND ELECTROHYDRAULIC STEERING GEAR
(a) Passenger Ships and Cargo Ships
Indicators for running indication of the motors of electric and electrohydraulic
steering gear shall be installed in a suitable location to the satisfaction of the Adminis
tration.
(b) All Passenger Ships (irrespective of tonnage] and Cargo Ships of 5,000 Tons Gross
Tonnage and upwards
(i) Electric and electrohydraulic steering gear shall be served by two circuits fed
from the main switchboard. One of the circuits may pass through the emergency
switchboard, if provided. Each circuit shall have adequate capacity for supplying all
the motors which are normally connected to it and which operate simultaneously. If
transfer arrangements are provided in the steering gear room to permit either circuit
to supply any motor or combination of motors, the capacity of each circuit shall be ade
quate for the most severe load condition. The circuits shall be separated throughout
their length as widely as is practicable.
(ii) Short circuit protection only shall be provided for these circuits and motors.
(c) Cargo Ships of less than 5,000 Tons Gross Tonnage
(i) Cargo ships in which electrical power is the sole source of power for both main and
auxiliary steering gear shall comply with sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph (b)
of this Regulation, except that if the auxiliary steering gear is powered by a motor pri
marily intended for other services, paragraph (b) (ii) may be waived, provided that the
Administration is satisfied with the protection arrangements.
(ii) Short circuit protection only shall be provided for motors and power circuits
of electrically or electrohydraulically operated main steering gear.
Regulation 31     "
OIL FUEL USED IN PASSENGER SHIPS
No internal combustion engine shall be used for any fixed installation in a passenger
ship if its fuel has a flash point of 110 &#186;F. (or 43 &#186;C.) or less.
Regulation 32
LOCATION OF EMERGENCY INSTALLATIONS IN PASSENGER SHIPS
The emergency source of electrical power, emergency fire pumps, emergency bilge
pumps, batteries of carbon dioxide bottles for fire extinguishing purposes and other emer
gency installations which are essential for the safety of the ship shall not be installed in
a passenger ship forward of the collision bulkhead.
Regulation 33
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN BRIDGE AND ENGINE ROOM
Ships shall be fitted with two means of communicating orders from the bridge to
the engine room. One means shall be an engine room telegraph.
Part D
FIRE PROTECTION
(In Part D, Regulations 34 to 52 apply to passenger ships carrying more than 36
passengers ; Regulations 35 and 53 apply to passenger ships carrying not more than
36 passengers ; Regulations 35 and 54 apply to cargo ships of 4,000 tons gross tonnage
'and upwards.)
Regulation 34
GENERAL
(a) The purpose of this Part is to require the fullest practicable degree of protection
from fire by regulation of the details of arrangement and construction. The three basic
principles underlying these regulations are :
(i) separation of the accommodation spaces from the remainder of the ship by thermal
and structural boundaries ;
(ii) containment, extinction, or detection of any fire in the space of origin ;
(iii) protection of means of escape.
(b) The hull, superstructure and deck houses shall be divided into main vertical
zones by "A" Class bulkheads (as described in paragraph (c) of Regulation 35 of this Chapter) and further divided by similar bulkheads forming the boundaries protecting -spaces
which provide vertical access and the boundaries separating the accommodation, spaces
from the machinery, cargo and service spaces and others. In addition, and supplementary
to the patrol systems, alarm systems and fire extinguishing apparatus required by Part E
of this Chapter, either of the following methods of protection, or a combination of these
methods to the satisfaction of the Administration, shall be adopted in accommodation
and service spaces with a view to preventing the spread of incipient fires from the spaces
of their origin :
Method I.-The construction of internal divisional bulkheading of "B" Class
divisions (as defined in paragraph (d) of Regulation 35 of this Chapter) generally
without the installation of a detection or sprinkler system in the accommodation
and service spaces ; or
Method II.-The fitting of an automatic sprinkler and fire alarm system for
the detection and extinction of fire in all spaces in which a fire might be expected
to originate, generally with no restriction on the type of internal divisional bulkheading
in spaces so protected ; or
Method III.-A system of subdivision within each main vertical zone using "A"
and "B" Class divisions distributed according to the importance, size and nature of
the various compartments, with an automatic fire detection system in all spaces in
which a fire might be expected to originate, and with restricted use of combustible
and highly inflammable materials and furnishings ; but generally without the
installation of a sprinkler system.
Where appropriate, the headings or sub-headings of the Regulations of this Part of this
Chapter indicate under which Method or Methods the Regulation is a requirement.
Regulation 35
DEFINITIONS
Wherever the phrases defined below occur throughout this Part of this Chapter,
they shall be interpreted in accordance with the following definitions :
(a) Incombustible Material means a material which neither burns nor gives off
inflammable vapours in sufficient quantity to ignite at a pilot flame when heated to ap
proximately 1,382 &#186;F, (or 750 &#186;C.). Any other material is a. "Combustible Material".
(b) A Standard Fire Test is one in which specimens of the relevant bulkheads or decks,
having a surface of approximately 50 square feet (or 4-65 square metres) and height of
8 feet (or 2-44 metres) resembling as closely as possible the intended construction and
including where appropriate at least one joint, are exposed in a test furnace to a series
of time temperature relationships, approximately as follows :
at the end of the first 5 minutes- 1,000 &#186;F. (or 538 &#186;C.)
at the end of the first 10 minutes-1,300 &#186;F. (or 704 &#186;C.)
at the end of the first 30 minutes-1,550 &#186;F. (or 843 &#186;C.)
at the end of the first 60 minutes-1,700 &#186;F. (or 927 &#186;C.)
(c) "A" Class or Fire-resisting Divisions are those divisions formed by bulkheads
and decks which comply with the following :
(i) they shall be constructed of steel or other equivalent material ;
{ii) they shall be suitably stiffened ;
i(iii) they shall be so constructed as to be capable of preventing the passage of smoke
and flame up to the end of the one-hour standard fire test ;
((iv) they shall have an insulating value to the satisfaction of the Administration, having
regard to the nature of the adjacent spaces. In general, where such bulkheads
and decks are required to form fire-resisting divisions between spaces either of which
contains adjacent woodwork, wood lining, or other combustible material, they shall
be so insulated that, if either face is exposed to the standard fire test for one hour,
the average temperature on the unexposed face will not increase at any time during
the test by more than 250 &#186;F. (or 139 &#186;C.) above the initial temperature nor shall
the temperature at any point on the face, including any joint, rise more than 325 &#186;F.
(or 180 &#186;C.) above the initial temperature. Reduced amounts of insulation or none
at all may be provided where in the opinion of the Administration a reduced fire
hazard is present. The Administration may require a test of an assembled proto
type bulkhead or deck to ensure that it meets the above requirements for integrity
and temperature rise.
(d) "B" Class or Fire-retarding Divisions are those divisions formed by bulkheads
which are so constructed that they will be capable of preventing the passage of flame
up to the end of the first one-half hour of the standard fire test. In addition they shall
have an insulating value to the satisfaction of the Administration, having regard to the
nature of the adjacent spaces. In general, where such bulkheads are required to form
fire-retarding divisions between spaces, they shall be of such material that, if either face
is exposed for the first one-half hour period of the standard fire test, the average tempera
ture on the unexposed face will not increase at any time during the test by more than
250 &#186;F. (or 139 &#186;C.) above the initial temperature, nor shall the temperature at any
point on the face including any joint rise more than 405 &#186;F. (or 225 &#186;C.) above the initial
temperature. For panels which are of incombustible materials it will only be necessary
to comply with the above temperature rise limitation during the first 15-minute period
of the standard fire test, but the test shall be continued to the end of the one-half hour
to test the panel's integrity in the usual manner. All materials entering into the con
struction and erection of incombustible "B" Class divisions shall themselves be of incom
bustible material. Reduced amounts of insulation or none at all may be provided where
in the opinion of the Administration a reduced fire hazard is present. The Administra
tion may require a test of an assembled prototype bulkhead to ensure that it meets the
above requirements for integrity and temperature rise.
(e) Main Vertical Zones are those sections into which the hull, superstructure, and
deck houses are divided by "A" Class divisions, the mean length of which on any one deck
does not, in general, exceed 131 feet (or 40 metres).
(/) Control Stations are those spaces in which radio, main navigating or central
fire-recording equipment or the emergency generator is located.
(g) Accommodation Spaces are those used for public spaces, corridors, lavatories,
cabins, offices, crew quarters, barber shops, isolated pantries and lockers and similar
spaces.
(h) Public Spaces are those portions of the accommodation which are used for halls,
dining rooms, lounges and similar permanently enclosed spaces.
(i) Service Spaces are those used for galleys, main pantries, stores (except isolated
pantries and lockers), mail and specie rooms and similar spaces and trunks to such spaces.
(j) Cargo Spaces are all spaces used for cargo (including cargo oil tanks) and trunks
to such spaces.
(k) Machinery Spaces include all spaces used for propelling, auxiliary or refrigerating
machinery, boilers, pumps, workshops, generators, ventilation and air conditioning ma
chinery, oil filling stations and similar spaces and trunks to such spaces.
(/) Steel or Other Equivalent Material.-Where the words "steel or other equivalent
material" occur, "equivalent material" means any material which, by itself or due to
insulation provided, has structural and integrity properties equivalent to steel at the end
of the applicable fire exposure (e.g., aluminium with appropriate insulation).
(m) Low flame spread means that the surface thus described will adequately restrict
the spread of flame having regard to the risk of fire in the spaces concerned, this being
determined to the satisfaction of the Administration by a suitably established test proce
dure.
Regulation 36
STRUCTURE (METHODS I, II AND III)
(a) Method I
The hull, superstructure, structural bulkheads, decks and deckhouses shall be con
structed of steel or other equivalent material.
(b) Method II
(i) The hull, superstructure, structural bulkheads, decks and deckhouses shall be
constructed of steel or other equivalent material.
(ii) Where fire protection in accordance with Method II is employed, the superstruc
ture may be constructed of, for example, aluminium alloy, provided that :
(1) the temperature rise of the metallic cores of the "A" Class divisions, when exposed
to the standard fire test, shall have regard to the mechanical properties of the material ;
(2) an automatic sprinkler system complying with paragraph (g) of Regulation 59 of
this Chapter is installed ;
(3) adequate provision is made to ensure that in the event of fire, arrangements for
stowage, launching and embarkation into survival craft remain as effective as if the
superstructure were constructed of steel ;
(4) crowns and casings of boiler and machinery spaces are of steel construction
adequately insulated, and the openings therein, if any, are suitably arranged and
protected to prevent spread of fire.
(c) Method III
(i) The hull, superstructure, structural bulkheads, decks and deckhouses shall be
constructed of steel or other equivalent material.
(ii) Where fire protection in accordance with Method III is employed, the super
structure may be constructed of, for example, aluminium alloy, provided that :
(1) the temperature rise of the metallic cores of the "A" Class divisions, when exposed
to the standard fire test, shall have regard to the mechanical properties of the
material ;
(2) the Administration shall be satisfied that the amount of combustible materials used
in the relevant part of the ship is suitably reduced. Ceilings (i.e., linings of deck
heads) shall be incombustible ;
(3) adequate provision is made to ensure that in the event of fire, arrangements for stow
age, launching and embarkation into survival craft remain as effective as if the super
structure were constructed of steel ;
(4) crowns and casings of boiler and machinery spaces are of steel construction adequately
insulated, and the openings therein, if any, are suitably arranged and protected to
prevent spread of fire.
Regulation 37
MAIN VERTICAL ZONES (METHODS I, II AND III)
(a) The hull, superstructure and deckhouses shall be subdivided into main vertical
zones. Steps and recesses shall be kept to a minimum, but where they are necessary,
they shall be of "A" Class divisions.
(b) As far as practicable, the bulkheads forming the boundaries of the main vertical
zones above the bulkhead deck shall be in line with watertight subdivision bulkheads
situated immediately below the bulkhead deck.
(c) Such bulkheads shall extend from deck to deck and to the shell or other bound
aries. '
(d) On ships designed for special purposes, such as automobile or railroad car ferries,
where installation of such bulkheads would defeat the purpose for which the ship is
intended, equivalent means for controlling and limiting a fire shall be substituted and
specifically approved by the Administration.
Regulation 38
OPENINGS IN "A" CLASS DIVISIONS (METHODS I, II AND III)
(a) Where "A" Class divisions are pierced for the passage of electric cables, pipes,
trunks, ducts &c. for girders, beams or other structures, arrangements shall be made to
ensure that the fire resistance is not impaired. ' .
(b) Dampers are to be fitted in ventilation trunks and ducts passing through main
vertical zone bulkheads, and shall be fitted with suitable local control capable of being
operated from both sides of the bulkhead. The operating positions shall be readily
accessible and marked in red. Indicators shall be fitted to show whether the dampers
are open or shut. !
(c) Except for tonnage openings and for hatches between cargo, store, and baggage
spaces, and between such spaces and the weather decks, all openings shall be provided
with permanently attached means of closing which shall be at least as effective for
resisting fires as the divisions in which they are fitted. Where "A" Class divisions are
pierced by tonnage openings the means of closure shall be by steel plates.
(d) The construction of all doors and door frames in "A" Class divisions,, with, the
means of securing them when closed, shall provide resistance to fire as well as to the passage
of smoke and flame as far as practicable equivalent to that of the bulkheads in which
the doors are situated. Watertight doors need not be insulated.
(e) It shall be possible for each door to be opened from either side of the bulkhead
by one person only. Fire doors in main vertical zone bulkheads other than watertight
doors shall be of the self-closing type with simple and easy means of release from the open
position. These doors shall be of approved types and designs, and the self-closing mech
anism shall be capable of closing the door against an inclination of 3 % degrees opposing
closure.
Regulation 39
BULKHEADS WITHIN MAIN VERTICAL ZONES (METHODS I AND III)
(a) Method I
(i) Within the accommodation spaces, all enclosure bulkheads, other than those
required to be of "A" Class divisions, shall be constructed of "B" Class divisions of incom
bustible materials, which may, however, be faced with combustible materials in accordance
with Regulation 48 of this Chapter. All doorways and similar openings shall have a
method of closure consistent with the type of bulkhead in which they are situated.
(ii) All corridor bulkheads shall extend from deck to deck. Ventilation openings
may be permitted in the doors in "B" Class bulkheads, preferably in the lower portion.
All other enclosure bulkheads shall extend from deck to deck vertically, and to the shell
or other boundaries transversely, unless incombustible ceilings or linings such as will
ensure fire integrity are fitted, in which case the bulkheads may terminate at the ceilings
or linings.
(b) Method III
(i) Within the accommodation spaces, enclosure bulkheads other than those required
to be of "A" Class divisions shall be constructed of "B" Class divisions, and shall be of
incombustible materials which may, however, be faced with combustible materials in
accordance with Regulation 48 of this Chapter. These bulkheads shall form a continuous
network of fire-retarding bulkheads within which the area of any one compartment shall
not in general exceed 1,300 square feet (or 120 square metres) with a maximum of 1,600
square feet (or 150 square metres) ; they shall extend from deck to deck. All doorways
and similar openings shall have a method of closure consistent with the type of bulkhead
in which they are situated.
(ii) Each public space larger than 1,600 square feet (or 150 square metres) shall be
surrounded by "B" Class divisions of incombustible materials.
(iii) The insulation of "A" Class and "B" Class divisions, except those constituting
the separation of the main vertical zones, the control stations, the stairway enclosures,
and the corridors, may be omitted when the divisions constitute the outside part of the
ship or when the adjoining compartment does not contain fire hazard.
(iv) All corridor bulkheads shall be of "B" Class divisions and shall extend from
deck to deck. Ceilings, if fitted, shall be of incombustible materials. Ventilation open
ings may be permitted in doors, preferably in the lower portion. All other partition
bulkheads shall also extend from deck to deck vertically and to the shell or other bound
aries transversely, unless incombustible ceilings or linings are fitted, in which case the
bulkheads may terminate at the ceilings or linings.
(v) "B" Class divisions other than those required to be of the incombustible type
shall have incombustible cores or be of an assembled type having internal layers of sheet
asbestos or similar incombustible material. The Administration may, however, approve
other materials without incombustible cores, provided that equivalent fire-retarding
properties are ensured.
Regulation 40
SEPARATION OF ACCOMMODATION SPACES FROM MACHINERY, CARGO AND SERVICE SPACES
(METHODS I, II AND III)
The boundary bulkheads and decks separating accommodation spaces from machin
ery, cargo and service spaces shall be constructed as "A" Class divisions, and these bulk
heads and decks shall have an insulation value to the satisfaction of the Administration
having regard to the nature of the adjacent spaces.
Regulation 41
DECK COVERINGS (METHODS I, II AND III)
Primary deck coverings within accommodation spaces, control stations, stairways
and corridors shall be of approved material which will not readily ignite.
Regulation 42
PROTECTION OF STAIRWAYS IN ACCOMMODATION AND SERVICE SPACES
(METHODS I, II AND III)
(a) Methods I and III
(i) All stairways shall be of steel frame construction, except where the Administration
sanctions the use of other equivalent material, and shall be within enclosures formed
of "A" Class divisions, with positive means of closure at all openings from the lowest
accommodation deck at least to a level which is directly accessible to the open deck,
except that :
(1) a stairway connecting only two decks need not be enclosed, provided the integrity
of the deck is maintained by proper bulkheads or doors at one level ;
(2) stairways may be fitted in the open in a public space, provided they lie wholly within
such public space.
(ii) Stairway enclosures shall have direct communication with the corridors and be
of sufficient area to prevent congestion having in view the number of persons likely
to use them in an emergency, and shall contain as little accommodation or other enclosed
space in which a fire may originate as practicable.
(iii) Stairway enclosure bulkheads shall have an insulation value to the satisfaction
of the Administration, having regard to the nature of the adjacent spaces. The means
for closure at openings in stairway enclosures shall be at least as effective for resisting
fire as the bulkheads in which they are fitted. Doors other than watertight doors shall
be of the self-closing type, as required for the main vertical zone bulkheads, in accordance
with Regulation 38 of this Chapter.
(b) Method II
(i) Main stairways shall be of steel frame construction, except where the Administra
tion sanctions the use of other suitable materials which, together with such supplementary
fire protection and/or extinction arrangements as would, in the opinion of the Adminis
tration, be equivalent to such construction, and shall be within enclosures formed of
"A" Class divisions with positive means of closure at all openings from the lowest accom
modation deck at least to a level which is directly accessible to the open deck except
that :
(1) a stairway connecting only two decks need not be enclosed, provided the integrity
of the deck is maintained by proper bulkheads or doors at one level ;
(2) stairways may be fitted in the open in a public space, provided they lie wholly within
such public space.
(ii) Stairway enclosures shall have direct communication with the corridors and be
of sufficient area to prevent congestion having in view the number of persons likely to
use them in an emergency, and shall contain as little accommodation or other enclosed
space in which a fire may originate as practicable.
(iii) Stairway enclosure bulkheads shall have an insulation value to the satisfaction
of the Administration having regard to the nature of the adjacent spaces. The means
for closure at openings in stairway enclosures shall be at least as effective for resisting
fire as the bulkheads in which they are fitted. Doors other than watertight doors shall
be of the self-closing type as required for the main vertical zone bulkheads, in accordance
with Regulation 38 of this Chapter.
(iv) Auxiliary stairways, namely those which do not form part of the means of escape
required by Regulation 68 of this Chapter and which connect only two decks, shall be of
steel frame construction, except where the Administration sanctions the use of other
suitable material in special cases, but need not be within enclosures, provided the integrity
of the deck is maintained by the fitting of sprinklers at the auxiliary stairways.
Regulation 43
PROTECTION OF LIFTS (PASSENGER AND SERVICE), VERTICAL TRUNKS FOR LIGHT AND
AIR, &c., IN ACCOMMODATION AND SERVICE SPACES (METHODS I, II AND III)
(a) Passenger and service lift trunks, vertical trunks for light and air to passenger
spaces, &c., shall be of "A" Class divisions. Doors shall be of steel or other equivalent
material and when closed shall provide fire-resistance at least as effective as the trunks
in which they are fitted.
(b) Lift trunks shall be so fitted as to prevent the passage of smoke and flame from
one between deck to another and shall be provided with means of closing so as to permit
of draught and smoke control. The insulation of lift trunks which are within stairway
enclosures shall not be compulsory.
(c) Where a trunk for light and air communicates with more than one between deck
space, and, in the opinion of the Administration, smoke and flame are likely to be con
ducted from one between deck to another, smoke shutters, suitably placed, shall be fitted
so that each space can be isolated in case of fire.
(d) Any other trunks (e.g., for electric cables) shall be so constructed as not to afford
passage for fire from one between deck or compartment to another.
Regulation 44
PROTECTION OF CONTROL STATIONS (METHODS I, II AND III)
Control stations shall be separated from the remainder of the ship by "A" Class
bulkheads and decks.
Regulation 45
PROTECTION OF STORE ROOMS, &c. (METHODS I, II AND III)
The boundary bulkheads of baggage rooms, mail rooms, store rooms, paint and lamp
lockers, galleys and similar spaces shall be of "A" Class divisions. Spaces containing
highly inflammable stores shall be so situated as to minimise the danger to passengers or
crew in the event of fire.
Regulation 46
WINDOWS AND SlDESCUTTLES (METHODS I, II AND III)
(a) All windows and sidescuttles in bulkheads separating accommodation spaces
and weather shall be constructed with frames of steel or other suitable material. The
glass shall be retained by a metal glazing bead.
(b) All windows and sidescuttles in bulkheads within accommodation spaces shall
be constructed so as to preserve the integrity requirements of the type of bulkhead in
which they are fitted.
(c) In spaces containing (1) main propulsion machinery, or (2) oil-fired boilers, or (3)
auxiliary internal combustion type machinery of total horsepower of 1,000 or over, the
folio-wing measures shall be taken :
(i) skylights shall be capable of being closed from outside the space ; '
(ii) skylights containing glass panels shall be fitted with external shutters of steel or
. other equivalent material permanently attached ;
(iii) any window permitted by the Administration in casings of such spaces shall be of
the non-opening type, and shall be fitted with an external shutter of steel or other
  equivalent material permanently attached ;
(iv) in the windows and skylights referred to in sub-paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) of this
paragraph, wire reinforced glass shall be used.
Regulation 47
VENTILATION SYSTEMS (METHODS I, II AND III)
(a) The main inlets and outlets of all ventilation systems shall be capable of being
closed from outside the space in the event of a fire. In general, the ventilation fans shall
be so disposed that the ducts reaching the various spaces remain within the main vertical
zone.
(6) All power ventilation, except cargo and machinery space ventilation and any
alternative system which may be required under paragraph (d) of this Regulation, shall
be fitted with master controls so that all fans may be stopped from either of two separate
positions which shall be situated as far apart as practicable. Two master controls shall
be provided for the power ventilation serving machinery spaces, one of which shall be
operable from a position outside the machinery space.
(c) Efficient insulation shall be provided for exhaust ducts from galley ranges where
the ducts pass through accommodation spaces.
(d) Such measures as are practicable shall be taken in respect of control stations
situated below deck and outside machinery spaces in order to ensure that ventilation,
visibility and freedom from smoke are maintained, so that in the event of fire the machin
ery and equipment contained therein may be supervised and continue to function effec
tively. Alternative and entirely separate means of air supply shall be provided for these
control stations ; air inlets to the two sources of supply shall be so disposed that the
risk of both inlets drawing in smoke simultaneously is minimised. At the discretion of
the Administration, such requirements need not apply to spaces situated on, and opening
on to, an open deck, or where local closing arrangements would be equally effective.
Regulation 48
DETAILS OF CONSTRUCTION (METHODS I AND III)
(a) Method I
Except in cargo spaces, mail rooms, baggage rooms, or refrigerated compartments
of service spaces, all linings, grounds, ceilings and insulations shall be of incombustible
materials. The total volume of combustible facings, mouldings, decorations and veneers
in any accommodation or public space shall not exceed a volume equivalent to one-tenth
inch (or 2-54 millimetres) veneer on the combined area of the walls and ceiling. All
exposed surfaces in corridors or stairway enclosures and in concealed or inaccessible
spaces shall have low flame spread characteristics.
(b) Method HI
The use of combustible materials of all kinds such as untreated wood, veneers,
ceilings, curtains, carpets, &c. shall be reduced in so far as it is reasonable and practicable.
In large public spaces, the grounds and supports to the linings and ceilings shall be of
steel or equivalent material. All exposed surfaces in corridors or stairway enclosures
and in concealed or inaccessible spaces shall have low flame spread characteristics.
Regulation 49
MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS (METHODS I, II AND III)
Requirements applicable to all parts of the ship
(a) Paints, varnishes and similar preparations having a nitro-cellulose or other
highly inflammable base shall not be used.
(b) Pipes penetrating "A" or "B" Class divisions shall be of a material approved
by the Administration having regard to the temperature such divisions are required to
withstand. Pipes conveying oil or combustible liquids shall be of a material approved
by the Administration having regard to the fire risk. Materials readily rendered in
effective by heat shall not be used for overhead scuppers, sanitary discharges, and other
outlets which are close to the water line and where the failure of the material in the event
of fire would give rise to danger of flooding.
Requirements applicable to accommodation and service spaces
(c) (i) Air spaces enclosed behind ceilings, panellings or linings shall be suitably
divided by close-fitting draught stops not more than 45 feet (or 13-73 metres) apart.
(ii) In the vertical direction, such spaces, including those behind linings of stairways,
trunks, &c., shall be closed at each deck.
(d) The construction of ceiling and bulkheading shall be such that it will be possible,
without impairing the efficiency of the fire protection, for the fire patrols to detect any
smoke originating in concealed and inaccessible places, except where in the opinion of
the Administration there is no risk of fire originating in such places. ,,    .-
(e) The concealed surfaces of all bulkheads, linings, panellings, stairways, wood
grounds, &c., in accommodation spaces shall have low flame spread characteristics.
(/) Electric radiators, if used, must be fixed in position and so constructed as to reduce
fire risks to a minimum. No such radiators shall be fitted with an element so exposed
that clothing, curtains, or other similar materials can be scorched or set on fire by heat
from the element.
Regulation 50
CINEMATOGRAPH FILM (METHODS I, II AND III)
Cellulose-based film shall not be used in cinematograph installations on board ship.
Regulation 51
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER AND FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS (METHOD II)
In ships in which Method II is adopted, an automatic sprinkler and fire alarm system
of an approved type and complying with the requirements of Regulation 59 of this Chap
ter shall be installed and so arranged as to protect all enclosed spaces appropriated to
the use or service of passengers or crew, except spaces which afford no substantial fire
risk.
Regulation 52
AUTOMATIC FIRE ALARM AND FIRE DETECTION SYSTEMS (METHOD III)
In ships in which Method III is adopted, a fire-detecting system of an approved
type shall be installed and so arranged as to detect the presence of fire in all enclosed
spaces appropriated to the use or service of passengers or crew (except spaces which afford
no substantial fire hazard) and automatically to indicate at one or more points or stations
where it can be most quickly observed by officers and crew, the presence or indication
of fire and also its location.
egulation 53
PASSENGER SHIPS CARRYING NOT MORE THAN 36 PASSENGERS
(a) In addition to being subject to the provisions of Regulation 35 of this Chapter,
ships carrying not more than 36 passengers shall comply with Regulations 36, 37, 38,
40, 41, 43 (a), 44, 45, 46, 49 (a), (b) and (/) and 50 of this Chapter. Where insulated
"A" Class divisions are required under the aforementioned Regulations, the Administra
tion may agree to a reduction of the amount of insulation below that envisaged by subparagraph
(c) (iv) of Regulation 35 of this Chapter.
(b) In addition to compliance with the Regulations referred to in paragraph (a),
the following provisions shall apply :
(i) all stairways and means of escape in accommodation and service spaces shall be of
steel or other suitable material ;
(ii) power ventilation of machinery spaces shall be capable of being stopped from an
easily accessible position outside the machinery spaces ;
(iii) except where all enclosure bulkheads in accommodation spaces conform with the
requirements of Regulations 39 (a) and 48 (a) of this Chapter, such ships shall be
provided with an automatic fire detection system conforming with Regulation 52
of this Chapter and in accommodation spaces, the corridor bulkheads shall be of
steel or be constructed of "B" Class panels.
Regulation 54
CARGO SHIPS OF 4,000 TONS GROSS TONNAGE AND UPWARDS
(a) The hull, superstructure, structural bulkheads, decks and deck houses shall bo
constructed of steel, except where the Administration may sanction the use of other
suitable material in special cases, having in mind the risk of fire.
(b) In accommodation spaces, the corridor bulkheads shall be of steel or be con
structed of "B" Class panels.
(c) Deck coverings within accommodation spaces on the decks forming the crown
of machinery and cargo spaces shall be of a type which will not readily ignite,
(d) Interior stairways below the weather deck shall be of steel or other suitable
material. Crew lift trunks within accommodation shall be of steel or equivalent material.
(e) Bulkheads of galleys, paint stores, lamprooms, boatswain's stores when adjacent
to accommodation spaces and emergency generator rooms if any, shall be of steel or
equivalent material.
(f) In accommodation and machinery spaces, paints, varnishes and similar prepara
tions having a nitro-cellulose or other highly inflammable base shall not be used.
(g) Pipes conveying oil or combustible liquids shall be of a material approved by
the Administration having regard to the fire risk. Materials readily rendered ineffective
by heat shall not be used for overboard scuppers, sanitary discharges, and other outlets
which are close to the water line and where the failure Of the material in the event of
fire would give rise to danger of flooding.
(h) Electric radiators, if used, must be fixed in position and so constructed as to
reduce fire risks to a minimum. No such radiators shall be fitted with an element so
exposed that clothing, curtains or other similar materials can be scorched or set on fire
by heat from the element.
(i) Cellulose-based film shall not be used in cinematograph installations on board
ship.
(j) Power ventilation of machinery spaces shall be capable of being stopped from an
easily accessible position outside the machinery spaces.
Part E
FIRE DETECTION AND EXTINCTION IN PASSENGER
SHIPS AND CARGO SHIPS
(Part E applies to passenger ships and cargo ships except that Regulations 59 and
64 apply only to passenger ships and Regulation 65 applies only to cargo ships.)
. NOTE.-Regulations 56 to 63 inclusive set forth the conditions with which the appliances
mentioned in Regulations 64 and 65 are required to comply.
Regulation 55
DEFINITIONS
In this Part of this Chapter, unless expressly provided otherwise :
(a) The length of the ship is the length measured between perpendiculars.
(b) Required means required by this Part of this Chapter.
Regulation 56
PUMPS, WATER SERVICE PIPES, HYDRANTS AND HOSES
(a) Total Capacity of Fire Pumps
(i) In a passenger ship, the required fire pumps shall be capable of delivering for fire
fighting purposes a quantity of water, at the appropriate pressure prescribed below, not
less than two-thirds of the quantity required to be dealt with by the bilge pumps when
employed for bilge pumping.
(ii) In a cargo ship, the required fire pumps, other than the emergency pump (if
any), shall be capable of delivering for firefighting purposes a quantity of water, at the
appropriate pressure prescribed, not less than four-thirds of the quantity required under
Regulation 18 of this Chapter to be dealt with by each of the independent bilge pumps
in a passenger ship of the same dimensions, when employed on bilge pumping. In place
of the definitions covering L, B and D referred to in paragraph (i) of Regulation 18 of
this Chapter, the following shall apply :
L = length between perpendiculars.
B = greatest moulded breadth.
D = depth to bulkhead deck amidships.
Provided that in no cargo ship need the total required capacity of the fire pumps
exceed 180 tons per hour.
(b) Fire Pumps
(i) The fire pumps shall be independently driven. Sanitary, ballast, bilge or general
service pumps may be accepted as fire pumps, provided that they are not normally used
for pumping oil and that if they are subject to occasional duty for the transfer or pumping
of fuel oil, suitable change-over arrangements are fitted.
(ii) Each of the required fire pumps (other than any emergency pump required by
Regulation 65 of this Chapter) shall have a capacity not less than 80 per cent, of the total
required capacity divided by the number of required fire pumps-and shall in any event
be capable of delivering at least the two required jets of water. These fire pumps shall be
capable of supplying the fire main system under the required conditions.
Where more pumps than required are installed their capacity shall be to the satis
faction of the Administration.
(iii) Relief valves shall be provided in conjunction with all fire pumps if the pumps
are capable of developing a pressure exceeding the design pressure of the water service
pipes, hydrants and hoses. These valves shall be so placed and adjusted as to prevent
excessive pressure in any part of the fire main system.
(c) Pressure in the Fire Main
(i) The diameter of the fire main and water service pipes shall be sufficient for the
effective distribution of the maximum required discharge from two fire pumps operating
simultaneously, except that in the case of cargo ships the diameter need only be sufficient
for the discharge of 140 tons per hour.
(ii) With the two pumps simultaneously delivering through nozzles specified in
paragraph (g) of this Regulation, the quantity of water specified in subparagraph (i)
of this paragraph, through any adjacent hydrants, the following minimum pressures
shall be maintained at all hydrants :
Passenger ships
4,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards 45 pounds per square inch, (or 3-2 kilo
grammes per square centimetre) , . ,
1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards, 40 pounds per square inch (or 2-8 kilobut
under 4,000 tons gross tonnage grammes per square centimetre)
Under 1,000 tons gross tonnage To the satisfaction of the Administration
Cargo ships
6,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards 40 pounds per square inch (or 2-8 kilo
grammes per square centimetre)
1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards, 37 pounds per square inch (or 2-6 kilobut
under 6,000 tons gross tonnage grammes per square centimetre)
Under 1,000 tons gross tonnage To the satisfaction of the Administration
(d) Number and Position of Hydrants
The number and position of the hydrants shall be such that at least two jets of
water not emanating from the same hydrant, one of which shall be from a single length
of hose, may reach any part of the ship normally accessible to the passengers or crew
while the ship is being navigated.
(e) Pipes and Hydrants .
(i) Materials readily rendered ineffective by heat shall not be used for fire mains unless
adequately protected. The pipes and hydrants shall be so placed that the fire hoses may
be easily coupled to them. In ships where deck cargo may be carried, the positions of the
hydrants shall be such that they are always readily accessible and the pipes shall be ar
ranged as far as practicable to avoid risk of damage by such cargo. Unless there is
provided one hose and nozzle for each hydrant in the ship there shall be complete interchangeability
of hose couplings and nozzles.
(ii) Cocks or valves shall be fitted in such positions on the pipes that any of the fire
hoses may be removed while the fire pumps are at work.
(f) Fire Hoses
Fire hoses shall be of material approved by the Administration and sufficient in
length to project a jet of water to any of the spaces in which they may be required to be
used. Their maximum length shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration. Each
hose shall be provided with a nozzle and the necessary couplings. Hoses specified in
these Regulations as "fire hoses" shall together with any necessary fittings and tools be
kept ready for use in conspicuous positions near the water service hydrants or connections.
(g) Nozzles
(i) For the purposes of this Part, standard nozzle sizes shall be % inch (or 12 milli
metres), 5/8 inch (or 16 millimetres) and 3/4 inch (or 20 millimetres), or as near thereto
as possible. Larger diameter nozzles may be permitted subject to compliance with
sub-paragraph (b) (ii) of this Regulation.
(ii) For accommodation and service spaces, a nozzle size greater than % inch (or
12 millimetres) need not be used.
(iii) For machinery spaces and exterior locations, the nozzle size shall be such as to
obtain the maximum discharge possible from two jets at the pressure mentioned in para
graph (c) of this Regulation from the smallest pump.
(h) International Shore Connection
The international shore connection required by paragraph (d) of Regulation 64 and
paragraph (d) of Regulation 65 of this Chapter to be installed in the ship shall be in
accordance with the following specification and the appended sketch :
Outside diameter : 7 inches (or 178 millimetres).
Inner diameter : 2 1/2 inches (or 64 millimetres).
Bolt circle diameter : 5 1/4 inches (or 132 millimetres).
Holes : 4 holes of 3/4 inch (or 19 millimetres) diameter equidistantly placed, slotted
to the flange periphery.
Flange thickness : 9/16 inch (or 14-5 millimetres) minimum.
Bolts : 4, each of 5/8 inch (or 16 millimetres) diameter, 2 inches (or 50 millimetres)
in length.
Flange surface : flat face.
Material : any suited to 150 pounds per square inch (or 10-5 kilogrammes per square
centimetre) service.
Gasket : any suited to 150 pounds per square inch (or 10-5 kilogrammes per square
centimetre) service.
The connection shall be constructed of material suitable for 150 pounds per square
inch (or 10-5 kilogrammes per square centimetre) service. The flange shall have a flat
face on one side, and to the other shall have permanently attached thereto a coupling
that will fit the ship's hydrants and hose. The connection shall be kept aboard the ship
together with a gasket of any material suitable for 150 pounds per square inch (or 10-5
kilogrammes per square centimetre) service, together with four 5/8 inch (or 16 millimetres)
bolts, 2 inches (or 50 millimetres) in length and eight washers.
Regulation 57
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS (PORTABLE AND NON-PORTABLE)
(a) All fire extinguishers shall be of approved types and designs.
(i) The capacity of required portable fluid extinguishers shall be not more than 3 gallons
(or 13% litres) and not less than 2 gallons (or 9 litres). Other extinguishers shall
not be in excess of the equivalent portability of the 3 gallon (or 13% litres) fluid
extinguisher and shall not be less than the fire extinguishing equivalent of a 2 gallon
(or 9 litres) fluid extinguisher.
(ii) The Administration shall determine the equivalents of fire extinguishers.
(b) Spare charges shall be provided in accordance with requirements to be specified
by the Administration.
(c) Fire extinguishers containing an extinguishing medium which either itself or
when in use gives off gases harmful to persons shall not be permitted. For radio rooms
and switchboards extinguishers containing not more than 1 quart (1-136 litres) of carbon
tetrachloride or similar media may be permitted at the discretion of the Administration
subject to such extinguishers being additional to any required by this Part of this Chapter.
(d) Fire extinguishers shall be periodically examined and subjected to such tests
as :the Administration may require.
(<<) One of the portable fire extinguishers intended for use in any space shall be stowed
near the entrance to that space.
Regulation 58
FIRE SMOTHERING GAS OR STEAM FOR MACHINERY AND CARGO SPACES
(a) Where provision is made for the injection of gas or steam into machinery or cargo
spaces for fire extinguishing purposes, the necessary pipes for conveying the gas or steam
shall be provided with control valves or cocks which shall be so placed that they will
be easily accessible and not readily cut off from use by an outbreak of fire. These control
valves or cocks shall be so marked as to indicate clearly the compartments to which the
pipes are led. Suitable provision shall be made to prevent inadvertent admission of
the gas or steam to any compartment, Where cargo spaces fitted with smothering for
fire protection are used as passenger spaces the smothering connection shall be blanked
during service as a passenger space.
(b) The piping shall be arranged so as to provide effective distribution of fire smother
ing gas or steam. Where steam is used in large holds there shall be at least two pipes,
one of which shall be fitted in the forward part and one in the after part ; the pipes shall
be led well down in the space as remote as possible from the shell.
(c) (i) When carbon dioxide is used as the extinguishing medium in cargo spaces,
the quantity of gas available shall be sufficient to give a minimum volume of free gas
equal to 30 per cent, of the gross volume of the largest cargo compartment in the ship
which is capable of being sealed.
(ii) When carbon dioxide is used as an extinguishing medium for spaces containing
boilers or internal combustion type machinery, the quantity of gas carried shall be
sufficient to give a minimum quantity of free gas equal to the larger of the following quan
tities, either
(1) 40 per cent, of the gross volume of the largest space, the volume to include the casing
up to the level at which the horizontal area of the casing is 40 per cent, or less of that
of the space concerned ; or
(2) 35 per cent, of the entire volume of the largest space including the casing ;
provided that the above mentioned percentages may be reduced to 35 per cent, and 30 per
cent, respectively for cargo ships of less than 2,000 tons gross tonnage ; provided also that
if two or more spaces containing boilers or internal combustion type machinery are not
entirely separate they shall be considered as forming one compartment.
(iii) When carbon dioxide is used as an extinguishing medium both for cargo spaces
and for spaces containing boilers or internal combustion type machinery the quantity
of gas need not be more than the maximum required either for the largest cargo com
partment or machinery space.
(iv) For the purpose of this paragraph the volume of gas shall be calculated at
9 cubic feet to the pound (or 0-56 cubic metres to the kilogramme).
(v) When carbon dioxide is used as the extinguishing medium for spaces containing
boilers or internal combustion type machinery the fixed piping system shall be such
that 85 per cent, of the gas can be discharged into the space within 2 minutes.
(d) Where a generator producing inert gas is used to provide smothering gas in a
fixed fire smothering installation for cargo spaces, it shall be capable of producing hourly
a volume of free gas at least equal to 25 per cent, of the gross volume of the largest com
partment protected in this way for a period of 72 hours.
(e) When steam is used as the extinguishing medium in cargo spaces the boiler or
boilers available for supplying steam shall have an evaporation of at least 1 pound of
steam per hour for each 12 cubic feet (or 1 kilogramme for each 0-75 cubic metres) of
the gross volume of the largest cargo compartment in the ship. Moreover the Adminis
tration shall be satisfied that steam will be available immediately and will not be dependent
on the lighting of boilers and that it can be supplied continuously until the end of the
voyage in the required quantity in addition to any steam necessary for the normal requirements
of the ship including propulsion and that provision is made for extra feed water
necessary to meet this requirement.
(/) Means shall be provided for giving audible warning of the release of fire smothering
gas into any working space.
Regulation 59
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS IN PASSENGER SHIPS
(a) Any automatic water sprinkler system for fire protection required in accordance
with Regulation 51 of this Chapter shall be ready for immediate use at any time, and no
action on the part of the crew shall be necessary to set it in operation. Where such a
system is fitted, it shall be kept charged at the necessary pressure and shall have provision
for a continuous supply of water.
(b) The system shall be subdivided into a number of sections to be decided by the
Administration, and automatic alarms shall be provided to indicate at one or more suitable
points or stations the occurrence or indication of fire, and its location.
(c) The pump or pumps to provide the discharge from sprinkler heads shall be so
connected as to be brought into action automatically by a pressure drop in the system.
There shall be a connection from the ship's fire main provided with a lockable screw
down valve and a non-return valve.
(d) Each pump shall be capable of maintaining a sufficient supply of water at the
appropriate pressure, at the sprinkler heads, while such number of sprinkler heads as
will be decided by the Administration are in operation.
(e) There shall be not less than two sources of power supply for the sea water pumps,
air compressors and automatic alarms. Where the sources of power are electrical, these
shall be a main generator and an emergency source of power. One supply shall be taken
from the main switchboard, by separate feeders reserved solely for that purpose. Such
feeders shall be run to a change-over switch situated near to the sprinkler unit arid the
switch shall normally be kept closed to the feeder from the emergency switchboard. The
change-over switch shall be clearly labelled and no other switch shall be permitted in these
feeders.
(/) Sprinkler heads shall be required to operate at temperatures that will be decided
by the Administration. Suitable means for the periodic testing of all automatic arrange
ments shall be provided.
(g) Where Method II of fire protection is employed in a passenger ship the super
structure of which is constructed in aluminium alloy, the whole unit including the sprinkler
pump, tank and air compressor shall be situated to the satisfaction of the Administration
in a position reasonably remote from the boiler and machinery spaces. If the feeders
from the emergency generator to the sprinkler unit pass through any space constituting
a fire risk the cables shall be of a fireproof type.
Regulation 60
FIXED FROTH FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM
(a) Any required fixed froth fire extinguishing system shall be able to discharge a
quantity of froth sufficient to cover to a depth of 6 inches (or 15 centimetres) the largest
area over which oil fuel is liable to spread.
(b) Such a system shall be controlled from an easily accessible position or positions,
outside the space to be protected, which will not be readily cut off by an outbreak of
fire.
Regulation 61
FIRE DETECTION SYSTEMS
(a) All required fire detection systems shall be capable of automatically indicating
the presence or indication of fire and also its location. Indicators shall be centralised
either on the bridge or in other control stations which are provided with a direct communi
cation with the bridge. The Administration may permit the indicators to be distributed
among several stations.
(b) In passenger ships electrical equipment used in the operation of required fire
detection systems shall have two separate sources of power, one of which shall be an
emergency source.
(c) The alarm system shall operate both audible and visible signals at the main sta
tions referred to in paragraph (a) of this Regulation. Detection systems for cargo spaces
need not have audible alarms.
Regulation 62
FIXED PRESSURE WATER-SPRAYING SYSTEMS FOR ENGINE ROOMS AND BOILER ROOMS
(a) Fixed pressure water-spraying systems for boiler rooms with oil fired boilers and
engine rooms with internal combustion type machinery shall be provided with spraying
nozzles of an approved type.
(b) The number and arrangement of the nozzles shall be to the satisfaction of the
Administration and be such as to ensure an effective distribution of water in the spaces
to be protected. Nozzles shall be fitted above bilges, tank tops and other areas over
which oil fuel is liable to spread and also above other main fire hazards in the boiler and
engine rooms.
(e) The systein may be divided into sections, the distribution manifolds of which
shall be operated from easily accessible positions outside the spaces to be protected .and
which will not be readily cut off by an outbreak of fire.
(d) The system shall be kept charged at the necessary pressure and the pump sup
plying the water for the system shall be put automatically into action by a pressure
drop in the system.
(e) The pump shall be capable of simultaneously supplying at the necessary pressure
all sections of the system in any one compartment to be protected. The pump and its
controls shall be installed outside the space or spaces to be protected. It shall not be
possible for a fire in the space or spaces protected by the water-spraying system to put
the system out of action.
(/) Special precautions shall be taken to prevent the nozzles from becoming clogged
by impurities in the water or corrosion of piping, nozzles, valves and pump.
Regulation 63
FIREMAN'S OUTFIT
(a) A fireman's outfit shall consist of a breathing apparatus, a lifeline, a safety
lamp and an axe, as described in this Regulation.
(b) A breathing apparatus shall be of an approved type and may be either :
(i) A smoke helmet or smoke mask which shall be provided with a suitable air pump and
a length of air hose sufficient to reach from the open deck, well clear of hatch or door
way, to any part of the holds or machinery spaces. If, in order to comply with this
sub-paragraph, an air hose exceeding 120 feet (or 36 metres) in length would be
necessary, a self-contained breathing apparatus shall be substituted or provided in
addition as determined by the Administration.
(ii) A self-contained breathing apparatus which shall be capable of functioning for a
period of time to be determined by the Administration.
(c) Each breathing apparatus shall have attached to its belt or harness, by means
of a snaphook, a fireproof lifeline of sufficient length and strength.
(d) A safety lamp (hand lantern) shall be of an approved type. Such safety lamps
shall be electric, and shall have a minimum burning period of three hours.
(e) The axe shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration.
Regulation 64
REQUIREMENTS FOR PASSENGER SHIPS
(a) Patrols and Detection
(i) An efficient patrol system shall be maintained in all passenger ships so that
any outbreak of fire may be promptly detected. Manual fire alarms shall be fitted
throughout the passenger and crew accommodation to enable the fire patrol to give an
alarm immediately to the bridge or fire control station.
(ii) An approved fire alarm or fire detecting system shall be provided which will
automatically indicate at one or more suitable points or stations, where it can be most
quickly observed by officers and crew, the presence or indication of fire and its location
in any part of the ship which, in the opinion of the Administration, is not accessible to
the patrol system, except where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Administration that
the ship is engaged on voyages of such short duration that it would be unreasonable to
apply this requirement.
(b) Fire Pumps and Water Service Pipes
A passenger ship shall be provided with fire pumps, water service pipes, hydrants
and hoses complying with Regulation 56 of this Chapter and with the following require
ments :
(i) A passenger ship of 4,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall be provided with
at least three independently driven fire pumps and every passenger ship of less than
4,000 tons gross tonnage with at least two such fire pumps.
(ii) In a passenger ship of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards, the arrangement of sea
connections, pumps and sources of power for operating them shall be such as to ensure
that a fire in any one compartment will not put all the fire pumps out of action.
(iii) In a passenger ship of less than 1,000 tons gross tonnage the arrangements shall
be to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(c) Fire Hydrants, Hoses and N<ozzles
(i) A passenger ship shall be provided with such number of fire hoses as the Adminis
tration may deem sufficient. There shall be at least one fire hose for each of the hydrants
required by paragraph (d) of Regulation 56 of this Chapter and these hoses shall be used
only for the purposes of extinguishing fires or testing the fire extinguishing apparatus at
fire drills and surveys.
(ii) In accommodation, service and machinery spaces, the number and position of
hydrants shall be such that the requirements of paragraph (d) of Regulation 56 of this
Chapter may be complied with when all watertight doors and all doors in main vertical
zone bulkheads are closed.
(iii) In a passenger ship the arrangements shall be such that at least two jets of water
can reach any part of any cargo space when empty.
(iv) All hydrants in the machinery spaces of passenger ships with oil-fired boilers
or internal combustion type propelling machinery shall be fitted with hoses having in
addition to the nozzles required in paragraph (f) of Regulation 56 of this Chapter nozzles
suitable for spraying water on oil, or alternatively dual purpose nozzles.
(d) International Shore Connection
(i) A passenger ship of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall be provided with
at least one international shore connection, complying with Regulation 56 of this Chapter.
(ii) Facilities shall be available enabling such a connection to be used on either side
of the ship.
(e) Portable Fire Extinguishers in Accommodation and Service Spaces
A passenger ship shall be provided in accommodation and service spaces with such
approved portable fire extinguishers as the Administration may deem to be appropriate
and sufficient.
(f) Fixed Fire Smothering Arrangements in Cargo Spaces
(i) The cargo spaces of passenger ships of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards
shall be protected by a fixed fire smothering gas system complying with Regulation 58
of this Chapter.
(ii) Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Administration that a passenger
ship is engaged on voyages of such short duration that it would be unreasonable to apply
the requirements of sub-paragraph (i) of this paragraph and also in passenger ships of
less than 1,000 tons gross tonnage, the arrangements in cargo spaces shall be to the satis
faction of the Administration.
(g) Fire Extinguishing Appliances in Boiler Rooms, &c.
Where main or auxiliary oil-fired boilers are situated, or in spaces containing oil
fuel units or settling tanks, a passenger ship shall be provided with the following arrange
ments.
(i) There shall be any one of the following fixed fire extinguishing installations :
(1) A pressure water spraying system complying with Regulation 62 of this Chapter ;
(2) A fire smothering gas installation complying with Regulation 58 of this Chapter ;
(3) A fixed froth installation complying with Regulation 60 of this Chapter. (The
Administration may require fixed or mobile arrangements by pressure water or froth
spraying to fight fire above the floor plates.)
In each case if the engine and boiler rooms are not entirely separate, or if fuel oil
can drain from the boiler room into the engine room bilges, the combined engine and
boiler rooms shall be considered as one compartment.
(ii) There shall be at least two approved portable extinguishers discharging froth
or other approved medium suitable for extinguishing oil fires, in each firing space in each
boiler room and each space in which a part of the oil fuel installation is situated. There
shall be not less than one approved froth type extinguisher of at least 30 gallons (or
136 litres) capacity or equivalent in each, boiler room. These extinguishers shall be pro
vided with hoses on reels suitable for reaching any part of the boiler room and spaces
containing any part of the oil fuel installations.
(iii) In each firing space there shall be a receptacle containing sand, sawdust im
pregnated with soda or other approved dry material, in such quantity as may be required
by the Administration. Alternatively an approved portable extinguisher may be sub
stituted therefor.
(h) Fife Fighting Appliances in Spaces containing Internal Combustion Type Machinery
Where internal combustion type engines are used, either (1) for main propulsion
or (2) for auxiliary purposes associated with a total power not less than 1,000 b.h.p., a
passenger ship shall be provided with the following arrangements :
(i) There shall be one of the fixed arrangements required by sub-paragraph (g) (i)
of this Regulation.
(ii) There shall be in each engine space one approved froth type extinguisher of
not less than 10 gallons (or 45 litres) capacity, or equivalent and also one approved portable
froth type extinguisher for each 1,000 b.h.p. of the engines or part thereof ; but the total
number of portable extinguishers so supplied shall be not less than two and need not
exceed six.
(i) Fire Fighting Arrangements in Spaces containing Steam Turbines and not requiring
any Fixed Installation
The Administration shall give special consideration to the fire-extinguishing arrange
ments to be provided in spaces containing steam turbines which are separated from boiler
rooms by watertight bulkheads.
{j) Fireman's Outfits
A passenger ship shall carry at least two fireman's outfits each complying with the
requirements of Regulation 63 of this Chapter. Where the ship exceeds 10,000 tons gross
tonnage at least three outfits shall be carried and where it exceeds 20,000 tons gross ton
nage at least four outfits shall be carried. These outfits shall be kept in widely separated
places ready for use.
Regulation 65
REQUIREMENTS FOR CARGO SHIPS
(a) Application
Where by virtue of minimum gross tonnage limits smaller cargo ships to which the
present Regulations apply are not covered by specific requirements the arrangements for
fire detection and extinction shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(b) Fire Pumps and Water Service Pipes
A cargo ship shall be provided with fire pumps, water service pipes, hydrants and
hoses complying with Regulation 56 of this Chapter and with the following requirements :
(i) A cargo ship of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall be provided with two
independently driven power pumps.
(ii) In a cargo ship of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards if a fire in any one
compartment could put all the pumps out of action, there must be an alternative means
of providing water for fire fighting. In a cargo ship of 2,000 tons gross tonnage and
upwards this alternative means shall be a fixed emergency pump independently driven.
This emergency pump shall be capable of supplying two jets of water to the satisfaction
of the Administration.
(c) Fire Hydrants, Hoses and Nozzles
(i) In cargo ships of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards the number of fire hoses
to be provided, each complete with couplings and nozzles, shall be one for each 100 feet
length of the ship and one spare, but in no case less than five in all. This number does
not include any hoses required in any engine or boiler room. The Administration may
increase the number of the hoses required so as to ensure that hoses in sufficient number
are available and accessible at all times, having regard to the type of the ship and the nature
of the trade on which the ship is employed.
(ii) In accommodation, service and machinery spaces, the number and position of
hydrants shall be such as to comply with the requirements of paragraph (d) of Regula
tion 56 of this Chapter.
(iii) In a cargo ship the arrangements shall be such that at least two jets of water
can reach any part of any cargo space when empty.
(iv) All hydrants in the machinery spaces of cargo ships with oil fired boilers or
internal combustion type propelling machinery shall be fitted with hoses having in addi
tion to the nozzles required in paragraph (/) of Regulation 56 of this Chapter nozzles
suitable for spraying water on oil, or alternatively dual purpose nozzles.
(d) International Shore Connection
(i) A cargo ship of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall be provided with at
least one international shore connection, complying with Regulation 56 of this Chapter.
(ii) Facilities shall be available enabling such a connection to be used on either side
of the ship.
(e) Portable Fire Extinguishers in Accommodation and Service Spaces
A cargo ship shall be provided in accommodation and service spaces with such
approved portable fire extinguishers as the Administration may deem to be appropriate
and sufficient ; in any case, their number shall not be less than five for ships of 1,000 tons
gross tonnage and upwards.
(f) Fixed Fire Smothering Arrangements in Cargo Spaces
(i) .Cargo spaces of ships of 2,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall be protected
by a fixed fire smothering system complying with Regulation 58 of this Chapter. The
Administration may allow the use of steam in lieu, of smothering gas if the arrangements
comply with paragraph (e), of Regulation 58 of this Chapter.
(ii) In tankers, installations discharging froth internally or externally to the tanks
may be accepted as a suitable alternative to smothering gas or steam. The details of
such installations shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(iii) The Administration may exempt from the requirements of sub-paragraphs (i)
and (ii) of this paragraph the cargo holds of any ship (other than the tanks of a tanker) -
(1) if they are provided with steel hatch covers and effective means of closing all venti
lators and other openings leading to the holds ;
(2) if the ship is constructed and intended solely for carrying such cargoes as ore, coal
or grain ;
(3) where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Administration that the ship is engaged
on voyages of such short duration that it would be unreasonable to apply the require
ment.
(iv) Every cargo ship in addition to complying with the requirements of this Regu
lation shall, while carrying explosives of such nature or in such quantity as are not permit
ted to be carried in passenger ships under Regulation 8 of Chapter VII of these Regula
tions comply with the following requirements :
(1) Steam shall not be used for fire smothering purposes in any compartment containing
explosives. For the purposes of this sub-paragraph, "compartment" means all
spaces contained between two adjacent permanent bulkheads and includes the lower
hold and all cargo spaces above it. The whole of any shelter deck space not sub
divided by steel bulkheads the openings of which can be closed by steel closing plates
shall, for the purposes of this sub-paragraph, be considered as a compartment. Where
steel bulkheads with openings closed by steel closing plates are fitted, the enclosed
spaces in the shelter deck may be considered as part of the compartment or com
partments below.
(2) In addition, in each compartment containing explosives and in adjacent cargo com
partments, there shall be provided a smoke or fire detection system in each cargo
space.
(g) Fire Extinguishing Appliances in Boiler Rooms, &-c.
Where main or auxiliary oil fired boilers are situated, or in spaces containing oil
fuel units or settling tanks, a cargo ship of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall
be provided with the following arrangements :
(i) There shall be any one of the following fixed fire extinguishing installations :
(1) A pressure water spraying system complying with Regulation 62 of this Chapter ;
{2) A fire smothering gas installation complying with Regulation 58 of this Chapter ;
(3) A fixed froth installation complying with Regulation 60 of this Chapter. (The
Administration may require fixed or mobile arrangements by pressure water or
froth spraying to fight fire above the floor plates.)
In each case if the engine and boiler rooms are not entirely separate, or if fuel oil
can drain from the boiler room into the engine room bilges, the combined engine and
boiler rooms shall be considered as one compartment.
(ii) There shall be at least two approved portable extinguishers discharging froth
or other approved medium suitable for extinguishing oil fires in each firing space in each
boiler room and each space in which a part of the oil fuel installation is situated. In
addition, there shall be at least one extinguisher of the same description with a capacity
of 2 gallons (or 9 litres) for each burner, provided that the total capacity of the additional
extinguisher or extinguishers need not exceed 10 gallons (or 45 litres) for any one boiler
room.
(iii) In each firing space there shall be a receptacle containing sand, sawdust im
pregnated with soda, or other approved dry material in such quantity as may be required
by the Administration. Alternatively an approved portable extinguisher may be sub
stituted therefor.
(h) Fire Fighting Appliances in Spaces containing Internal Combustion Type Machinery
Where internal combustion type engines are used, either (1) for main propulsion
machinery, or (2) for auxiliary purposes associated with a total power not less than
1,000 b.h.p., a cargo ship of 1,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall be provided
with the following arrangements :
(i) There shall be one of the fixed arrangements required by sub-paragraph (g) (i)
of this Regulation.
(ii) There shall be in each engine space one approved froth type extinguisher of not
less than 10 gallons (or 45 litres) capacity or equivalent and also one approved portable
froth extinguisher for each 1,000 b.h.p. of the engines or part thereof; but the total
number of portable extinguishers so supplied shall be not less than two and need not
exceed six.
(i) Fire Fighting Arrangements in Spaces containing Steam Turbines and not requiring
any Fixed Installation
The Administration shall give special consideration to the fire extinguishing arrange
ments to be provided in spaces containing steam turbines which are separated from boiler
rooms by watertight bulkheads. .
(j) Firemen's Outfit
A cargo ship shall carry at least one fireman's outfit complying with the requirements,
of Regulation 63 of this Chapter.
Regulation 66
READY AVAILABILITY OF FIRE FIGHTING APPLIANCES
Fire extinguishing appliances in new and existing passenger ships and cargo ships
shall be kept in good order and available for immediate use at all times during the voyage.
Regulation 67
ACCEPTANCE OF SUBSTITUTES
Where in this Part of this Chapter any special type of appliance, apparatus, extin
guishing medium or arrangement is specified, any other type of appliance, &c. may be
allowed, provided the Administration is satisfied that it is not less effective.
Part F
GENERAL FIRE PRECAUTIONS
(Part F applies to passenger ships and cargo ships.)
Regulation 68
MEANS OF ESCAPE
(a) Passenger Ships
(i) In and from all passenger and crew spaces and spaces in which crew are normally
employed, other than machinery spaces, stairways and ladderways shall be arranged so
as to provide ready means of escape to the lifeboat embarkation deck. In particular
the following precautions shall be complied with :
(1) below the bulkhead deck, two means of escape, at least one of which shall be incle-
, pendent of watertight doors, shall be provided for each watertight compartment or
.similarly restricted space or group of spaces. One of these means of escape may be
dispensed with by the Administration, due regard being paid to the nature and
the location of spaces concerned, and to the number of persons who normally might
be quartered or employed there ;
(2) above the bulkhead deck, there shall be at least two practical means of escape from
each main vertical zone or similarly restricted space or group of spaces at least one
of which shall give access to a stairway forming a vertical escape ;
(3) at least one of the means of escape shall be by means of a readily accessible enclosed
stairway, which shall provide as far as practicable continuous fire shelter from the
level of its origin to the lifeboat embarkation deck. The width, number and continuity
of the stairways shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(ii) In machinery spaces, two means of escape, one of which may be a watertight
door, shall be provided from each engine room, shaft tunnel and boiler room. In
machinery spaces, where no watertight door is available, the two means of escape shall
be formed by two sets of steel ladders as widely separated as possible leading to doors
in the casing similarly separated and from which access is provided to the embarkation
deck. In the case of ships of less than 2,000 tons gross tonnage, the Administration may
dispense with this requirement, due regard being paid to the width and the disposition
of the casing.
(b) Cargo Ships
(i) In and from all crew and passenger spaces and spaces in which crew are normally
employed, other than machinery spaces, stairways and ladders shall be arranged so as
to provide ready means of escape to the lifeboat embarkation deck.
(ii) In machinery spaces, the requirements of sub-paragraph (a) (ii) of this Regulation
shall apply.
Regulation 69
MEANS FOR STOPPING MACHINERY AND FOR SHUTTING OFF OIL FUEL SUCTION PIPES
(a) Means shall be provided for stopping ventilating fans serving machinery and
cargo spaces and for closing all doorways, ventilators, annular spaces around funnels
and other openings to such spaces. These means shall be capable of being operated from
outside such spaces in case of fire.
(b) Machinery driving forced and induced draught fans, oil fuel transfer pumps, oil
fuel unit pumps and other similar fuel pumps shall be fitted with remote controls situated
outside the space concerned so that they may be stopped in the event of a fire arising
in the space in which they are located.
(c) Every oil fuel suction pipe from a storage, settling or daily service tank situated
above the double bottom shall be fitted with a cock or valve capable of being closed
from outside the space concerned in the event of a fire arising in the space in which such
tanks are situated. In the special case of deep tanks situated in any shaft or pipe tunnel,
valves On the tanks shall be fitted but control in event of fire may be effected by means
of an additional valve on the pipe line or lines outside the tunnel or tunnels.
Regulation 70
FIRE CONTROL PLANS
In any passenger ship, and, as far as applicable in any cargo ship, there shall be
permanently exhibited for the guidance of the ship's officers general arrangement plans
showing clearly for each deck the control stations, the various fire sections enclosed by
fire-resisting, bulkheads, the sections enclosed by fire-retarding bulkheads (if any), to
gether with particulars of the fire alarms, detecting systems, the sprinkler installation
(if any), the fire extinguishing appliances, means of access to different compartments,
decks, &c., and the ventilating system including particulars of the master fan controls,
the positions of dampers and identification numbers of the ventilating fans serving each
section. Alternatively, at the discretion of the Administration, the aforementioned
details may be set out in a booklet, a copy of which shall be supplied to each officer, and
one copy at all times shall be available on board in an accessible position. Plans and
booklets shall be kept up-to-date, any alterations being recorded thereon as soon as
practicable.
CHAPTER III
LIFE-SAVING APPLIANCES, &c.
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
(a) This Chapter, except where it is otherwise expressly provided, applies as follows
to new ships engaged on international voyages :
Part A-Passenger ships and cargo ships.
Part B-Passenger ships.
Part C-Cargo ships.
(b) In the case of existing ships engaged on international voyages and which do not
already comply with the provisions of this Chapter relating to new ships, the arrangements
in each ship shall be considered by the Administration with a view to securing, so far as
this is practicable and reasonable, and as early as possible, substantial compliance with
the requirements of this Chapter. The proviso to sub-paragraph (b) (i) of Regulation 27
of this Chapter may, however, be applied to existing ships only if :
(i) the provisions of Regulations 4, 8, 14, 18 and 19, and paragraphs (a) and (b) of
Regulation 27 of this Chapter are complied with ;
(ii) the liferafts carried in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of Regula
tion 27 comply with the requirements of either Regulation 15 or Regulation 16,
and of Regulation 17 of this Chapter ; and
(iii) the total number of persons on board shall not be increased as the result of the pro
vision of liferafts.
Part A
GENERAL
(Part A applies to both passenger ships and cargo ships.)
Regulation 2
DEFINITIONS
(a) For the purposes of this Chapter the expression "short international voyage"
means an international voyage in the course of which a ship is not more than 200 miles
from a port or place in which the passengers and crew could be placed in safety, and which
does not exceed 600 miles in length between the last port of call in the country in which
the voyage begins and the final port of destination.
(b) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "liferaft" means a liferaft com
plying with either Regulation 15 or Regulation 16 of this Chapter.
(c) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "approved launching device"
means a device approved by the Administration, capable of launching from the embarka
tion position a liferaft fully loaded with the number of persons it is permitted to carry
and with its equipment.
(d) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "certificated lifeboatman"
means any member of the crew who holds a certificate of efficiency issued under the pro
visions of Regulation 32 of this Chapter.
(e) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "buoyant apparatus" means
flotation equipment (other than lifeboats, liferafts, lifebuoys and lifejackets) designed
to support a specified number of persons who are in the water and of such construction
that it retains its shape and properties.
Regulation 3
EXEMPTIONS
(a) The Administration, if it considers that the sheltered nature and conditions
of the voyage are such as to render the application of the full requirements of this Chapter
unreasonable or unnecessary, may to that extent exempt from the requirements of this
Chapter individual ships or classes of ships which, in the course of their voyage, do not
go more than 20 miles from the nearest land.
(b) In the case of passenger ships engaged on international voyages which are
employed in the carriage of large numbers of unberthed passengers in special trades,
such, for example, as the pilgrim trade, the Administration, if satisfied that it is imprac
ticable to enforce compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, may exempt such
ships from those requirements on the following conditions :
(i) that the fullest provision which the circumstances of the trade will permit shall be
made in the matter of lifeboats and other life-saving appliances and fire protection ;
^ii) that all such boats and appliances shall be readily available within the meaning of
Regulation 4 of this Chapter ;
<(iii) that a lifejacket shall be provided for every person on board ;
(iv) that steps shall be taken to formulate general rules which shall be applicable to the
particular circumstances of these trades. Such rules shall be formulated in concert
with such other Contracting Governments, if any, as may be directly interested in
the carriage of such passengers in such trades.
Notwithstanding any provisions of the present Convention the Simla Rules, 1931,
shall continue in force as between the Parties to those Rules until the rules formulated
under sub-paragraph (b) (iv) of this Regulation come into force.
Regulation 4
READY AVAILABILITY OF LIFEBOATS, LIFERAPTS AND BUOYANT APPARATUS
(a) The general principle governing the provision of lifeboats, liferafts and buoyant
apparatus in a ship to which this Chapter applies is that they shall be readily available
in case of emergency.
(b) To be readily available, the lifeboats, liferafts and buoyant apparatus shall comply
with the following conditions :
(i) they shall be capable of being put into the water safely and rapidly even under
unfavourable conditions of trim and of 15 degrees of list ;
(ii) it shall be possible to effect embarkation into the lifeboats and liferafts rapidly and
in good order ;
(iii) the arrangement of each lifeboat, liferaft and article of buoyant apparatus shall
be such that it will not interfere with the operation of other boats, liferafts and
buoyant apparatus.
(c) All the life-saving appliances shall be kept in working order and available for
immediate use before the ship leaves port and at all times during the voyage.
Regulation 5
CONSTRUCTION OF LIFEBOATS
(a) All lifeboats shall be properly constructed and shall be of such form and pro
portions that they shall have ample stability in a seaway, and sufficient freeboard when
loaded with, their full complement of persons and equipment. All lifeboats shall be capable
of maintaining positive stability when open to the sea and loaded with their full comple
ment of persons and equipment.
(b) (i) All lifeboats shall have rigid sides and internal buoyancy only. The Adminis
tration may approve lifeboats with a rigid shelter, provided that it may be readily
opened from both inside and outside, and does not impede rapid embarkation and dis
embarkation or the launching and handling of the lifeboat.
(ii) Motor lifeboats may be fitted to the satisfaction of the Administration with
means for preventing the entry of water at the fore end.
(iii) All lifeboats shall be not less than 24 feet (or 7-3 metres) in length except where
owing to the size of the ship, or for other reasons, the Administration considers the carriage
of such lifeboats unreasonable or impracticable. In no ship shall the lifeboats be less
than 16 feet (or 4-9 metres) in length.
(c) No lifeboat may be approved the weight of which when fully laden with persons
and equipment exceeds 20 tons (or 20,300 kilogrammes) or which has a carrying capacity
calculated in accordance with Regulation 7 of this Chapter of more than 150 persons.
(d) All lifeboats permitted to carry more than 60 persons but not more than 100 per
sons shall be either motor lifeboats complying with the requirements of Regulation 9
of this Chapter or be lifeboats fitted with an approved means of mechanical propulsion
complying with Regulation 10 of this Chapter. All lifeboats permitted to carry more than
100 persons shall be motor lifeboats complying with the requirements of Regulation 9
of this Chapter.
(e) All lifeboats shall be of sufficient strength to enable them to be safely lowered into
the water when loaded with their full complement of persons and equipment. All life
boats shall be of such strength that they will not suffer residual deflection if subjected
to an overload of 25 per cent.
(f) All lifeboats shall have a mean sheer at least equal to 4 per cent, of their length.
The sheer shall be approximately parabolic in form.
(g) In lifeboats permitted to carry 100 or more persons the volume of the buoyancy
shall be increased to the satisfaction of the Administration.
(h) All lifeboats shall have inherent buoyancy, or shall be fitted with watertight air
cases or other equivalent non-corrodible buoyant material which shall not be adversely
affected by oil or oil products, sufficient to float the boat and its equipment when the boat
is flooded and open to the sea. An additional volume of watertight air cases or other
equivalent non-corrodible buoyant material, which shall not be adversely affected by oil
or oil products, equal to at least one-tenth of the cubic capacity of the boat shall also be
provided. The Administration may permit the watertight air cases to be filled with a
non-corrodible buoyant material which shall not be adversely affected by oil or oil pro
ducts.
(i) All thwarts and side-seats shall be fitted as low in the lifeboat as practicable.
(ii) The block coefficient of the cubic capacity as determined in accordance with
Regulation 6 of this Chapter of all lifeboats, except wooden lifeboats made of planks,
shall be not less than 0-64.
Regulation 6
CUBIC CAPACITY OF LIFEBOATS
(a) The cubic capacity of a lifeboat shall be determined by Stirling's (Simpson's)
Rule or by any other method giving the same degree of accuracy. The capacity of a
square-sterned lifeboat shall be calculated as if the lifeboat had a pointed stern.
(b) For example, the capacity in cubic feet (or cubic metres) of a lifeboat, calculated
by the aid of Stirling's Rule, may be considered as given by the following formula :
Capacity = (L/12)(4A+B+4C)
L being the length of the lifeboat in feet (or metres) from the inside of the plank
ing or plating at the stem to the corresponding point at the stern post : in the case of a
lifeboat with a square stern, the length is measured to the inside of the transom.
A, B, C denote respectively the areas of the cross-sections at the quarter-length
forward, amidships, and the quarter-length aft, which correspond to the three points
obtained by dividing L into four equal parts. (The areas corresponding to the two ends
of the lifeboat are considered negligible.)
The areas A, B, C shall be deemed to be given in square feet (or square metres) by
the successive application of the following formula to each of the three cross-sections :
Area = (h/12)(a+4b+2c+4d+e)
h being the depth measured in feet (or in metres) inside the planking or plating from the
keel to the level of the gunwale, or, in certain cases, to a lower level as determined here
after.
a, b, c, d, e denote the horizontal breadths of the lifeboat measured in feet (or in metres)
at the upper and lower points of the depth and at the three points obtained by dividing h
into four equal parts (a and e being the breadths at the extreme point, and c at the middle
point of h).
(c) If the sheer of the gunwale, measured at the two points situated at a quarter of
the length of the lifeboat from the ends, exceeds 1 per cent, of the length of the lifeboat
the depth employed in calculating the area of the cross-sections A or C shall be deemed
to be the depth amidships plus 1 per cent, of the length of the lifeboat.
(d) If the depth of the lifeboat amidships exceeds 45 per cent, of the breadth, the
depth employed in calculating the area of the amidship cross-section B shall be deemed
to be equal to 45 per cent, of the breadth, and the depth employed in calculating the
areas of the quarter-length sections A and C is obtained by increasing this last figure by
an amount equal to 1 per cent, of the length of the lifeboat, provided that in no case shall
the depths employed in the calculation exceed the actual depths at these points.
(e) If the depth of the lifeboat is greater than 4 feet (or 122 centimetres) the number
of persons given by the application of this Rule shall be reduced in proportion to the
ratio of 4 feet (or 122 centimetres) to the actual depth, until the lifeboat has been satis
factorily tested afloat with that number of persons on board, all wearing lifejackets.
(f) The Administration shall impose, by suitable formulae, a limit for the number
of persons allowed in lifeboats with very fine ends and in lifeboats very full in form.
(g) The Administration may assign to a lifeboat constructed of wooden planks
capacity equal to the product of the length, the breadth and the depth multiplied by
0-6 if it is evident that this formula does not give a greater capacity than that obtained
by the above method. The dimensions shall then be measured in the following manner :
Length.-From the intersection of the outside of the planking with the stem
to the corresponding point at the stern post or, in the case of a square-sterned boat,
to the after side of the transom.
Breadth.-From the outside of the planking at the point where the breadth
of the boat is greatest.
Depth.-Amidships inside the planking from the keel to the level of the gunwale,
but the depth used in calculating the cubic capacity may not in any case exceed
45 per cent, of the breadth.
In all cases the shipowner has the right to require that the cubic capacity of the
lifeboat shall be determined by exact measurement.
(h) The cubic capacity of a motor lifeboat or a lifeboat fitted with other propelling
gear shall be obtained from the gross capacity by deducting a volume equal to that occu
pied by the motor and its accessories or the gearbox of the other propelling gear, and,
when carried, the radiotelegraph installation and searchlight with their accessories.
Regulation 7
CARRYING CAPACITY OF LIFEBOATS
The number of persons which a lifeboat shall be permitted to accommodate shall
be equal to the greatest whole number obtained by dividing the capacity in cubic feet
by:
In the case of a lifeboat of 24 feet (or
7-3 metres) in length or over ..... 10 (or where the capacity is measured in
cubic metres, 0-283) ;
in the case of lifeboats of 16 feet (or
4-9 metres) in length ......... 14 (or where the capacity is measured in
cubic metres, 0-396) ; and
in the case of lifeboats of 16 feet (or
4-9 metres) in length or over but under
24 feet (or 4-9 metres) ........ a number between 14 and 10 (or where the
capacity is measured in cubic metres,
between 0-396 and 0-283), to be
obtained by interpolation ;
provided that the number shall in no case exceed the number of adult persons wearing
life jackets which can be seated without in any way interfering with the use of oars or the
operation of other propulsion equipment.
Regulation 8
NUMBER OF MOTOR LIFEBOATS TO BE CARRIED
(a) In every passenger ship there shall be carried on each side of the ship at least one
motor lifeboat complying with the requirements of Regulation 9 of this Chapter.
Provided that in passenger ships in which the total number of persons which the ship
is certified to carry, together with the crew, does not exceed 30, only one such motor
lifeboat shall be required.
(b) In every cargo ship of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards, except tankers,
ships employed as whale factory ships, ships employed as fish processing or canning fac
tory ships, and ships engaged in the carriage of persons in the whaling, fish processing
or canning industries, there shall be carried at least one motor lifeboat complying with
the requirements of Regulation 9 of this Chapter.
(c) In every tanker of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards, in every ship employed
as a whale factory ship, in every ship employed as a fish processing or canning factory
ship and in every ship engaged in the carriage of persons employed in the whaling, fish
processing or canning industries, there shall be carried on each side at least one motor
lifeboat complying with the requirements of Regulation 9 of this Chapter.
Regulation 9
SPECIFICATION OF MOTOR LIFEBOATS
(a) A motor lifeboat shall comply with the following conditions :
(i) It shall be fitted with a compression ignition engine and kept so as to be at all
times ready for use ; it shall be capable of being readily started in all conditions ; sufficient
fuel for 24 hours continuous operation at the speed specified in sub-paragraph (a) (iii)
of this Regulation shall be provided.
(ii) The engine and its accessories shall be suitably enclosed to ensure operation under
adverse weather conditions, and the engine casing shall be fire-resisting. Provision shall
be made for going astern.
(iii) The speed ahead in smooth water when loaded with its full complement of
persons and equipment shall be :
(1) In the case of motor lifeboats required by Regulation 8 of this Chapter to be carried
in passenger ships, tankers, ships employed as whale factory ships, ships employed as
fish processing or canning factory ships and ships engaged in the carriage of persons
employed in the whaling, fish processing or canning industries, at least six knots.
(2) In the case of any other motor lifeboat, at least four knots.
(b) The volume of the internal buoyancy appliances of a motor lifeboat shall be
increased above that required by Regulation 5 of this Chapter by the amount, if any,
by which the volume of the internal buoyancy appliances required to support the engine
and its accessories, and, if fitted, the searchlight and radiotelegraph installation and their
accessories, exceeds the volume of the internal buoyancy appliances required, at the
rate of one cubic foot per person, to support the additional persons which the lifeboat
could accommodate if the motor and its accessories, and, if fitted, the searchlight and
radiotelegraph installation and their accessories, were removed.
Regulation 10
SPECIFICATION OF MECHANICALLY PROPELLED LIFEBOATS OTHER THAN MOTOR LIFEBOATS
A mechanically propelled lifeboat, other than a motor lifeboat, shall comply with the
following conditions :
(a) The propelling gear shall be of an approved type and shall have sufficient power
to enable the lifeboat to be readily cleared from the ship's side when launched and to be
able to hold course under adverse weather conditions. If the gear is manually operated
it shall be capable of being worked by persons untrained in its use and shall be capable
of being operated when the lifeboat is flooded.
(o) A device shall be fitted by means of which the helmsman can cause the lifeboat to
go astern at any time when the propelling gear is in operation.
(c) The volume of the internal buoyancy of a mechanically propelled lifeboat, other
than a motor lifeboat, shall be increased to compensate for the weight of the propelling
gear.
Regulation 11
EQUIPMENT OF LIFEBOATS
(a) The normal equipment of every lifeboat shall consist of :   -ISM
(i) a single banked complement of buoyant oars, two spare buoyant oars, and a
buoyant steering oar ; one set and a half of thole pins or crutches, attached to the
lifeboat by lanyard or chain ; a boat hook ;
(ii) two plugs for each plug hole (plugs are not required when proper automatic valves
are fitted) attached to the lifeboat by lanyards or chains ; a baler, and two buckets
of approved material ;
(iii) a rudder attached to the lifeboat and a tiller ;
(iv) two hatchets, one at each end of the lifeboat ;
(v) a lamp, with oil sufficient for 12 hours ; two boxes of suitable matches in a water
tight container ;
(vi) a mast or masts, with galvanised wire stays together with sails (coloured orange) ;
(vii) an efficient compass in binnacle, to be luminised or fitted with suitable means of
illumination ;
(viii) a lifeline becketed round the outside of the lifeboat ;
(ix) a sea-anchor of approved size ;
(x) two painters of sufficient length. One shall be secured to the forward end of the
lifeboat with strop and toggle so that it can be released, and the other shall be
firmly secured to the stem of the lifeboat and be ready for use ;
(xi) a vessel containing one gallon (or four and half litres) of vegetable, fish or animal
oil. The vessel shall be so constructed that the oil can be easily distributed on
the water, and so arranged that it can be attached to the sea-anchor ;
(xii) a food ration, determined by the Administration, for each person the lifeboat is
certified to carry. These rations shall be kept in airtight receptacles which
are to be stowed in a watertight container ;
(xiii) watertight receptacles containing six pints (or three litres) of fresh water for
each person the lifeboat is certified to carry, or watertight receptacles containing
four pints (or two litres) of fresh water for each person together with an approved
de-salting apparatus capable of providing two pints (or one litre) of drinking
water per person ; a rustproof dipper with lanyard ; a rustproof graduated
drinking vessel ;
(xiv) four parachute signals of approved type capable of giving a bright red light at
a high altitude ; six hand flares of an approved type giving a bright red light ;
(xv) two buoyant smoke signals of an approved type (for day-time use) capable of
giving off a volume of orange-coloured smoke ;
(xvi) approved means to enable persons to cling to the boat should it be upturned, in
the form of bilge keels or keel rails, together with grab lines secured from gunwale
to gunwale under the keel, or other approved arrangements ;
(xvii) an approved first aid outfit in a watertight case ;
(xviii) a waterproof electric torch suitable for signalling in the Morse Code together
with one spare set of batteries and one spare bulb in a waterproof container ;
(xix) a daylight-signalling mirror of an approved type ;
(xx) a jack-knife fitted with a tin opener to be kept attached to the boat with a
lanyard ;
(xxi) two light buoyant heaving lines ;
(xxii) a manual pump of an approved type ;
(xxiii) a suitable locker for stowage of small items of equipment ;
(xxiv) one whistle or equivalent sound signal ;
(xxv) one set of fishing tackle ;
(xxvi) one approved cover of a highly visible colour capable of protecting the occupants
against injury by exposure ; and
(xxvii) one copy of the illustrated table of life-saving signals referred to in Regulation 16
of Chapter V.
(V) In the case of ships engaged on voyages of such duration that in the opinion of
the Administration the items specified in sub-paragraphs (vi), (xii), (xix), (xx) and (xxv)
of paragraph (a) of this Regulation are unnecessary, the Administration may allow them
to be dispensed with.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this Regulation, motor
lifeboats or other approved mechanically propelled lifeboats need not carry a mast or
sails or more than half the complement of oars, but they shall carry two boat hooks.
(d) All lifeboats shall be fitted with suitable means to enable persons in the water
to climb into the lifeboat.
(<<) Every motor lifeboat shall carry portable fire-extinguishing equipment of an
approved type capable of discharging froth or other suitable substance for extinguishing
oil fires.   .    
Regulation 12
SECURITY OF LIFEBOAT EQUIPMENT
All items of lifeboat equipment, with the exception of the boat hook which shall be
kept free for fending off purposes, shall be suitably secured within the lifeboat. The
lashing shall be carried out in such a manner as to ensure the security of the equipment and
so as not to interfere with the lifting hooks or to prevent ready embarkation. All items
of lifeboat equipment shall be as small and light in weight as possible and shall be packed
in suitable and compact form.
Regulation 13
PORTABLE RADJO APPARATUS
(a) An approved portable radio apparatus for survival craft complying with the
requirements set out in Regulation 13 of Chapter IV shall be carried in all ships except
those on which there is carried on each side of the ship a motor lifeboat fitted with a
radiotelegraph installation complying with the provisions of Regulation 14 of this Chapter
and of Regulation 12 of Chapter IV. All this equipment shall be kept together in the
chartroom or other suitable place ready to be moved to one or other of the lifeboats in
the event of an emergency. However, in tankers of 3,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards
in which lifeboats are fitted amidships and aft this equipment shall be kept in a suitable
place in the vicinity of those lifeboats which are furthest away from the ship's main
transmitter.
(6) In the case of ships engaged on voyages of such duration that in the opinion of
the Administration portable radio apparatus for survival craft is unnecessary, the Ad
ministration may allow such equipment to be dispensed with.
Regulation 14
RADIO APPARATUS AND SEARCHLIGHTS IN MOTOR LIFEBOATS
(a.) (i) Where the total number of persons on board a passenger ship engaged on
international voyages which are not short international voyages, a ship employed as a
whale factory ship, a ship employed as a fish processing or canning factory ship or a ship
engaged in the carriage of persons employed in the whaling, fish processing or canning
industries, is more than 199 but less than 1,500, a radiotelegraph apparatus complying
with the requirements set out in this Regulation and in Regulation 12 of Chapter IV
shall be fitted in at least one of the motor lifeboats required under Regulation 8 of 'this
Chapter to be carried in that ship.
(ii) Where the total number of persons on board such a ship is 1,500 or more, such a
radiotelegraph apparatus shall be fitted in every motor lifeboat required under Regula
tion 8 of this Chapter to be carried in that ship.
(b) The radio apparatus shall be installed in a cabin large enough to accommodate
both the equipment and the person using it.
(c) The arrangements shall be such that the efficient operation of the transmitter
and receiver shall not de interfered with by the engine while it is running, whether a
battery is on charge or not.
(d) The radio battery shall not be used to supply power to any engine starting motor
or ignition system.
(e) The motor lifeboat engine shall be fitted with a dynamo for recharging the radio
battery, and for other services.
(/) A searchlight shall be fitted in each motor lifeboat required to be carried under
paragraph (a) of Regulation 8 of this Chapter in passenger ships and under paragraph (c)
of that Regulation in ships employed as whale factory ships, fish processing or canning
factory ships and ships engaged in the carriage of persons employed in the whaling, fish
processing or canning industries.
(g) The searchlight shall include a lamp of at least 80 watts, an efficient reflector
and a source of power which will give effective illumination of a light-coloured object
having a width of about 60 feet (or 18 metres) at a distance of 200 yards (or 180 metres)
for a total period of six hours and shall be capable of working for at least three hours
continuously.
Regitlation 15
REQUIREMENTS FOR INFLATABLE LIFERAFTS
(a) Every inflatable liferaft shall be so constructed that, when fully inflated and
floating with the cover uppermost, it shall be stable in a seaway.
(b) The liferaft shall be so constructed that if it is dropped into the water from a
height of 60 feet (or 18 metres) neither the liferaft nor its equipment will be damaged.
(c) The construction of the liferaft shall include a cover which shall automatically
be set in place when the liferaft is inflated. This cover shall be capable of protecting the
occupants against injury from exposure, and means shall be provided for collecting rain.
The top of the cover shall be fitted with a lamp which derives its luminosity from a seaactivated
cell and a similar lamp shall also be fitted inside the liferaft. The cover of the
liferaft shall be of a highly visible colour.
(d) The liferaft shall be fitted with a painter and shall have a line securely becketed
round the outside. A lifeline shall also be fitted around the inside of the liferaft.
(e) The liferaft shall be capable of being readily righted by one person if it inflates
in an inverted position.
(f) The liferaft shall be fitted at each opening with efficient means to enable persons
in the water to climb on board.
(g). The liferaft shall be contained in. a valise or other container so.constructed as
to be capable of withstanding hard wear under conditions met with at sea. , The liferaft
in its..valise or other container shall be inherently buoyant.
(h) The buoyancy of the liferaft shall be so arranged as to ensure by a division into
an evert number of separate compartments, half of which shall be capable of supporting
out of the water the number of persons which the liferaft is permitted to accommodate,
or by some other equally efficient means, that there is a reasonable margin, of buoyancy
if the raft is damaged or partially fails to inflate.
(*') The total weight of the liferaft, its valise or other container and its equipment shall
not exceed 400 Ib. (or 180 kilogrammes). ' '
(j) The number of persons which an inflatable liferaft shall be permitted to accom
modate shall be equal to :
(i) the greatest whole number obtained by dividing by 3-4 the volume, measured in
cubic feet (or by 96 the volume, measured in cubic decimetres) of the main buoyancy
tubes (which for this purpose shall include neither the arches nor the thwart or thwarts
if fitted) when inflated, or
(ii) the greatest whole number obtained by dividing by 4 the area, measured in square
feet (or by 3,720 the area measured in square centimetres) of the floor (which for this
purpose may include the thwart or thwarts if fitted) of the liferaft .when inflated
whichever number shall be the less.
(A) The floor of the liferaft shall be waterproof and shall be capable of being suffi
ciently insulated against cold.
(/) The liferaft shall be inflated by a gas which is not injurious to the occupants and
the inflation shall take place automatically either on the pulling of a line or by some other
equally simple and efficient method. Means shall be provided whereby the topping-up
pump or bellows required by Regulation 17 of this Chapter may be used to maintain pres
sure.
(m) The liferaft shall be of approved material and construction, and shall be so
constructed as to be capable of withstanding exposure for 30 days afloat in all sea con
ditions.
(<<) No liferaft shall be approved which has a carrying capacity calculated in accord
ance with paragraph (/) of this Regulation of less than six persons. The maximum num
ber of persons calculated in accordance with that paragraph for which an inflatable
liferaft may be approved shall be at the discretion of the Administration, but shall in
no case exceed 25.
(o) The liferaft shall be capable of operating throughout a temperature range of
150 &#186; F. to minus 22 &#186; F. (or 66 &#186; C. to minus 30 &#186; C.).
(p) The liferaft shall be so stowed as to be readily available in case of emergency.
(q) The liferaft shall be fitted with arrangements enabling it to be readily towed,
Regulation 16
REQUIREMENTS FOR RIGID LIFERAFTS
(a) Every rigid liferaft shall be so constructed that if it is dropped into the water
from its stowed position neither the liferaft nor its equipment will be damaged.
(6) The deck area of the liferaft shall be situated within that part of the liferaft
which affords protection to its occupants. The area of that deck shall be at least 4 square
feet (or 3,720 square centimetres) for every person the liferaft is permitted to carry.
The nature of the deck shall be such as to prevent so far as practicable the ingress of water
and it shall effectively support the occupants out of the water.
(c) The liferaft shall be fitted with a cover or equivalent arrangement of a highly
visible colour, which shall be capable of protecting the occupants against injury from
exposure whichever way up the liferaft is floating.
(d) The equipment of the liferaft shall be so stowed as to be readily available which
ever way up the liferaft is floating.
(e) The total weight of a liferaft and its equipment carried in passenger ships shall
not exceed 400 Ib. (or 180 kilogrammes). Liferafts carried in cargo ships may exceed
400 Ib. (or 180 kilogrammes) in weight if they are capable of being launched from both
sides of the ship or if there are provided means for putting them into the water mechani
cally.
(/) The liferaft must at all times be effective and stable when floating either way up,
(g) The liferaft shall have at least 3-4 cubic feet (or 96 cubic decimetres) of air cases
or equivalent buoyancy for each person it is permitted to carry which must be placed as
near as possible to the sides of the raft.
(h) The liferaft shall have a painter attached and a lifeline securely becketed round
the outside. A lifeline shall also be fitted around the inside of the raft.
(i) The liferaft shall be fitted at each opening with efficient means to enable persons
in the water to climb on board.
(j) The liferaft shall be so constructed as not to be affected by oil or oil products.
(k) A buoyant light of the electric battery type shall be attached to the liferaft by a
lanyard.
(l) The liferaft shall be fitted with arrangements enabling it to be readily towed.
(m) Liferafts shall be so stowed as to float free in the event of the ship sinking.
Regulation 17
EQUIPMENT OF INFLATABLE AND RIGID LIFERAFTS
(a) The normal equipment of every liferaft shall consist of :
(i) One buoyant rescue quoit, attached to at least 100 feet (or 30 metres) of buoyant
line.
(ii) For liferafts which are permitted to accommodate not more than 12 persons ;
one knife and one baler ; for liferafts which are permitted to accommodate 13 per
sons Or more ; two knives and two balers.
(iii) Two sponges.
- (iv) Two sea-anchors, one permanently attached to the liferaft and one spare.
: (v) Two paddles. '
(vi) One repair outfit capable of repairing punctures in buoyancy compartments.
(vii) One topping-up pump or bellows, unless the liferaft complies with Regulation 16
of this Chapter.
(yiii) Three tin-openers,
(ix) One approved first-aid outfit in a waterproof case.
(x) One rustproof graduated drinking vessel.
- (xi) One waterproof electric torch suitable for signalling in the Morse Code, together
with one spare set of batteries and one spare bulb in a waterproof container.
(xii) One daylight signalling mirror and one signalling whistle,
(xiii) Two parachute distress signals of an approved type, capable of giving a bright
red light at a high altitude,
(xiv) Six hand flares of an approved type, capable of giving a bright red light.
(xv) One set of fishing tackle.
(xvi) A food ration, determined by the Administration, for each person the liferaft is
permitted to accommodate.
(xvii) Watertight receptacles containing three pints (or one and a half litres) of fresh
water for each person the liferaft is permitted to accommodate, of which one pint
(or half a litre) per person may be replaced by a suitable de-salting apparatus
capable of producing an equal amount of fresh water.
(xviii) Six anti-seasickness tablets for each person the liferaft is deemed fit to accom
modate.
(xix) Instructions on how to survive in the liferaft ; and
(xx) One copy of the illustrated table of life-saving signals referred to in Regulation 16
of Chapter V.
(b) In the case of passenger ships engaged on short international voyages of such
duration that in the opinion of the Administration all the items specified in .paragraph (a)
are unnecessary, the Administration may allow one or more liferafts, not being less than
one-sixth of the number of the liferafts carried in any such ship, to be provided with the
equipment specified in sub-paragraphs (i) to (vii) inclusive, (xi) and (xix) of paragraph (a)
of this Regulation, and with one-half of the equipment specified in sub-paragraphs (xiii)
and (xiv) of the said paragraph and the remainder of the liferafts carried to be provided
with the equipment specified in sub-paragraphs (i) to (vii) inclusive and (xix) of the said
paragraph.
Regulation IS
TRAINING IN THE USE OF LIFERAFTS
The Administration shall so far as is practicable and reasonable take steps with a
view to ensuring that crews of ships in which liferafts are carried are trained in their
launching and use.
Regulation 19
EMBARKATION INTO LIFEBOATS AND LIFERAFTS
(a) Suitable arrangements shall be made for embarkation into the lifeboats, which
shall include :
(i) a ladder at each set of davits to afford access to the lifeboats when waterborne,
except that in passenger ships, ships employed as whale factory ships, ships employed
as fish processing or canning factory ships and ships engaged in the carriage of persons
employed in the whaling, fish processing or canning industries, the Administration
may permit such ladders to be replaced by approved devices provided that there
shall not be less than one ladder on each side of the ship ;
(ii) means for illuminating the lifeboats and their launching gear during preparation for
and the process of launching, and also for illuminating the water into which the life
boats are launched until the process of launching is completed ;
(iii) arrangements for warning the passengers and crew that the ship is about to be
abandoned ; and
(iv) means for preventing any discharge of water into the lifeboats.
(b) Suitable arrangements shall also be made for embarkation into the liferafts,
which shall include :
(i) sufficient ladders to facilitate embarkation into the liferafts when waterborne except
that in passenger ships, ships employed as whale factory ships, ships employed as
fish processing or canning factory ships, and ships engaged in the carriage of per
sons employed in the whaling, fish processing or fish canning industries, the Admin
istration may permit the replacement of some or all of such ladders by approved
devices ;
(ii) where there are carried liferafts for which approved launching devices are provided,
means for illuminating those liferafts and launching devices during the preparation
for and the process of launching, and also for illuminating the water into which those
liferafts are launched until the process of launching is completed ;
(iii) means for illuminating the stowage position of liferafts for which approved launching
devices are not provided ;
(iv) arrangements for warning the passengers and crew that the ship is about to be
abandoned ; and '
(v) means for preventing any discharge of water into the liferafts at fixed laurichirig
positions, including those under approved launching devices.
Regulation 20
MARKING OF LIFEBOATS, LIFERAFTS AND BUOYANT APPARATUS
(a) The dimensions of a lifeboat and the number of persons which it is permitted
to carry shall be marked on it in clear permanent characters. The name and port of
registry of the ship to which the lifeboat belongs shall be painted on each side of the bow.
(b) Buoyant apparatus shall be marked with the number of persons in the same
manner. ;
(c) The number of persons shall be marked in the same manner on inflatable liferafts
and also on the valise or container in which the inflatable liferaft is contained. Every
inflatable liferaft shall also bear a serial number and the manufacturer's name so that the
owner of the liferaft can be ascertained.
(d) Every rigid liferaft shall be marked with the name and port of registry of the
ship in which it is carried, and with the number of persons it is permitted to carry.
(e) No lifeboat, liferaft or buoyant apparatus shall be marked for a greater number
of persons than that obtained in the manner specified in this Chapter.
Regulation 21
SPECIFICATION OF A LIFEBUOY
(a) A lifebuoy shall satisfy the following requirements :
(i) it shall be of solid cork or any other equivalent material ;
(ii) it shall be capable of supporting in fresh water for 24 hours at least 32 Ibs. (or
14-5 kilogrammes) of iron ;
(iii) it shall not be adversely affected by oil or oil products ;
(iv) it shall be of a highly visible colour ;
(v) it shall be marked in block letters with the name and port of registry of the ship
in which it is carried.
(b) Lifebuoys filled with rushes, cork shavings or granulated cork, or any other loose
granulated material, or whose buoyancy depends upon air compartments which require
to be inflated, are prohibited.
(c) Lifebuoys made of plastic or other synthetic compounds shall be capable of
retaining their buoyant properties and durability in contact with sea water or oil
products, or under variations of temperature or climatic changes prevailing in open
sea voyages.
(d) Lifebuoys shall be fitted with beckets securely seized. At least one lifebuoy
on each side of the ship shall be fitted with a buoyant lifeline of at least 15 fathoms
(or 27-5 metres) in length.
(<<) In passenger ships not less than one-half of the total number of lifebuoys, and in
no case less than six, and in cargo ships at least one-half of the total number of lifebuoys,
shall be provided with efficient self-igniting lights.
(/) The self-igniting lights required by paragraph (e) of this Regulation shall be such
that they cannot be extinguished by water. They shall be capable of burning for not less
than 45 minutes and shall have a luminosity of not less than 3-5 lumens. They shall
be kept near the lifebuoys to which they belong, with the necessary means of attach
ment. Self-igniting lights used in tankers shall be of an approved electric battery type.
(g) All lifebuoys shall be so placed as to be readily accessible to the persons on board,
and at least two of the lifebuoys provided with self-igniting lights in accordance with
paragraph (e) of this Regulation shall also be provided with an efficient self-activating
smoke signal capable of producing smoke of a highly visible colour for at least 15 minutes,
and shall be capable of quick release from the navigating bridge.
(h) Lifebuoys shall always be capable of being rapidly cast loose and shall not be
permanently secured in any way.
Regulation 22
LIFE JACKETS
(a) Ships shall carry for every person on board a lifejacket of an approved type and,
in addition, unless these lifejackets can be adapted for use by children, a sufficient num
ber of lifejackets suitable for children.
(6) In addition to the lifejackets required by paragraph (a) there shall be carried on
passenger ships lifejackets for 5 per cent, of the total number of persons on board. These
lifejackets shall be stowed in a conspicuous place on deck.
(c) A lifejacket shall not be approved unless it satisfies the following requirements :
(i) It shall be constructed with proper workmanship and materials,
(ii) It shall be capable of supporting in fresh water for 24 hours 16-5 pounds (or
7-5 kilogrammes) of iron.
(iii) It shall be so constructed as to eliminate so far as possible all risk of its being put
on incorrectly, except that it shall be capable of being worn inside out.
(iv) It shall provide support to the head so that the face of an unconscious person is
held above the water with the body inclined backwards from its vertical position.
(v) It shall be capable of turning the body, on entering the water, to a safe floating
position with the body inclined backwards from its vertical position.
 (vi) It shall not be adversely affected by oil or oil products.
<(vii) It shall be of a highly visible colour,
(viii) It shall be fitted with an approved whistle, firmly secured by a cord.
(d) A lifejacket, the buoyancy of which depends on inflation, may be permitted for
use by the crews of all ships except passenger ships and tankers provided that :
(i) It has two separate air compartments, together capable of supporting in fresh water
for 24 hours 33 pounds (or 15 kilogrammes) of iron, and each capable of so sup
porting 16-5 pounds (7-5 kilogrammes) of iron ;
(ii) It is capable of being inflated both mechanically and by mouth ; and
(iii) It complies with the requirements of sub-paragraphs (i), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii)
and (viii) of paragraph (c) even if one air compartment is not inflated.
(e) Lifejackets shall be so placed as to be readily accessible and their position shall
be plainly indicated.
Regulation 23
LINE-THROWING APPLIANCES
(a) Ships shall carry a line-throwing appliance of an approved type.
(b) The appliance shall be capable of carrying a line not less than 250 yards (or
230 metres) with reasonable accuracy, and shall include not less than four projectiles and
four lines.
Regulation 24
SHIPS' DISTRESS SIGNALS
Ships shall be provided, to the satisfaction of the Administration, with means of
making effective distress signals by day and by night, including at least twelve parachute
signals capable of giving a bright red light at a high altitude.
Regulation 25
MUSTER LIST AND EMERGENCY PROCEDURE
(a) Special duties to be undertaken in the event of an emergency shall be allotted to
each member of the crew.
(b) The muster list shall show all the special duties and shall indicate, in particular,
the station to which each member must go, and the duties that he has to perform.
(c) Before the vessel sails, the muster list shall be drawn up. Copies shall be posted
in several parts of the ship, and in particular in the crew's quarters.
(d) The muster list shall show the duties assigned to the different members of the
crew in connection with :
(i) the closing of the watertight doors, valves and closing mechanisms of scuppers, ashshoots,
and fire doors ;
(ii) the equipping of the lifeboats (including the portable radio apparatus for survival
craft) and the other life-saving appliances ;
(iii) the launching of the lifeboats ;
(iv) the general preparation of the other life-saving appliances ;
(v) the muster of the passengers ; and
(vi) the extinction of fire.
(<<) The muster list shall show the several duties assigned to the members of the
stewards' department in relation to the passengers in case of emergency. These duties
shall include :
(i) warning the passengers ;
(ii) seeing that they are suitably clad and have put on their lifejackets in a proper manner ;
(iii) assembling the passengers at muster stations ;
(iv) keeping order in the passages and on the stairways, and, generally, controlling the
movements of the passengers ; and
(v) ensuring that a supply of blankets is taken to the lifeboats.
(/) The muster list shall specify definite signals for calling all the crew to their boat,
liferaft and fire stations, and shall give full particulars of these signals. These signals shall
be made on the whistle or siren and, except on passenger ships on short international
voyages and on cargo ships of less than 150 feet in length, they shall be supplemented
by other signals which shall be electrically operated. All these signals shall be operable
from the bridge.
Regulation 26
PRACTICE MUSTERS AND DRILLS
(a) (i) In passenger ships, musters of the crew for boat drill and fire drill shall take
place weekly when practicable and there shall be such a muster when a passenger ship
leaves the final port of departure on an international voyage which is not a short inter
national voyage.
(ii) In cargo ships, a muster of the crew for boat drill and fire drill shall take place
at intervals of not more than one month, provided that a muster of the crew for boat
drill and fire drill shall take place within 24 hours of leaving a port if more than 25 per
cent, of the crew have been replaced at that port.
(iii) On the occasion of the monthly muster in cargo ships the boats' equipment shall
be examined to ensure that it is complete.
(iv) The date upon which musters are held shall be recorded in such log book as
may be prescribed by the Administration ; and, if in any week (for passenger ships) or
month (for cargo ships) no muster or a part muster only is held, an entry shall be made
stating the circumstances and extent of the muster held. A report of the examination
of the boats' equipment on cargo ships shall be entered in the log book, which shall also
record the occasions on which the lifeboats are swung out and lowered in compliance
with paragraph (c) of this Regulation.
(b) In passenger ships, except those engaged on short international voyages, a
muster of the passengers shall be held within twenty-four hours after leaving port.
(c) Different groups of lifeboats shall be used in turn at successive boat drills and
every lifeboat shall be swung out and, if practicable and reasonable, lowered at least
once every four months. The musters and inspections shall be so arranged that the crew
thoroughly understand and are practised in the duties they have to perform, including
instructions in the handling and operation of liferafts where these are carried.
(d) The emergency signal for summoning passengers to muster stations shall be a
succession of seven or more short blasts followed by one long blast on the whistle or siren.
This shall be supplemented in passenger ships, except those engaged on short international
voyages, by other signals, which shall be electrically operated, throughout the ship op
erable from the bridge. The meaning of all signals affecting passengers, with precise
instructions on what they are to do in an emergency, shall be clearly stated in appropriate
languages on cards posted in their cabins and in conspicuous places in other passenger
quarters.
Part B
PASSENGER SHIPS ONLY
Regulation 27
LIFEBOATS, LIFERAFTS AND BUOYANT APPARATUS
(a) Passenger ships shall carry two boats attached to davits-one on each side of the
ship-for use in an emergency. These boats shall be of an approved type and shall be
not more than 28 feet (or 8% metres) in length. They may be counted for the purposes
of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Regulation, provided that they comply fully with the
requirements for lifeboats of this Chapter, and for the purposes of Regulation 8 provided
that in addition they comply fully with the requirements of Regulation 9 and where
appropriate Regulation 14. They shall be kept ready for immediate use while the ship
is at sea. In ships in which the requirements of paragraph (h) of Regulation 29 are met
by means of appliances fitted to the sides of the lifeboats, such appliances shall not be
required to be fitted to the two boats provided to meet the requirements of this Regulation.
(6) Passenger ships engaged on international voyages which are not short inter
national voyages shall carry :
(i) lifeboats on each side of such aggregate capacity as will accommodate half the total
number of persons on board.
Provided that the Administration may permit the substitution of lifeboats by
liferafts of the same total capacity so however that there shall never be less than
sufficient lifeboats on each side of the ship to accommodate 37 % per cent, of all
on board.
{ii) liferafts of sufficient aggregate capacity to accommodate 25 per cent, of the total
number of persons on board, together with buoyant apparatus for 3 per cent, of that
number.
Provided that ships which have a factor of subdivision of 0-33 or less shall be
permitted to carry, in lieu of liferafts for 25 per cent, of all on board and buoyant
apparatus for 3 per cent, of all on board, buoyant apparatus for 25 per cent, of that
number.
(c) (i) A passenger ship engaged on short international voyages shall be provided
with sets of davits in accordance with its length as specified in Column A of the Table
in Regulation 28 of this Chapter. Each set of davits shall have a lifeboat attached to
it and these lifeboats shall provide at least the minimum capacity required by Column C
of the Table or the capacity required to provide accommodation for all on board if this
is less.
Provided that when in the opinion of the Administration it is impracticable or un
reasonable to place on a ship engaged on short international voyages the number of sets
of davits required by Column A of the Table in Regulation 28, the Administration may
authorise, under exceptional conditions, a smaller number of davits, except that this num
ber shall never be less than the minimum number fixed by Column B of the Table, and
that the total capacity of the lifeboats on the ship will be at least equal to the minimum
capacity required by Column C or the capacity required to provide for all persons on board
if this is less.
(ii) If the lifeboats so provided are not sufficient to accommodate all on board, addi
tional lifeboats under davits or liferafts shall be provided so that the accommodation
provided in the lifeboats and the liferafts in the ship shall be sufficient for all on board.
(iii) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph (c) (ii) in any ship engaged
on short international voyages the number of persons carried shall not exceed the total
capacity of the lifeboats provided in accordance with sub-paragraphs (c) (i) and (c) (ii)
of this Regulation unless the Administration considers that this is necessitated by the
volume of traffic and then only if the ship complies with the provisions of paragraph (d)
of Regulation 1 of Chapter II.
(iv) Where under the provisions of sub-paragraph (c) (iii) the Administration has
permitted the carriage of persons in excess of the lifeboat capacity and is satisfied that
it is impracticable in that ship to stow the liferafts carried in accordance with subparagraph
(c) (ii) it may permit a reduction in the number of lifeboats.
Provided that ;
(1) the number of lifeboats shall, in the case of ships of 190 feet (or 58 metres) in length
and over, never be less than four, two of which shall be carried on each side of the
ship, and in the case of ships of less than 190 feet (or 58 metres) in length, shall never
be less than two, one of which shall be carried on each side of the ship ; and
(2) the number of lifeboats and liferafts shall always be sufficient to accommodate the
total number of persons on board.
(v) Every passenger ship engaged on short international voyages shall carry in addi
tion to the lifeboats and liferafts required by the provisions of this paragraph, liferafts
sufficient to accommodate 10 per cent, of the total number of persons for whom there
is accommodation in the lifeboats carried in that ship.
(vi) Every passenger ship engaged on short international voyages shall also carry
buoyant apparatus for at least 5 per cent, of the total number of persons on board.
(vii) The Administration may permit individual ships or classes of ships with short
international voyage certificates to proceed on voyages in excess of 600 miles but not
exceeding 1,200 miles if such ships comply with the provisions of paragraph (d) of Regu
lation 1 of Chapter II, if they carry lifeboats which provide for 75 per cent, of the persons
on board and otherwise comply with the provisions of this paragraph.
Regulation 28
TABLE RELATING TO DAVITS AND LIFEBOAT CAPACITY FOR SHIPS ON SHORT
INTERNATIONAL VOYAGES
The following table fixes according to the length of the ship-
(A) the minimum number of sets of davits to be provided on a ship engaged on short
international voyages to each of which must be attached a lifeboat in accordance
with Regulation 27 of this Chapter ;
(B) the smaller number of sets of davits which may be authorised exceptionally on a ship
engaged on short international voyages under Regulation 27 ; and
(C) the minimum lifeboat capacity required for a ship engaged on short international
voyages.
Regulation 29
STOWAGE AND HANDLING OF LIFEBOATS, LIFERAFTS AND BUOYANT APPARATUS
(a) Lifeboats and liferafts shall be stowed to the satisfaction of the Administration
in such a way that :
(i) they can all be launched in the shortest possible time and in not more than 30 minutes ;
(ii) they will not impede in any way the prompt handling of any of the other lifeboats,
liferafts or buoyant apparatus or the marshalling of the persons on board at the
launching stations, or their embarkation ;
(iii) the lifeboats, and the liferafts for which approved launching devices are required to
be carried, shall be capable of being put into the water loaded with their full comple
ment of persons and equipment even in unfavourable conditions of trim and of
15 degrees of list either way ; and
(iv) the liferafts for which approved launching devices are not required to be carried,
and the buoyant apparatus, shall be capable of being put into the water even in
unfavourable conditions of trim and of 15 degrees of list either way.
(b) Every lifeboat shall be attached to a separate set of davits.
(c) Lifeboats may only be stowed on more than one deck if proper measures are taken
to prevent lifeboats on a lower deck being fouled by those stowed on a deck above.
(d) Lifeboats, and liferafts for which approved launching devices are required to be
carried shall not be placed in the bow of the ship. They shall be stowed in such positions
as to ensure safe launching having particular regard to clearance from the propeller and
steeply overhanging portions of the hull aft.
(e) Davits shall be of approved design and shall be suitably placed to the satisfaction
of the Administration. They shall be so disposed on one or more decks that the lifeboats
placed under them can be safely lowered without interference from the operation of any
other davits.
(/) Davits shall be as follows :
(i) luffing or gravity type for operating lifeboats weighing not more than 2 1/4 tons
(or 2,300 kilogrammes) in their turning out condition ;
(ii) gravity type for operating lifeboats weighing more than 2 1/4 tons (or 2,300 kilo
grammes) in their turning out condition.
(g) Davits, falls, blocks and all other gear shall be of such strength that the life
boats can be turned out manned by a launching crew and then safely lowered with the
full complement of persons and equipment, with the ship listed to 15 degrees either way
and with a 10 degrees trim.
(h) Skates or other suitable means shall be provided to facilitate launching the life
boats against a list of 15 degrees.
(i) Means shall be provided for bringing the lifeboats against the ship's side and there
holding them so that persons may be safely embarked.
(j) Lifeboats, together with the emergency boats required by Regulation 27 of this
Chapter, shall be served by wire rope falls, together with winches of an approved type
which, in the case of the emergency boats, shall be capable of quick recovery of those
boats. Exceptionally, the Administration may allow manila rope falls or falls of another
approved material with or without winches (except that the emergency boats shall be
required to be served by winches which are capable of quick recovery of those boats)
where they are satisfied that manila rope falls or falls of another approved material are
adequate.
(k) At least two lifelines shall be fitted to the davit span, and the falls and lifelines
shall be long enough to reach the water with the ship at its lightest sea-going draught
and listed to 15 degrees either way. Lower fall blocks shall be fitted with a suitable ring
or long link for attaching to the sling hooks unless an approved type of disengaging
gear is fitted.
(/) Where mechanically-powered appliances are fitted for the recovery of the life
boats, efficient hand gear shall also be provided. Where davits are recovered by action
of the falls by power, safety devices shall be fitted which will automatically cut off the
power before the davits come against the stops in order to avoid overstressing the wire
rope falls or davits.
(m) Lifeboats attached to davits shall have the falls ready for service and arrange
ments shall be made for speedily, but not necessarily simultaneously, detaching the life
boats from the falls. The point of attachment of the lifeboats to the falls shall be at
such height above the gunwale as to ensure stability when lowering the lifeboats.
(n) (i) In passenger ships engaged on international voyages which are not short
international voyages in which there are carried lifeboats and liferafts in accordance
with sub-paragraph (b) (i) of Regulation 27 of this Chapter, there shall be provided ap
proved launching devices sufficient in number in the opinion of the Administration to
enable that number of liferafts which, together with the lifeboats, is required in accord
ance with that sub-paragraph to provide accommodation for all on board, to be put
into the water loaded with the number of persons they are permitted to accommodate,
in not more than thirty minutes in calm conditions. Approved launching devices so
provided shall, so far as practicable, be distributed equally on each side of the ship and
there shall never be less than one such device on each side. No such devices need, how
ever, be provided for the additional liferafts required to be carried by sub-paragraph (b) (ii)
of Regulation 27 of this Chapter for 25 per cent, of all on board, but every liferaft carried
in accordance with that sub-paragraph shall, where an approved launching device is
provided in the ship, be of a type which is capable of being launched from such a device.
(ii) In passenger ships engaged on short international voyages, the number of ap
proved launching devices to be provided shall be at the discretion of the Administration.
The number of liferafts allocated to each such device carried shall not be more than the
number which, in the opinion of the Administration, can be put into the water fully
loaded with the number of persons they are permitted to carry by that device in not more
than 30 minutes in calm conditions.
Regulation 30
LIGHTING FOR DECKS, LIFEBOATS, LIFERAFTS, &c.
(a) Provision shall be made for an electric or equivalent system of lighting sufficient
for all the requirements of safety in the different parts of a passenger ship, and particu
larly for decks on which the lifeboats and liferafts are stowed. The self-contained emer
gency source of electrical power required by Regulation 25 of Chapter II shall be capable
of supplying where necessary this lighting system and also the lighting required by
sub-paragraphs (a) (ii), (b) (ii) and (b) (iii) of Regulation 19 of this Chapter.
(b) The exit from every main compartment occupied by passengers or crew shall
be continuously lighted by an emergency lamp. The power for these emergency lamps
shall be so arranged that they will be supplied from the emergency source of power referred
to in paragraph (a) of this Regulation in the event of failure of the main generating plant.
Regulation 31
MANNING OF LIFEBOATS AND LIFERAFTS
(a) A deck officer or certificated lifeboatman shall be placed in charge of each life
boat and a second-in-command shall also be nominated. The person in charge shall have
a list of the lifeboat's crew, and shall see that the men placed under his orders are
acquainted with their several duties.
(b) A man capable of working the motor shall be assigned to each motor lifeboat.
(c) A man capable of working the radio and searchlight installations shall be assigned
to each lifeboat carrying this equipment.
(d) A man practised in the handling and operation of liferafts shall be assigned to
each liferaft carried, except where in ships engaged on short international voyages the
Administration is satisfied that this is not practicable.
Regulation 32
CERTIFICATED LIFEBOATMEN
(a) In passenger ships there shall be, for every lifeboat carried in order to comply
with this Chapter, a number of lifeboatmen at least equal to that specified in the following
table :
The Minimum Number
of Certificated Lifeboatmen
Prescribed Complement of Lifeboat shall be
Less than 41 persons .................... 2
From 41 to 61 persons .................... 3
From 62 to 85 persons .................... 4
Above 85 persons ...................... 5
(b) The allocation of the certificated lifeboatmen to each lifeboat remains within the
 discretion of the master.
(p) Certificates of efficiency shall be issued under the authority of the Administra
tion. In order to obtain such a certificate an applicant shall prove that he has been trained
in all the operations connected with launching lifeboats and other life-saving appliances
and in the use of oars and propelling gear ; that he is acquainted with the practical handling
of lifeboats and of other life-saving equipment, and further, that he is capable of under
standing and answering the orders relative to all kinds of life-saving appliances.
Regulation 33
BUOYANT APPARATUS
(a) No type of buoyant apparatus shall be approved unless it satisfies the following
conditions :
(i) It shall be of such size and strength that it can be thrown from the place where it
is stowed into the water without being damaged,
(ii) It shall not exceed 400 Ibs. in weight (or 180 kilogrammes) unless suitable means
to the satisfaction of the Administration are provided to enable it to be launched
without lifting by hand.
(iii) It shall be of approved material and construction,
(iv) It shall be effective and stable when floating either way up.
(v) The air cases or equivalent buoyancy shall be placed as near as possible to the sides
of the apparatus, and such buoyancy shall not be dependent upon inflation.
(vi) It shall be fitted with a painter and have a line securely becketed round the outside.
(b) The number of persons for which buoyant apparatus is certified shall be the
number,
(i) ascertained by dividing the number of punds of iron which it is capable of supporting
in fresh water by 32 (or the number of kilogrammes divided by 14-5), or
(ii) equal to the number of feet (equivalent to 30-5 centimetres) in the perimeter,
whichever is the less.
Regulation 34
NUMBER OF LIFEBUOYS TO BE PROVIDED
The minimum number of lifebuoys with which passenger ships are provided shall
be fixed by the following table :
Length of Ship
Part C
CARGO SHIPS ONLY
Regulation 35
NUMBER AND CAPACITY OF LIFEBOATS AND LIFERAFTS
(a) (i) Every cargo ship, except tankers of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards,
ships employed as whale factory ships, fish processing or canning factory ships, and ships
engaged in the carriage of persons employed in the whaling, fish processing or canning
industries, shall carry lifeboats on each side of the ship of such aggregate capacity as
will accommodate all persons on board, and in addition shall carry liferafts sufficient to
accommodate half that number.
Provided that, in the case of such cargo ships engaged on international voyages
between near neighbouring countries, the Administration, if it is satisfied that the condi
tions of the voyage are such as to render the compulsory carriage of liferafts unreason
able or unnecessary, may to that extent exempt individual ships or classes of ships from
this requirement.
(ii) Every tanker of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall carry lifeboats on
each side of the ship of such aggregate capacity as will accommodate all persons on board.
(b) (i) Every ship employed as a whale factory ship, every ship employed as a fish
processing or canning factory ship and every ship engaged in the carriage of persons em
ployed in the whaling, fish processing or canning industries shall carry-
(1) Lifeboats on each side of such aggregate capacity as will accommodate half the total
number of persons on board.
Provided that the Administration may permit the substitution of lifeboats by
liferafts of the same total capacity so however that there shall never be less than
sufficient lifeboats on each side of the ship to accommodate 37% per cent, of all on
board.
(2) Liferafts of sufficient aggregate capacity to accommodate half the total number of
persons on board.
Provided that, if in ships employed as fish processing or canning factory ships, it
is impracticable to carry lifeboats which comply fully with the requirements of this
Chapter, the Administration may permit instead the carriage of other boats, which
shall however provide not less than the accommodation required by this Regulation
and shall have at least the buoyancy and equipment required by this Chapter for
lifeboats.
(ii) Every ship employed as a whale factory ship, every ship employed as a fish
processing or canning factory ship and every ship engaged in the carriage of persons employed
in the whaling, fish processing or canning industries shall carry two boats-one
on each side-for use in an emergency. These boats shall be of an approved type and
shall be not more than 28 feet (or 8% metres) in length. They may be counted for the
purposes of this paragraph provided that they comply fully with the requirements for
lifeboats of this Chapter and for the purposes of Regulation 8 provided that in addition
they comply with the requirements of Regulation 9, and, where appropriate, Regulation 14.
They shall be kept ready for immediate use while the ship is at sea. In ships in which
the requirements of paragraph (g) of Regulation 36 are met by means of appliances
fitted to the sides of the lifeboats, such appliances shall not be required to be fitted to
the two boats provided to meet the requirements of this Regulation.
(c) Every tanker of 3,000 tons gross tonnage and upwards shall carry not less than
four lifeboats. Two lifeboats shall be carried aft and two amidships, except that in tankers
which have no amidships superstructure all lifeboats shall be carried aft.
Provided that, if in the case of tankers with no amidships superstructure it is imprac
ticable to carry four lifeboats aft, the Administration may permit instead the carriage
aft of one lifeboat on each side of the ship. In such a case :
(i) each such lifeboat shall not exceed 26 feet (or 8 metres) in length ;
(ii) each such lifeboat shall be stowed as far forward as practicable, but at least so far
forward that the after end of the lifeboat is one-and-a-half times the length of the
lifeboat forward of the propeller ;
(iii) each lifeboat shall be stowed as near the sea level as is safe and practicable ; and
'{iv) there shall be carried in addition liferafts sufficient to accommodate at least one-half
of the total number of persons on board.
Regulation 36
DAVITS AND LAUNCHING ARRANGEMENTS
(a) In cargo ships lifeboats and liferafts shall be stowed to the satisfaction of the
Administration.
(b) Every lifeboat shall be attached to a separate set of davits.
(c) Lifeboats, and liferafts for which approved launching devices are required to
be carried, shall not be placed in the bow of the ship. They shall be stowed in such posi
tions as to ensure safe launching, having particular regard to clearance from the propeller
and steeply overhanging portions of the hull aft, with the object of ensuring so far as
practicable that they are capable of being launched down the straight side of the ship.
(d) Davits shall be of approved design and shall be suitably placed to the satis
faction of the Administration.
(e) In tankers of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards, ships employed as whale
factory ships, ships employed as fish processing or canning factory ships and ships engaged
in the carriage of persons employed in the whaling, fish processing or canning industries,
all davits shall be of the gravity type. In other ships, davits shall be as follows :
(i) luffing or gravity type for operating lifeboats weighing not more than 2 1/4 tons
(or 2,300 kilogrammes) in their turning out condition ;
(ii) gravity type for operating lifeboats weighing more than 2 1/4 tons (or 2,300 kilo
grammes) in their turning out condition.
(/) Davits, falls, blocks and all other gear shall be of such strength that the life
boats can be turned out manned by a launching crew and then safely lowered with the
full complement of persons and equipment, with the ship listed to 15 degrees either way,
and with a 10 degrees trim.
(g) Skates or other suitable means shall be provided to facilitate launching the life
boats against a list of 15 degrees.
(h) Means shall be provided for bringing the lifeboats against the ship's side and
there holding them so that persons may be safely embarked.
(i) Lifeboats, together with the emergency boats required by sub-paragraph (b) (ii)
of Regulation 35 of this Chapter, shall be served by wire rope falls, together with winches
of an approved type which, in the case of the emergency boats, shall be capable of quick
recovery of those boats. Exceptionally, the Administration may allow manila rope
falls or falls of another approved material with or without winches (except that the emer
gency boats shall be required to be served by winches which are capable of quick recovery
of those boats) where they are satisfied that manila rope falls or falls of another approved
material are adequate.
(/) At least two lifelines shall be fitted to the davit spans, and the falls and lifelines
shall be long enough to reach the water with the ship at its lightest sea-going draught
and listed to 15 degrees either way. Lower fall blocks shall be fitted with a suitable
ring or long link for attaching to the sling hooks unless an approved type of disengaging
gear is fitted.
(k) Where mechanically powered appliances are fitted for the recovery of the life
boats, efficient hand gear shall also be provided. Where davits are recovered by action
of the falls by power, safety devices shall be fitted which will automatically cut off the
power before the davits come against the stops in order to avoid overstressing the wire
rope falls or davits.
(l) Lifeboats shall have the falls ready for service, and arrangements shall be made
for speedily, but not necessarily simultaneously, detaching the lifeboats from the falls.
The point of attachment of the lifeboats to the falls shall be at such height above the
gunwale as to ensure stability when lowering the lifeboats.
(m) In ships employed as whale factory ships, ships employed as fish processing or
canning factory ships and ships engaged in the carriage of persons employed in the whaling,
fish processing or canning industries, in which there are carried lifeboats and liferafts
in accordance with sub-paragraph (i) (2) of paragraph (b) of Regulation 35 no approved
launching devices need be provided for the liferafts, but there shall be provided such
devices sufficient in number, in the opinion of the Administration, to enable the liferafts
carried in accordance with sub-paragraph (i) (1) of that paragraph to be put into the
water loaded with the number of persons they are permitted to accommodate, in not
more than 30 minutes in calm conditions. Approved launching devices so provided
shall, so far as practicable, be distributed equally on each side of the ship. Every
liferaft carried on ships in which an approved launching device is required to be provided
shall be of a type which is capable of being launched by such a device.
Regulation 37
NUMBER OF LIFEBUOYS TO BE PROVIDED
At least eight lifebuoys of a type which satisfies the requirements of Regulation 21
of this Chapter shall be carried.
Regulation 38
EMERGENCY LIGHTING
The lighting required by sub-paragraphs (a) (ii), (b) (ii) and (b) (iii) of Regula
tion 19 of this Chapter shall be capable of being supplied for at least three hours by the
emergency source of power required by Regulation 26 of Chapter II. In cargo ships of
1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards the Administration shall ensure that the lighting
of the alleyways, stairways and exits is such that the access of all persons on board to the
launching stations and stowage positions of lifeboats and liferafts is not impeded.
CHAPTER IV
RADIOTELEGRAPHY AND RADIOTELEPHONY
Part A
APPLICATION AND DEFINITIONS
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
(a) Unless expressly provided otherwise, this Chapter applies to all ships to which
the present Regulations apply.
(b) This Chapter does not apply to ships to which the present Regulations would
otherwise apply while such ships are being navigated within the Great Lakes of North
America and their connecting and tributary waters as far east as the lower exit of the
St. Lambert Lock at Montreal in the Province of Quebec, Canada.
(c) No provision in this Chapter shall prevent the use by a ship or survival craft in
distress of any means at its disposal to attract attention, make known its position and
obtain help.
Regulation 2
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms shall have the meanings defined
below. All other terms which are used in this Chapter and which are also defined in the
Radio Regulations shall have the same meanings as defined in those Regulations :
(a) "Radio Regulations" means the Radio Regulations annexed to, or regarded as
being annexed to, the most recent International Telecommunication Convention which
may be in force at any time.
(b) "Radiotelegraph auto alarm" means an automatic alarm receiving apparatus
which responds to the radiotelegraph alarm signal and has been approved.
(c) "Radio officer" means a person holding at least a first or second class radio
telegraph operator's certificate complying with the provisions of the Radio Regulations,
who is employed in the radiotelegraph station of a ship which is provided with such
a station in compliance with the provisions of Regulation 3 or Regulation 4 of this Chapter.
(d) "Radiotelephone operator" means a person holding an appropriate certificate
complying with the provisions of the Radio Regulations.
(e) "Existing installation" means :
(i) an installation wholly installed on board a ship before the date on which the present
Convention comes into force, irrespective of the date on which acceptance by the
respective Administration takes effect ; and
(ii) an installation part of which was installed on board a ship before the date of coming
into force of the present Convention and the rest of which consists either of parts
installed in replacement of identical parts, or parts which comply with the require
ments of this Chapter.
(f) "New installation" means any installation which is not an existing installation.
Regulation 3
RADIOTELEGRAPH STATION
Passenger ships irrespective of size and cargo ships of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and
upwards, unless exempted under Regulation 5 of this Chapter, shall be fitted with a radio
telegraph station complying with the provisions of Regulations 8 and 9 of this Chapter.
Regulation 4
RADIOTELEPHONE STATION
Cargo ships of 300 tons gross tonnage and upwards but less than 1,600 tons gross
tonnage, unless fitted with a radiotelegraph station complying with the provisions of
Regulations 8 and 9 of this Chapter shall, provided they are not exempted under Regu
lation 5 of this Chapter, be fitted with a radiotelephone station complying with the provi
sions of Regulations 14 and 15 of this Chapter.
Regulation 5
EXEMPTIONS FROM REGULATIONS 3 AND 4
(a) The Contracting Governments consider it highly desirable not to deviate from
the application of Regulations 3 and 4 of this Chapter ; nevertheless the Administration
may grant to individual passenger or cargo ships exemptions of a partial and/or conditional
nature, or complete exemption from the requirements of Regulation 3 or Regulation 4
of this Chapter.
(b) The exemptions permitted under paragraph (a) of this Regulation shall be granted
only to a ship engaged on a voyage where the maximum distance of the ship from the
shore, the length of the voyage, the absence of general navigational hazards, and other
conditions affecting safety are such as to render the full application of Regulation 3 or
Regulation 4 of this Chapter unreasonable or unnecessary. When deciding whether or
not to grant exemptions to individual ships, Administrations shall have regard to the
effect that exemptions may have upon the general efficiency of the distress service for the
safety of all ships. Administrations should bear in mind the desirability of requiring
ships which are exempted from the requirement of Regulation 3 of this Chapter to be
fitted with a radiotelephone station which complies with the provisions of Regulations
14 and 15 of this Chapter as a condition of exemption.
(c) Each Administration shall submit to the Organization as soon as possible after
the first of January in each year a report showing all exemptions granted under paragraphs
(a) and (b) of this Regulation during the previous calendar year and giving the reasons
for granting such exemptions.
Part B
WATCHES
Regulation 6
WATCHES-RADIOTELEGRAPH
(a) Each ship which in accordance with Regulation 3 or Regulation 4 of this Chapter
is fitted with a radiotelegraph station shall, while at sea, carry at least one radio officer
and, if not fitted with a radiotelegraph auto alarm, shall, subject to the provisions of
paragraph (d) of this Regulation, listen continuously on the radiotelegraph distress fre
quency by means of a radio officer using headphones or a loud-speaker.
(b) Each passenger ship which in accordance with Regulation 3 of this Chapter is
fitted with a radiotelegraph station, if fitted with a radiotelegraph auto alarm, shall,
subject to the provisions of paragraph (d) of this Regulation, and while at sea, listen on
the radiotelegraph distress frequency by means of a radio officer using headphones or
a loud-speaker, as follows :
(i) if carrying or certificated to carry 250 passengers or less, at least 8 hours listening
a day in the aggregate ;
(ii) if carrying or certificated to carry more than 250 passengers and engaged on a
voyage exceeding 16 hours duration between two consecutive ports, at least 16 hours
listening a day in the aggregate. In this case the ship shall carry at least two radio
officers ;
(iii) if carrying or certificated to carry more than 250 passengers and engaged on a voyage
of less than 16 hours duration between two consecutive ports, at least 8 hours
listening a day in the aggregate.
(c) (i) Each cargo ship which in accordance with Regulation 3 of this Chapter is
fitted with a radiotelegraph station, if fitted with a radiotelegraph auto alarm, shall,
subject to the provisions of paragraph (d) of this Regulation, and while at sea, listen on
the radiotelegraph distress frequency by means of a radio officer using headphones or
a loud-speaker, for at least 8 hours a day in the aggregate. However, Administrations
may on cargo ships of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards but less than 3,500 tons gross
tonnage permit the hours of listening to be limited to not less than 2 hours a day in the
aggregate for a period of three years from the date of coming into force of the present
Convention.
(ii) Each cargo ship of 300 tons gross tonnage and upwards but less than 1,600 tons
gross tonnage which is fitted with a radiotelegraph station as a consequence of Regulation
4 of this Chapter, if fitted with a radiotelegraph auto alarm shall, subject to the provisions
of paragraph (d) of this Regulation, and while at sea, listen on the radiotelegraph distress
frequency by means of a radio officer using headphones or a loud-speaker, during such
periods as may be determined by the Administration. Administrations shall, however,
have regard to the desirability of requiring, whenever practicable, a listening watch of
at least 8 hours a day in the aggregate.
(d) During the period when a radio officer is required by this Regulation to listen
on the radiotelegraph distress frequency the radio officer may discontinue such listening
during the time when he is handling traffic on other frequencies, or performing other
essential radio duties, but only if it is impracticable to listen by split headphones or loud
speaker. The listening watch shall always be maintained by a radio officer using head
phones or loud-speaker during the silence periods provided for by the Radio Regulations.
(e) In all ships fitted with a radiotelegraph auto alarm this radiotelegraph auto
alarm shall, while the ship is at sea, be in operation whenever there is no listening being
kept under paragraphs (b), (c) or (d) of this Regulation and, whenever practicable, during
direction-finding operations.
(/) The listening periods provided for by this Regulation, including those which artdetermined
by the Administration, should be maintained preferably during periods pro
scribed for the radiotelegraph service by the Radio Regulations.
Regulation 7
WATCHES-RADIOTELEPHONE
(a) Each ship which is fitted with a radiotelephone station in accordance with Regu
lation 4 of this Chapter shall, for safety purposes, carry at least one radiotelephone operator
(who may be the master, an officer or a member of the crew holding only a certificate
for radiotelephony) and shall, subject to the provisions of paragraph (6) of this Regulation,
while at sea, maintain continuous listening watch on the radiotelephone distress frequency,
in the place on board from which the ship is usually navigated, using a loud-speaker or
other appropriate means.
(6) Listening may be discontinued
(i) when the receiving equipment is being used for traffic on another frequency and a
second receiver is not available ; or
(ii) when, in the opinion of the master, conditions are such that maintenance of the
listening watch would interfere with the safe navigation of the ship.
Listening watch should, however, as far as possible be maintained during the silence
periods provided for in the Radio Regulations.
Part C
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
Regulation 8
RADIOTELEGRAPH STATIONS
(a) The radiotelegraph station shall be so located that no harmful interference from
extraneous mechanical or other noise will be caused to the proper reception of radio signals.
The station shall be placed as high in the ship as is practicable, so that the greatest possible
degree of safety may be secured.
(b) The radiotelegraph operating room shall be of sufficient size and of adequate
ventilation to enable the main and reserve radiotelegraph installations to be operated
efficiently, and shall not be used for any purpose which will interfere with the operation
of the radiotelegraph station.
(c) The sleeping accommodation of at least one radio officer shall be situated as
near as practicable to the radiotelegraph operating room. In new ships, this sleeping
accommodation shall not be within the radiotelegraph operating room.
(d) There shall be provided between the radiotelegraph operating room and the bridge
and one other place, if any, from which the ship is navigated, an efficient two-way system
for calling and voice communication which shall be independent of the main communi
cation system on the ship.
(e) The radiotelegraph installation shall be installed in such a position that it will
be protected against the harmful effects of water or extremes of temperature. It shall
be readily accessible both for immediate use in case of distress and for repair.
(/) A reliable clock with a dial not less than five inches (or 12-5 centimetres) in
diameter and a concentric seconds hand, the face of which is marked to indicate the silence
periods prescribed for the radiotelegraph service by the Radio Regulations, shall be pro
vided. It shall be securely mounted in the radiotelegraph operating room in such aposition
that the entire dial can be easily and accurately observed by the radio officer from the
radiotelegraph operating position and from the position for testing the radiotelegraph
auto alarm receiver.
(g) A reliable emergency light shall be provided in the radiotelegraph operating room,
consisting of an electric lamp permanently arranged so as to provide satisfactory illumi
nation of the operating controls of the main and reserve radiotelegraph installations and
of the clock required by paragraph (/) of this Regulation. In new installations, this lamp
shall, if supplied from the reserve source of energy required by sub-paragraph (iii) of
paragraph (a) of Regulation 9 of this Chapter, be controlled by two-way switches placed
near the main entrance to the radiotelegraph operating room and at the radiotelegraph
operating position, unless the layout of the radiotelegraph operating room does not warrant
it. These switches shall be clearly labelled to indicate their purpose.
(h) Either an electric inspection lamp, operated from the reserve source of energy
required by sub-paragraph (iii) of paragraph (a) of Regulation 9 of this Chapter and pro
vided with a flexible lead of adequate length, or a flashlight shall be provided and kept
in the radiotelegraph operating room.
(i) The radiotelegraph station shall be provided with such spare parts, tools and
testing equipment as will enable the radiotelegraph installation to be maintained in efficient
working condition while at sea. The testing equipment shall include an instrument or
instruments for measuring A. C. volts, D. C. volts and ohms.
(j) If a separate emergency radiotelegraph operating room is provided the require
ments of paragraphs (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) of this Regulation shall apply to it.
Regulation 9
RADIOTELEGRAPH INSTALLATIONS
(a) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Regulation-
(i) The radiotelegraph station shall include a main installation and a reserve installation,
electrically separate and electrically independent of each other.
(ii) The main installation shall include a main transmitter, main receiver and main
source of energy.
(iii) The reserve installation shall include a reserve transmitter, reserve receiver and
reserve source of energy.
(iv) A main and a reserve aerial shall be provided and installed, provided that the
Administration may except any ship from the provision of a reserve aerial if it
is satisfied that the fitting of such an aerial is impracticable or unreasonable, but
in such case a suitable spare aerial completely assembled for immediate installation
shall be carried. In addition, sufficient aerial wire and insulators shall in all cases
be provided to enable a suitable aerial to be erected.
The main aerial, of suspended between supports liable to whipping, shall be suitably
protected against breakage.
(b) In installations on cargo ships (except those on cargo ships of 1.600 tons gross
tonnage and upwards installed on or after 19 November, 1952), if the main transmitter
complies with all the requirements for the reserve transmitter, the latter is not obligatory.
(c) (i) The main and reserve transmitters shall be capable of being quickly connected
with and tuned to the main aerial, and the reserve aerial if one is fitted.
(ii) The main and reserve receivers shall be capable of being quickly connected with
any aerial with which they are required to be used.
(d) All parts of the reserve installation shall be placed as high in the ship as is practi
cable, so that the greatest possible degree of safety may be secured.
(e) The main and reserve transmitters shall be capable of transmitting on the radio
telegraph distress frequency using a class of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations
for that frequency. In addition, the main transmitter shall be capable of transmitting
on at least two of the frequencies, and of using a class of emission, which, in accordance
with the Radio Regulations, may be used for the transmission of safety messages in the
bands between 405 kc/s and 535 kc/s. The reserve transmitter may consist of a ship's
emergency transmitter, as defined in, and limited in use by, the Radio Regulations.
(f) The main and reserve transmitters shall, if modulated emission is prescribed by
the Radio Regulations, have a depth of modulation of not less than 70 per cent, and a
note frequency between 450 and 1,350 cycles per second.
(g) The main and reserve transmitters shall, when connected to the main aerial,
have a minimum normal range as specified below, that is to say, they must be capable
of transmitting clearly perceptible signals from ship to ship by day and under normal
conditions and circumstances over the specified ranges* (Clearly perceptible signals will
normally be received if the R. M. S. value of the field strength at the receiver is at least
50 microvolts per metre.)
and such other communications relating to safety of navigation as may be considered
necessary by the Administration.
(iii) For a period not exceeding five years from the date of coming into force of the
present Convention, the radiotelegraph auto alarm receiver may be used as the reserve
receiver if capable of effectively producing signals in headphones or a loud-speaker with
which it is connected for this purpose. When so used, it shall be connected to the reserve
source of energy.
(i) The main receiver shall have sufficient sensitivity to produce signals in headphones
or by means of a loud-speaker when the receiver input is as low as 50 microvolts. The
reserve receiver shall, except in cases where a radiotelegraph auto alarm receiver is used
for this purpose, have sufficient sensitivity to produce such signals when the receiver input
is as low as 100 microvolts.
(/) There shall be available at all times, while the ship is at sea, a supply of electrical
energy sufficient to operate the main installation over the normal range required by para
graph (g) of this Regulation as well as for the purpose of charging any batteries forming
part of the radiotelegraph station. The voltage of the supply for the main installation
shall, in the case of new ships, be maintained within +/-10 per cent, of the rated voltage.
In the case of existing ships, it shall be maintained as near the rated voltage as possible
and, if practicable, within +/- 10 per cent.
(k) The reserve installation shall be provided with a source of energy independent of
the propelling power of the ship and of the ship's electrical system. The Administration
may delay the application of the requirement for a reserve source of energy for a period
not exceeding three years from the date of coming into force of the present Convention,
in the case of existing installations on those cargo ships of 500 tons gross tonnage and
upwards but less than 1,600 tons gross tonnage which were excepted, prior to the date
of the coming into force of the present Convention, from the requirement to be provided
with a reserve source of energy.
(I) The reserve source of energy shall preferably consist of accumulator batteries,
which may be charged from the ship's electrical system, and shall under all circumstances
be capable of being put into operation rapidly and of operating the reserve transmitter
and receiver for at least six hours continuously under normal working conditions besides
any of the additional loads mentioned in paragraphs (m) and (<<) of this Regulation.
(m) The reserve source of energy shall be used to supply the reserve installation and
the automatic alarm signal keying device specified in paragraph (r) of this Regulation
if it is electrically operated.
The reserve source of energy may also be used to supply :
(i) the radiotelegraph auto alarm ;
(ii) the emergency light specified in paragraph (g) of Regulation 8 of this Chapter ;
iii) the direction-finder ;
(iv) any device, prescribed by the Radio Regulations, to permit changeover from trans
mission to reception and vice versa.
Subject to the provisions of paragraph (<<) of this Regulation, the reserve source of
energy shall not be used other than for the purposes specified in this paragraph.
(n) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (m) of this Regulation, the Adminis
tration may authorise the use in cargo ships of the reserve source of energy for a small
number of low-power emergency circuits which are wholly confined to the upper part
of the ship, such as emergency lighting on the boat deck, on condition that these can be
readily disconnected if necessary, and that the source of energy is of sufficient capacity
to carry the additional load or loads.
(o) The reserve source of energy and its switchboard shall be as high as practicable
in the ship and readily accessible to the radio officer. The switchboard shall, wherever
possible, be situated in a radio room ; if it is not, it shall be capable of being illuminated
(p) While the ship is at sea, accumulator batteries, whether forming part of the main
installation or reserve installation, shall be brought up to the normal fully-charged condi
tion daily.
(q) All steps shall be taken to eliminate so far as is possible the causes of, and to
suppress, radio interference from electrical and other apparatus on board. If necessary,
steps shall be taken to ensure that the aerials attached to broadcast receivers do not cause
interference to the efficient or correct working of the radiotelegraph installation. Partic
ular attention shall be paid to this requirement in the design of new ships.
(r) In addition to a means for manually transmitting the radiotelegraph alarm signal,
an automatic radiotelegraph alarm signal keying device shall be provided, capable of
keying the main and the reserve transmitters so as to transmit the radiotelegraph alarm
signal. The device shall be capable of being taken out of operation at any time in order
to permit immediate manual operation of the transmitter. If electrically operated, this
keying device shall be capable of operation from the reserve source of energy.
(s) At sea, the reserve transmitter, if not used for communications, shall be tested
daily using a suitable artificial aerial, and at least once during each voyage using the reserve
aerial if installed. The reserve source of energy shall also be tested daily.
(/) All equipments forming part of the radiotelegraph installation shall be reliable,
and shall be so constructed that they are readily accessible for maintenance purposep.
(w) Notwithstanding the provision of Regulation 4 of this Chapter, the Administration
may, in the case of cargo ships below 1,600 tons gross tonnage, relax the full requirements
of Regulation 8 of this Chapter and the present Regulation, provided that the standard
of the radiotelegraph station shall in no case fall below the equivalent of that prescribed
under Regulation 14 and Regulation 15 this Chapter for radiotelephone stations, so far
as applicable. In particular, in the case of cargo ships of 300 tons gross tonnage and
upwards but less than 500 tons gross tonnage, the Administration need not require :
(i) a reserve receiver ;
(ii) a reserve source of energy in existing installations ;
(iii) protection of the main aerial against breakage by whipping ;
(iv) the means of communication between the radiotelegraph station and the bridge to
be independent of the main communication system ;
(v) the range of the transmitter to be greater than 75 miles.
Regulation 10
RADIOTELEGRAPH AUTO ALARMS
(a) Any radiotelegraph auto alarm installed after the date of coming into force of
the present Convention shall comply with the following minimum requirements :
(i) In the absence of interference of any kind it shall be capable of being actuated,
without manual adjustment, by any radiotelegraph alarm signal transmitted on
the radiotelegraph distress frequency by any coast station, ship's emergency or
survival craft transmitter operating in accordance with the Radio Regulations,
provided that the strength of the signal at the receiver input is greater than 100
microvolts and less than 1 volt.
(ii) In the absence of interference of any kind, it shall be actuated by either three or
four consecutive dashes when the dashes vary in length from 3-5 to as near 6 seconds
as possible and the spaces vary in length between 1-5 seconds and the lowest
practicable value, preferably not greater than 10 milliseconds.
(iii) It shall not be actuated by atmospherics or by any signal other than the radio
telegraph alarm signal, provided that the received signals do not in fact constitute
a signal falling within the tolerance limits indicated in (ii).
(iv) The selectivity of the radiotelegraph auto alarm shall be such as to provide a
practically uniform sensitivity over a band extending not less than 4 kc/s and not
more than 8 kc/s on each side of the radiotelegraph distress frequency and to provide
outside this band a sensitivity which decreases as rapidly as possible in conformity
which the best engineering practice.
(v) If practicable, the radiotelegraph auto alarm shall, in the presence of atmospherics
or interfering signals, automatically adjust itself so that within a reasonably short
time it approaches the condition in which it can most readily distinguish the radio
telegraph alarm signal.
(vi) When actuated by a radiotelegraph alarm signal, or in the event of failure of the
apparatus, the radiotelegraph auto alarm shall cause a continuous audible warning
to be given in the radiotelegraph operating room, in the radio officer's sleeping
accommodation and on the bridge. If practicable, warning shall also be given in
the case of failure of any part of the whole alarm receiving system. Only one
switch for stopping the warning shall be provided and this shall be situated in the
radiotelegraph operating room.
(vii) For the purpose of regularly testing the radiotelegraph auto alarm, the apparatus
shall include a generator pre-tuned to the radiotelegraph distress frequency and a
keying device by means of which a radiotelegraph alarm signal of the minimum
strength indicated in (i) is produced. A means shall also be provided for attaching
headphones for the purpose of listening to signals received on the radiotelegraph
auto alarm.
(viii) The radiotelegraph auto alarm shall be capable of withstanding vibration, humidity
and changes of temperature, equivalent to severe conditions experienced on board
ships at sea, and shall continue to operate under such conditions.
(b) Before a new type of radiotelegraph auto alarm is approved, the Administration
concerned shall be satisfied, by practical tests made under operating conditions equivalent
to those obtaining in practice, that the apparatus complies with paragraph (a) of this
Regulation.
(c) In ships fitted with a radiotelegraph auto alarm, its efficiency shall be tested by
a radio officer at least once every 24 hours while at sea. If it is not in working order,
the radio officer shall report that fact to the master or officer on watch on the bridge.
(d) A radio officer shall periodically check the proper functioning of the radiotele
graph auto alarm receiver, with its normal aerial connected, by listening to signals and
by comparing them with similar signals received on the radiotelegraph distress frequency
on the main installation.
(e) As far as practicable, the radiotelegraph auto alarm, when connected to an aerial,
shall not affect the accuracy of the direction-finder.
(f) Radiotelegraph auto alarms which do not comply with the requirements of
paragraph (a) of this Regulation shall be replaced by radiotelegraph auto alarms which
do so comply within four years from the date of coming into force of the present Con
vention.
Regulation 11
DIRECTION-FINDERS
(a) The direction-finding apparatus required by Regulation 12 of Chapter V shall
be efficient and capable of receiving signals with the minimum of receiver noise and of
taking bearings from which the true bearing and direction may be determined.
(b) It shall be capable of receiving signals on the radiotelegraph frequencies assigned
by the Radio Regulations for the purposes of distress and direction-finding and for
maritime radio beacons.
(c) In the absence of interference the direction-finding apparatus shall have a sensi
tivity sufficient to permit accurate bearings being taken on a signal having a field strength
as low as 50 microvolts per metre.
(d) As far as is practicable, the direction-finding apparatus shall be so located that
as little interference as possible from mechanical or other noise will be caused to the
efficient determination of bearings.
(e) As far as is practicable, the direction-finding aerial system shall be erected in
such a manner that the efficient determination of bearings will be hindered as little as
possible by the close proximity of other aerials, derricks, wire halyards or other large
metal objects.
(/) An efficient two-way means of calling and voice communication shall be provided
between the direction-finder and the bridge.
(g) All direction-finders shall be calibrated to the satisfaction of the Administration
on first installation. The calibration shall be verified by check bearings or by a further
calibration whenever any changes are made in the position of any aerials or of any struc
tures on deck which might aSect appreciably the accuracy of the direction-finder. The
calibration particulars shall be checked at yearly intervals, or as near thereto as possible.
A record shall be kept of the calibrations and of any checks made of their accuracy.
Regulation 12
RADIOTELEGRAPH INSTALLATION FOR FITTING IN MOTOR LIFEBOATS
(a) The radiotelegraph installation required by Regulation 14 of Chapter III shall
include a transmitter, a receiver and a source of energy. It shall be so designed that it
can be used in an emergency by an unskilled person.
(b) The transmitter shall be capable of transmitting on the radiotelegraph distress
frequency using a class of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations for that frequency.
The transmitter shall also be capable of transmitting on the frequency, and of using a
class of emission, assigned by the Radio Regulations for use by survival craft in the bands
between 4,000 kc/s and 27,500 kc/s.
(c) The transmitter shall, if modulated emission is prescribed by the Radio Regu
lations, have a depth of modulation of not less than 70 per cent, and a note frequency
between 450 and 1,350 cycles per second.
(d) In addition to a key for manual transmissions, the transmitter shall be fitted
with an automatic keying device for the transmission of the radiotelegraph alarm and
distress signals.
(e) On the radiotelegraph distress frequency the transmitter shall have a minimum
normal range (as specified in paragraph (g) of Regulation 9 of this Chapter) of 25 miles
using the fixed aerial.
(/) The receiver shall be capable of receiving the radiotelegraph distress frequency
and the classes of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations for that frequency.
(g) The source of energy shall consist of an accumulator battery with sufficient
capacity to supply the transmitter for four hours continuously under normal working
conditions. If the battery is of a type that requires charging, means shall be available
for charging it from the ship's power supply. In addition there shall be a means for
charging it after the lifeboat has been launched.
(h) When the power for the radiotelegraph installation and the searchlight required
by Regulation 14 of Chapter III are drawn from the same battery, it shall have sufficient
capacity to provide for the additional load of the searchlight.
(t) A fixed-type aerial shall be provided together with means for supporting it at the
maximum practicable height. In addition an aerial supported by a kite or balloon shall
be provided if practicable.
(7) At sea a radio officer shall at weekly intervals test the transmitter using a suitable
artificial aerial, and shall bring the battery up to full charge if it is of a type which requires
charging.
Regulation 13
PORTABLE RADIO APPARATUS FOR SURVIVAL CRAFT
(a) The apparatus required by Regulation 13 of Chapter III shall include a trans
mitter, a receiver, an aerial and a source of energy. It shall be so designed that it can
be used in an emergency by an unskilled person.
(b) The apparatus shall be readily portable, watertight, capable of floating in sea
water and capable of being dropped into the sea without damage. New equipment shall
be as light-weight and compact as practicable and shall preferably be capable of use in
both lifeboats and liferafts.
(c) The transmitter shall be capable of transmitting on the radiotelegraph distress
frequency using a class of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations for the frequency,
and, in the bands between 4,000 kc/s and 27,500 kc/s, of transmitting on that radiotele
graph frequency, and of using a class of emission, assigned by the Radio Regulations for
survival craft. However, the Administration may permit the transmitter to be capable
of transmitting on the radiotelephone distress frequency, and of using the class of emission,
assigned by the Radio Regulations for that frequency, as an alternative or in addition to
transmission on the radiotelegraph frequency assigned by the Radio Regulations for sur
vival craft in the bands between 4,000 kc/s and 27,500 kc/s.
(d) The transmitter shall, if modulated emission is prescribed by the Radio Regula
tions, have a depth of modulation of not less than 70 per cent, and in the case of radio
telegraph emission have a note frequency between 450 and 1,350 cycles per second.
(e) In addition to a key for manual transmissions, the transmitter shall be fitted
with an automatic keying device for the transmission of the radiotelegraph alarm and
distress signals. If the transmitter is capable of transmitting on the radiotelephone
distress frequency, it shall be fitted with an automatic device, complying with the require
ments of paragraph (e) of Regulation 15 of this Chapter, for transmitting the radiotele
phone alarm signal.
(/) The receiver shall be capable of receiving the radiotelegraph distress frequency
and the classes of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations for that frequency. If
the transmitter is capable of transmitting on the radiotelephone distress frequency the
receiver shall also be capable of receiving that frequency and the class of emission assigned
by the Radio Regulations for that frequency.
(g) The aerial shall be either self-supporting or capable of being supported by the
mast of a lifeboat at the maximum practicable height. In addition it is desirable that
an aerial supported by a kite or balloon shall be provided if practicable.
(h) The transmitter shall supply an adequate radio frequency power to the aerial
required by paragraph (a) of this Regulation and shall preferably derive its supply from
a hand generator. If operated from a battery, the battery shall comply with conditions
laid down by the Administration to ensure that it is of a durable type and is of adequate
capacity.
(i) At sea a radio officer or a radiotelephone operator, as appropriate, shall at weekly
intervals test the transmitter, using a suitable artificial aerial, and shall bring the battery
up to full charge if it is of a type which requires charging.
(j) For the purpose of this Regulation, new equipment means equipment supplied
to a ship after the date of coming into force of the present Convention.
Regulation 14
RADIOTELEPHONE STATIONS
(a) The radiotelephone station shall be in the upper part of the ship and so located
that it is sheltered to the greatest possible extent from noise which might impair the
correct reception of messages and signals.
(b) There shall be efficient communication between the radiotelephone station and
the bridge.
(c) A reliable clock shall be securely mounted in such a position that the entire dial
can be easily observed from the radiotelephone operating position.
(d) A reliable emergency light shall be provided, independent of the system which
supplies the normal lighting of the radiotelephone installation, and permanently arranged
so as to be capable of providing adequate illumination of the operating controls of the
radiotelephone installation, of the clock required by paragraph (c) of this Regulation and
of the card of instructions required by paragraph (/).
(e) Where a source of energy consists of a battery or batteries, the radiotelephone
station shall be provided with a means of assessing the charge condition.
(/) A card of instructions giving a clear summary of the radiotelephone distress
procedure shall be displayed in full view of the radiotelephone operating position.
Regulation 15
RADIOTELEPHONE INSTALLATIONS
(a) The radiotelephone installation shall include a transmitter, a receiver and a source
of energy.
(b) The transmitter shall be capable of transmitting on the radiotelephone distress
frequency and on at least one other frequency in the bands between 1,605 kc/s and
2,850 kc/s, using the class of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations for these fre
quencies. In normal operation the transmitter shall have a depth of modulation of at
least 70 per cent, at peak intensity.
(c) (i) In the case of cargo ships of 500 tons gross tonnage and upwards but less than
1,600 tons gross tonnage the transmitter shall have a minimum normal range of 150 miles,
i.e., it shall be capable of transmitting clearly perceptible signals from ship to ship by
day and under normal conditions and circumstances over this range. (Clearly perceptible
signals will normally be received if the R.M.S. value of the field strength produced at the
receiver by the unmodulated carrier is at least 25 microvolts per metre) :
(ii) In the case of cargo ships of 300 tons gross tonnage and upwards but less than
500 tons gross tonnage-
for existing installations the transmitter shall have a minimum normal range of
at least 75 miles ;
for new installations the transmitter shall produce a power in the aerial of at
least 15 watts (unmodulated carrier).
(d) The transmitter shall be fitted with a device for generating the radiotelephone
alarm signal by automatic means. The device shall be capable of being taken out of
operation at any time in order to permit the immediate transmission of a distress message.
The Administration may delay the application of the requirement for the device in the
case of existing installations for a period not exceeding three years from the date of coming
into force of the present Convention.
(e) The device required by paragraph (d) of this Regulation shall comply with the
following requirements :
(i) The tolerance of the frequency of each tone shall be +/-1-5 per cent. ;
(ii) The tolerance on the duration of each tone shall be +/- 50 milliseconds ;
(iii) The interval between successive tones shall not exceed 50 milliseconds ;
(iv) The ratio of the amplitude of the stronger tone to that of the weaker shall be within
the range 1 to 1-2.
(/) The receiver required by paragraph (a) of this Regulation shall be capable of
receiving the radiotelephone distress frequency and at least one other freuqency available
for maritime radiotelephone stations in the bands between 1,605 kc/s and 2,850 kc/s,
using the class of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations for these frequencies. In
addition the receiver shall permit the reception of such other frequencies, using the class
of emission assigned by the Radio Regulations, as are used for the transmission by radiotelephony
of meteorological messages and such other communications relating to the
safety of navigation as may be considered necessary by the Administration. The receiver
shall have sufficient sensitivity to produce signals by means of a loudspeaker when the
receiver input is as low as 50 microvolts.
(g) The receiver used for maintaining watch on the radiotelephone distress frequency
shall be preset to this frequency, or so arranged that setting to the frequency may be
carried out in a rapid an precise manner and that, when set to this frequency, the receiver
shall not easily be detuned accidentally. The Administration may delay the application
of the requirements of this paragraph in the case of existing installations for a period not
exceeding three years from the date of coming into force of the present Convention.
(h) To permit rapid change-over from transmission to reception when manual switch
ing is used, the control for the switching device shall, where practicable, be located on
the microphone or the telephone handset.
(i) While the ship is at sea, there shall be available at all times a main source of
energy sufficient to operate the installation over the normal range required by paragraph
(c) of this Regulation. If batteries are provided they shall under all circumstances have
sufficient capacity to operate the transmitter and receiver for at least six hours con
tinuously under normal working conditions.* In installations in cargo ships of 500 tons
gross tonnage and upwards but less than 1,600 tons gross tonnage made on or after
19 November 1952, a reserve source of energy shall be provided in the upper part of the
ship unless the main source of energy is so situated.
(j) The reserve source of energy, if provided, may be used only to supply
(i) the radiotelephone installation ;
(ii) the emergency light required by paragraph (d) of Regulation 14 of this Chapter ; and
(iii) the device required by paragraph (d) of this Regulation, for generating the radio
telephone alarm signal.
(k) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (j) of this Regulation, the Adminis
tration may authorise the use of the reserve source of energy, if provided, for a direction
finder, if fitted, and for a number of low-power emergency circuits which are wholly
confined to the upper part of the ship, such as emergency lighting on the boat deck, on
condition that the additional loads can be readily disconnected, and that the source of
energy is of sufficient capacity to carry them.
(l) While at sea, any battery provided shall be kept charged so as to meet the require
ments of paragraph (i) of this Regulation.
(m) An aerial shall be provided and installed and, if suspended between supports
liable to whipping, shall in the case of ships of 500 tons gross tonnage and upwards but
less than 1,600 tons gross tonnage be protected against breakage. In addition, there
shall be a spare aerial completely assembled for immediate replacement or, where this is
not practicable, sufficient aerial wire and insulators to enable a spare aerial to be erected.
The necessary tools to erect an aerial shall also be provided.
Part D
RADIO LOGS
Regulation 16
RADIO LOGS
(a) The radio log (diary of the radio service) required by the Radio Regulations for
a ship which is fitted with a radiotelegraph station in accordance with Regulation 3 or
Regulation 4 of this Chapter shall be kept in the radiotelegraph operating room during
the voyage. Every radio officer shall enter in the log his name, the times at which he
goes on and off watch, and all incidents connected with the radio service which occur
during his watch which may appear to be of importance to safety of life at sea. In
addition, there shall be entered in the log :
(i) the entries required by the Radio Regulations ;
(ii) details of the maintenance, including a record of the charging, of the batteries, in
such form as may be prescribed by the Administration ;
(iii) a daily statement that the requirement of paragraph (p) of Regulation 9 of this
Chapter has been fulfilled ;
(iv) details of the tests of the reserve transmitter and reserve source of energy made
under paragraph (s) of Regulation 9 of this Chapter ;
(v) in ships fitted with a radiotelegraph auto alarm details of tests made under para
graph (c) of Regulation 10 of this Chapter ;
(vi) details of the maintenance of the batteries, including a record of the charging (if
applicable) required by paragraph (;') of Regulation 12 of this Chapter, and details
of the tests required by that paragraph in respect of the transmitters fitted in motor
lifeboats ;
(vii) details of the maintenance of the batteries, including a record of the charging (if
applicable) required by paragraph (i) of Regulation 13 of this Chapter, and details
of the tests required by that paragraph in respect of portable radio apparatus for
survival craft.
(b) The radio log (diary of the radio service) required by the Radio Regulations for
a ship which is fitted with a radiotelephone station in accordance with Regulation 4 of
this Chapter shall be kept at the place where listening watch is maintained. Every
qualified operator, and every master, officer or crew member carrying out a listening
watch in accordance with Regulation 7 of this Chapter, shall enter in the log, with his
name, the details of all incidents connected with the radio service which occur during his
watch which may appear to be of importance to safety of life at sea. In addition, there
shall be entered in the log :
(i) the details required by the Radio Regulations ;
(ii) the time at which listening watch begins when the ship leaves port, and the time at
which it ends when the ship reaches port ;
(iii) the time at which listening watch is for any reason discontinued, together with the
reason, and the time at which listening watch is resumed ;
(iv) details of the maintenance of the batteries (if provided), including a record of the
charging required by paragraph (/) of Regulation 15 of this Chapter ;
(v) details of the maintenance of the batteries, including a record of the charging (if
applicable) required by paragraph (i) of Regulation 13 of this Chapter, and details
of the tests required by that paragraph in respect of portable radio apparatus
for survival craft.
(c) Radio logs shall be available for inspection by the officers authorised by the
Administration to make such inspection.
CHAPTER V
SAFETY OF NAVIGATION
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
This Chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, applies to all
ships on all voyages, except ships of war and ships solely navigating the Great Lakes of
North America and their connecting and tributary waters as far east as the lower exit of
the St. Lambert Lock at Montreal in the Province of Quebec, Canada.
Regulation 2
DANGER MESSAGES
(a) The master of every ship which meets with dangerous ice, a dangerous derelict,
or any other direct danger to navigation, or a tropical storm, or encounters sub-freezing
air temperatures associated with gale force winds causing severe ice accretion on super
structures, or winds of force 10 or above on the Beaufort scale for which no storm warning
has been received, is bound to communicate the information by all the means at his dis
posal to ships in the vicinity, and also to the competent authorities at the first point on the
coast with which he can communicate. The form in which the information is sent is
not obligatory. It may be transmitted either in plain language (preferably English)
or by means of the International Code of Signals. It should be broadcast to all ships
in the vicinity and sent to the first point on the coast to which communication can be
made, with a request that it be transmitted to the appropriate authorities.
(6) Each Contracting Government will take all steps necessary to ensure that when
intelligence of any of the dangers specified in paragraph (a) is received, it will be promptly
brought to the knowledge of those concerned and communicated to other interested
Governments.
(c) The transmission of messages respecting the dangers specified is free of cost to
the ships concerned.
(d) All radio messages issued under paragraph (a) of this Regulation shall be pre
ceded by the Safety Signal, using the procedure as prescribed by the Radio Regulations
as defined in Regulation 2 of Chapter IV.
Regulation 3
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN DANGER MESSAGES
The following information is required in danger messages :
(a) Ice, Derelicts and other Direct Dangers to Navigation.
(i) The kind of ice, derelict or danger observed ;
(ii) the position of the ice, derelict or danger when last observed ;
(iii) the time and date (Greenwich Mean Time) when danger last observed.
(b) Tropical Storms (Hurricanes in the West Indies, Typhoons in the China Sea,
Cyclones in Indian waters, and storms of a similar nature in other regions).
(i) A statement that a tropical storm has been encountered. This obligation should
be interpreted in a broad spirit, and information transmitted whenever the master has
good reason to believe that a tropical storm is developing or exists in his neighbourhood.
(ii) Time, date (Greenwich Mean Time) and position of ship when the observation
was taken.
(iii) As much of the following information as is practicable should be included in
the message :
-barometric pressure, preferably corrected (stating millibars, inches, or millimetres,
and whether corrected or uncorrected) ;
-barometric tendency (the change in barometric pressure during the past three
hours) ;
-true wind direction ;
-wind force (Beaufort scale) ;
-state of the sea (smooth, moderate, rough, high) ;
-swell (slight, moderate, heavy) and the true direction from which it comes. Period
or length of swell (short, average, long) would also be of value ;
-true course and speed of ship.
(c) Subsequent Observations. When a master has reported a tropical or other
dangerous storm, it is desirable, but not obligatory, that further observations be made
and transmitted hourly, if practicable, but in any case at intervals of not more than
three hours, so long as the ship remains under the influence of the storm.
(d) Winds of force 10 or above on the Beaufort scale for which no storm warning
has been received.
This is intended to deal with storms other than the tropical storms referred to in
paragraph (b) ; when such a storm is encountered, the message should contain similar
information to that listed under paragraph (b) but excluding the details concerning sea
and swell.
(e) Sub-freezing air temperatures associated with gale force winds causing severe
ice accretion on superstructures.
(i) Time and Date (Greenwich Mean Time).
(ii) Air temperature,
(iii) Sea temperature (if practicable).
(iv) Wind force and direction.
Examples
Ice
TTT Ice. Large berg sighted in 4605 N., 4410 W., at 0800 GMT. May 15.
Derelicts
TTT Derelict. Observed derelict almost submerged in 4006 N., 1243 W., at 1630
GMT. April 21.
Danger to Navigation
TTT Navigation. Alpha lightship not on station. 1800 GMT. January 3.
Tropical Storm
TTT Storm. 0030 GMT. August 18. 2204 N., 11354 E. Barometer corrected
994 millibars, tendency down 6 millibars. Wind NW., force 9, heavy squalls. Heavy
easterly swell. Course 067, 5 knots.
TTT Storm. Appearances indicate approach of hurricane. 1300 GMT. Sep
tember 14. 2200 N., 7236 W. Barometer corrected 29.64 inches, tendency down
.015 inches. Wind NE., force 8, frequent rain squalls. Course 035, 9 knots.
TTT Storm. Conditions indicate intense cyclone has formed. 0200 GMT. May 4.
1620 N., 9203 E. Barometer uncorrected 753 millimetres, tendency down 5 millimetres.
Wind S. by W., force 5. Course 300, 8 knots.
TTT Storm. Typhoon to southeast. 0300 GMT. June 12. 1812 N., 12305 E.
Barometer falling rapidly. Wind increasing from N.
TTT Storm. Wind force 11, no storm warning received. 0300 GMT. May 4.
4830 N., 30 W. Barometer corrected 983 millibars, tendency down 4 millibars. Wind
SW., force 11 veering. Course 260, 6 knots.
Icing
TTT experiencing severe icing. 1400 GMT. March 2. 69 N., 10 W. Air tem
perature 18. Sea temperature 29. Wind NE., force 8.
Regulation 4
METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
(a) The Contracting Governments undertake to encourage the collection of meteoro
logical data by ships at sea and to arrange for their examination, dissemination and
exchange in the manner most suitable for the purpose of aiding navigation. Administra
tions shall encourage the use of instruments of a high degree of accuracy, and shall fa
cilitate the checking of such instruments upon request.
(b) In particular, the Contracting Governments undertake to co-operate in carrying
out, as far as practicable, the following meteorological arrangements :
(i) To warn ships of gales, storms and tropical storms, both by the issue of radio mes
sages and by the display of appropriate signals at coastal points.
(ii) To issue daily, by radio, weather bulletins suitable for shipping, containing data
of existing weather, waves and ice, forecasts and, when practicable, sufficient addi
tional information to enable simple weather charts to be prepared at sea and also
to encourage the transmission of suitable facsimile weather charts.
(iii) To prepare and issue such publications as may be necessary for the efficient conduct
of meteorological work at sea and to arrange, if practicable, for the publication and
making available of daily weather charts for the information of departing ships.
(iv) To arrange for selected ships to be equipped with tested instruments (such as a
barometer, a barograph, a psychrometer, and suitable apparatus for measuring sea
temperature) for use in this service, and to take meteorological observations at
main standard times for surface synoptic observations (at least four times daily,
whenever circumstances permit) and to encourage other ships to take observations
in a modified form, particularly when in areas where shipping is sparse ; these ships
to transmit their observations by radio for the benefit of the various official meteoro
logical services, repeating the information for the benefit of ships in the vicinity.
When in the vicinity of a tropical storm, or of a suspected tropical storm, ships
should be encouraged to take and transmit their observations at more frequent
intervals whenever practicable, bearing in mind navigational preoccupations of
ships' officers during storm conditions.
(v) To arrange for the reception and transmission by coast radio stations of weather
messages from and to ships. Ships which are unable to communicate direct with
shore shall be encouraged to relay their weather messages through ocean weather
ships or through other ships which are in contact with shore.
(vi) To encourage all masters to inform ships in the vicinity and also shore stations when
ever they experience a wind speed of 50 knots or more (force 10 on the Beaufort
scale).
<(vii) To endeavour to obtain a uniform procedure in regard to the international meteoro
logical services already specified, and, as far as is practicable, to conform to the
Technical Regulations and recommendations made by the World Meteorological
Organization, to which the Contracting Governments may refer for study and advice
any meteorological question which may arise in carrying out the present Convention.
(c) The information provided for in this Regulation shall be furnished in form for
transmission and transmitted in the order of priority prescribed by the Radio Regulations,
and during transmission "to all stations" of meteorological information, forecasts and
warnings, all ship stations must conform to the provisions of the Radio Regulations.
(d) Forecasts, warnings, synoptic and other meteorological reports intended for
ships shall be issued and disseminated by the national service in the best position to
serve various zones and areas, in accordance with mutual arrangements made by the
Contracting Governments concerned.
Regulation 5
ICE PATROL SERVICE
(a) The Contracting Governments undertake to continue an ice patrol and a service
for study and observation of ice conditions in the North Atlantic. During the whole
of the ice season the south-eastern, southern and south-western limits of the regions of
icebergs in the vicinity of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland shall be guarded for the
purpose of informing passing ships of the extent of this dangerous region ; for the study of
ice conditions in general ; and for the purpose of affording assistance to ships and crews
requiring aid within the limits of operation of the patrol ships. During the rest of the
year the study and observation of ice conditions shall be maintained as advisable.
(b) Ships and aircraft used for the ice patrol service and the study and observation
of ice conditions may be assigned other duties by the managing Government, provided
that such other duties do not interfere with their primary purpose or increase the cost
of this service.
Regulation 6
ICE PATROL. MANAGEMENT AND COST
(a) The Government of the United States of America agrees to continue the manage-
.ment of the ice patrol service and the study and observation of ice conditions, including
the dissemination of information received therefrom. The Contracting Governments
specially interested in these services undertake to contribute to the expense of maintain
ing and operating these services ; each contribution to be based upon the total gross ton
nage of the vessels of each contributing Government passing through the regions of
icebergs guarded by the Ice Patrol ; in particular, each Contracting Government specially
interested undertakes to contribute annually to the expense of maintaining and operating
these services a sum determined by the ratio which the total gross tonnage of that Con
tracting Government's vessels passing during the ice season through the regions of ice
bergs guarded by the Ice Patrol bears to the combined total gross tonnage of the vessels
of all contributing Governments passing during the ice season through the regions of
icebergs guarded by the Ice Patrol. Non-contracting Governments specially interested
may contribute to the expense of maintaining and operating these services on the same
basis. The managing Government will furnish annually to each contributing Govern
ment a statement of the total cost of maintaining and operating the Ice Patrol and of
the proportionate share of each contributing Government.
(b) Each of the contributing Governments has the right to alter or discontinue its
contribution, and other interested Governments may undertake to contribute to the
expense. The contributing Government which avails itself of this right will continue
responsible for its current contribution up to the 1 September following the date of giving
notice of intention to alter or discontinue its contribution. To take advantage of the
said right it must give notice to the managing Government at least six months before
the said 1 September.
(c) If, at any time, the United States Government should desire to discontinue these
services, or if one of the contributing Governments should express a wish to relinquish
responsibility for its pecuniary contribution, or to have its contribution altered, or another
Contracting Government should desire to undertake to contribute to the expense, the
contributing Governments shall settle the question in accordance with their mutual
interests.
(d) The contributing Governments shall have the right by common consent to make
from time to time such alterations in the provisions of this Regulation and of Regulation 5
of this Chapter as appear desirable.
(<<) Where this Regulation provides that a measure may be taken after agreement
among the contributing Governments, proposals made by any Contracting Government
for effecting such a measure shall be communicated to the managing Government which
shall approach the other contributing Governments with a view to ascertaining whether
they accept such proposals, and the results of the enquiries thus made shall be sent to
the other contributing Governments and the Contracting Government making the pro
posals. In particular, the arrangements relating to contributions to the cost of the serv
ices shall be reviewed by the contributing Governments at intervals not exceeding three
years. The managing Government shall initiate the action necessary to this end.
Regulation 7
SPEED NEAR ICE
When ice is reported on or near his course the master of every ship at night is bound
to proceed at a moderate speed or to alter his course so as to go well clear of the danger
zone.
Regulation 8
NORTH ATLANTIC ROUTES
(a) The practice of following recognised routes across the North Atlantic in both
directions and, in particular, routes in converging areas of both sides of the North Atlantic,
has contributed to the avoidance of collisions between ships and with icebergs, and should
be recommended to all ships concerned.
(b) The selection of the routes and the initiation of action with regard to them, and
the delineation of what constitutes converging areas, is left to the responsibility of the
shipping companies concerned. The Contracting Governments will assist the companies,
when requested to do so, by placing at their disposal any information bearing on the
routes which may be in the possession of the Governments.
(c) The Contracting Governments undertake to impose on the companies the obliga
tions to give public notice of the regular routes which they propose their ships should
follow, and of any changes made in these routes. They will also use their influence to
induce the owners of all passenger ships crossing the Atlantic to follow the recognised
routes, and will do everything in their power to ensure adherence to such routes in the
converging areas by all ships, so far as circumstances will permit. They will also induce
the owners of all ships crossing the Atlantic bound to or from ports of the United States
or Canada via the vicinity of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland to avoid, as far as prac
ticable, the fishing banks of Newfoundland north of latitude 43 &#186;N. during the fishing
season, and to pass outside regions known or believed to be endangered by ice.
(d) The Government managing the ice patrol service is requested to report to the
Administration concerned any passenger ship which is observed not to be on any regular,
recognised or advertised route and any ship which crosses the above mentioned fishing
banks during the fishing season, or which when proceeding to or from ports of the United
States or Canada passes through regions known or believed to be endangered by ice.
Regulation 9
MISUSE OF DISTRESS SIGNALS
The use of an international distress signal, except for the purpose of indicating that
a ship or aircraft is in distress, and the use of any signal which may be confused with
an international distress signal, are prohibited on every ship or aircraft.
Regulation 10
DISTRESS MESSAGES-OBLIGATIONS AND PROCEDURES
(a) The master of a ship at sea, on receiving a signal from any source that a ship or
aircraft or survival craft thereof is in distress, is bound to proceed with all speed to the
assistance of the persons in distress informing them if possible that he is doing so. If
he is unable or, in the special circumstances of the case, considers it unreasonable or
unnecessary to proceed to their assistance, he must enter in the log book the reason for
failing to proceed to the assistance of the persons in distress.
(b) The master of a ship in distress, after consultation, so far as may be 'possible,
with, the masters of the ships which answer his call for assistance, has the right to requi
sition such one or more of those ships as he considers best able to render assistance, and
it shall be the duty of the master or masters of the ship or ships requisitioned to comply
with the requisition by continuing to proceed with all speed to the assistance of persons
in distress.
(c) The master of a ship shall be released from the obligation imposed by para
graph (a) of this Regulation when he learns that one or more ships other than his own
have been requisitioned and are complying with the requisition.
(d) The master of a ship shall be released from the obligation imposed by paragraph (a)
of this Regulation, and, if his ship has been requisitioned, from the obligation imposed
by paragraph (b) of this Regulation, if he is informed by the persons in distress or by the
master of another ship which has reached such persons that assistance is no longer
necessary.
(e) The provisions of this Regulation do not prejudice the International Convention
for the unification of certain rules with regard to Assistance and Salvage at Sea, signed at
Brussels on the 23rd September, 1910, particularly the obligation to render assistance
imposed by Article 11 of that Convention.
Regulation 11
SIGNALLING LAMPS
All ships of over 150 tons gross tonnage, when engaged on international voyages,
shall have on board an efficient daylight signalling lamp which shall not be solely de
pendent upon the ship's main source of electrical power.
Regulation 12
RADIO DIRECTION-FINDING APPARATUS
(a) All ships of 1,600 tons gross tonnage and upwards, when engaged on international
voyages, shall be fitted with radio direction-finding apparatus complying with the pro
visions of Regulation 11 of Chapter IV.
(b) The Administration may, in areas where it considers it unreasonable or unneces
sary for such apparatus to be carried, exempt any ship under 5,000 tons gross tonnage
from this requirement, due regard being had to the fact that radio direction-finding
apparatus is of value both as a navigational instrument and as an aid to locating ships,
aircraft or survival craft.
Regulation 13
MANNING
The Contracting Governments undertake, each for its national ships, to maintain,
or, if it is necessary, to adopt, measures for the purpose of ensuring that, from the point
of view of safety of life at sea, all ships shall be sufficiently and efficiently manned.
Regulation 14
AIDS TO NAVIGATION
The Contracting Governments undertake to arrange for the establishment and main
tenance of such aids to navigation, including radio beacons and electronic aids as, in
their opinion, the volume of traffic justifies and the degree of risk requires, and to arrange
for information relating to these aids to be made available to all concerned.
Regulation 15
SEARCH AND RESCUE
(a) Each Contracting Government undertakes to ensure that any necessary arrange
ments are made for coast watching and for the rescue of persons in distress at sea round
its coasts. These arrangements should include the establishment, operation and main
tenance of such maritime safety facilities as are deemed practicable and necessary having
regard to the density of the seagoing traffic and the navigational dangers and should, so
far as possible, afford adequate means of locating and rescuing such persons.
(b) Each Contracting Government undertakes to make available information con
cerning its existing rescue facilities and the plans for changes therein, if any.
Regulation 16
LIFE-SAVING SIGNALS
The following signals shall be used by life-saving stations and maritime rescue units
when communicating with ships or persons in distress and by ships or persons in distress
when communicating with life-saving stations and maritime rescue units. The signals
used by aircraft engaged in search and rescue operations to direct ships are indicated in
sub-paragraph (d) below. An illustrated table describing the signals listed below shall
be readily available to the officer of the watch of every ship to which this Chapter applies.
(a) Replies from life-saving stations or maritime rescue units to distress signals made by a
ship or person :
(b) Landing signals for the guidance of small boats with crews or persons in distress :
(c) Signals to be employed in connection with the use of shore life-saving apparatus :
(d) Signals used by aircraft engaged on search and rescue operations to direct ships towards
an aircraft, ship or person in distress (see explanatory Note below) :
(i) The following procedures performed in sequence by an aircraft mean that the
aircraft is directing a surface craft towards an aircraft or a surface craft in distress :
(1) circling the surface craft at least once ;
(2) crossing the projected course of the surface craft close ahead at a low altitude, opening
and closing the throttle or changing the propeller pitch ;
(3) heading in the direction in which the surface craft is to be directed.
Repetition of such procedures has the same meaning.
(ii) The following procedure performed by an aircraft means that the assistance of
the surface craft to which the signal is directed is no longer required :
-crossing the wake of the surface craft close astern at a low altitude, opening and
closing the throttle or changing the propeller pitch.
NOTE : Advance notification of changes in these signals will be given by the
Organization as necessary.
Regulation 17
PILOT LADDERS
Ships engaged on voyages in the course of which pilots are likely to be employed
shall comply with the following requirements respecting pilot ladders :
(a) The ladder shall be kept in good order and for use only by officials and other
persons while a ship is arriving at or leaving a port, and for embarkation and disembar
kation of pilots.
(b) The ladder shall be secured in a position so that each step rests firmly against
the ship's side and so that the pilot can gain safe and convenient access to the ship after
climbing not less than 5 feet (or 1-5 metres) and not more than 30 feet (or 9 metres).
A single length of ladder shall be used capable of reaching sea level in all normal conditions
of trim of the ship. Whenever the distance from sea level to the point of access to the
ship is more than 30 feet (or 9 metres), access from the pilot ladder to the ship shall be
by means of an accommodation ladder or other equally safe and convenient means.
(c) The treads of the ladder shall be not less than 19 inches (or 48 centimetres) long,
4% inches (or 11-4 centimetres) wide and 1 inch (or 2-5 centimetres) in depth. Steps
shall be joined in such a manner as will provide a ladder of adequate strength whose
treads are maintained in a horizontal position and not less than 12 inches (or 30-5 centi
metres) or more than 15 inches (or 38 centimetres) apart.
(d) A man-rope, properly secured, and a safety line shall be available and ready
for use if required.
(e) Arrangements shall be such that :
(i) The rigging of the ladder and the embarkation and disembarkation of a pilot is super
vised by a responsible officer of the ship.
(ii) Handholds are provided to assist the pilot to pass safely and conveniently from the
head of the ladder into the ship or on to the ship's deck.
(/) If necessary spreaders shall be provided at such intervals as will prevent the ladder
from twisting.
(g) At night a light shining overside shall be available and used and the deck at the
position where the pilot boards the ship shall be adequately lit.
(h) Ships with rubbing bands or other ships whose construction makes it impossible
to comply fully with the provision that the ladder shall be secured at a place where each
step will rest firmly against the ship's side shall comply with this provision as closely as
possible.
CHAPTER VI
CARRIAGE OF GRAIN
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
Unless expressly provided otherwise, this Chapter applies to the carriage of grain
in all ships to which the present Regulations apply.
Regulation 2
DEFINITION
The term "grain" includes wheat, maize (corn), oats, rye, barley, rice, pulses and
seeds.
Regulation 3
TRIMMING
Where grain is loaded in a ship, all necessary and reasonable precautions shall be
taken to prevent the grain from shifting. If any hold or compartment is entirely filled
with bulk grain, the grain shall be trimmed so as to fill all the spaces between the beams
and in the wings and ends.
Regulation 4
STOWAGE OF FULL HOLDS AND COMPARTMENTS
Subject to the provisions of Regulation 6 of this Chapter, if any hold or compartment
is entirely filled with bulk grain it shall be divided either by a longitudinal bulkhead or
shifting boards in line with, or not more than 5 per cent, of the moulded breadth of the
ship from, the centre line or by longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards off the centre
line of the ship provided that the distance between them shall not exceed 60 per cent,
of the moulded breadth of the ship and that in the latter case trimming hatches of suitable
size shall be provided in the wings at longitudinal intervals of not more than 25 feet
(or 7-62 metres) with end trimming hatches placed not more than 12 feet (or 3-66 metres)
from transverse bulkheads. In every case the longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards
shall be properly constructed and fitted grain-tight with proper fillings between the
beams. In holds such longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards shall extend downwards
from the underside of the deck to a distance of at least one-third of the depth of the hold
or 8 feet (or 2-44 metres) whichever is the greater. In compartments in 'tween decks
and superstructures they shall extend from deck to deck. In all cases the longitudinal
bulkheads or shifting boards shall extend to the top of the feeders of the hold or com
partment in which they are situated.
Provided that in the case of ships loaded with bulk grain other than linseed in which
a metacentric height (after correction for the free surface effects of liquids in tanks) is
maintained throughout the voyage of not less than 12 inches (or 0-31 metres) in the
case of one or two deck ships and not less than 14 inches (or 0-36 metres) in the case
of other ships, longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards need not be fitted :
(a) below and within 7 feet (or 2-13 metres) of a feeder, but only in way of a hatchway,
if that feeder contains, or all the feeders collectively feeding a compartment contain,
not less than 5 per cent, of the quantity of grain carried in the compartment which
is fed ;
(b) in feeders which meet the requirements of paragraph (a) of this Regulation and
which have such dimensions that the free grain surface will remain within the feeders
throughout the voyage after allowing for a sinkage of grain amounting to 2 per cent,
of the volume of the compartment fed and a shift of the free grain surface to an
angle of 12 degrees to the horizontal ; in this case the possible effects of the above
mentioned movement of the free grain surfaces within the feeders shall be taken into
account in calculating the metacentric height given above ;
(c) in way of the hatchway where the bulk grain beneath the hatchway is trimmed in
the form of .a saucer hard up to the deckhead beyond the hatchway and is topped off
with bagged grain or other suitable bagged cargo extending to a height in the centre
of the saucer of not less than 6 feet (or 1-83 metres) above the top of the bulk grain
(measured below the deck line) ; the bagged grain or other suitable bagged cargo shall
fill the hatchway and the saucer below and shall be stowed tightly against the deckhead,
the longitudinal bulkheads, the hatchway beams and the hatchway side and
end coamings.
Regulation 5
STOWAGE OF PARTLY FILLED HOLDS AND COMPARTMENTS
Subject to the provisions of Regulation 6 of this Chapter, if any hold or compart
ment is partly filled with bulk grain :
(a) it shall be divided by a longitudinal bulkhead or shifting boards, in line with, or not
more than 5 per cent, of the moulded breadth of the ship from, the centre line or by
longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards off the centre line of the ship provided that
the distance between them shall not exceed 60 per cent, of the moulded breadth of
the ship. In every case the longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards shall be properly
constructed and shall extend from the bottom of the hold or deck, as the case may
be, to a height of not less than 2 feet (or 0-61 metres) above the surface of the bulk
grain.
Provided that, except in the case of holds partly filled with linseed in bulk, longi
tudinal bulkheads or shifting boards need not be fitted in way of the hatchway in
the case of ships in which a metacentric height (after correction for the free surface
effects of liquids in tanks) is maintained throughout the voyage of not less than
12 inches (or 0-31 metres) in the case of one or two deck ships and not less than 14
inches (or 0-36 metres) in the case of other ships ;
(b) the bulk grain shall be levelled and topped off with bagged grain or other suitable
cargo tightly stowed and extending to a height of not less than 4 feet (or 1 -22 metres)
above the top of the bulk grain within spaces divided by such a longitudinal bulk
head or shifting boards, and not less than 5 feet (or 1-52 metres) within spaces not
so divided. The bagged grain or other suitable cargo shall be supported on suitable
platforms laid over the whole surface of the bulk grain ; such platforms shall consist
of bearers spaced not more than 4 feet (or 1 -22 metres) apart and 1 inch (or 25 mil
limetres) boards laid thereon spaced not more than 4 inches (or 0-10 metres) apart
or of strong separation cloths with adequate overlapping.
Regulation 6
EXCEPTIONS TO THE REQUIREMENTS FOR LONGITUDINAL BULKHEADS
The fitting of longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards in accordance with the pro
visions of Regulations 4 and 5 of this Chapter shall not be required :
(a) in a lower hold (which term also includes the lower part of the hold of a single-deck
ship) if the bulk grain therein does not exceed one-third of the capacity of the hold,
or where such lower hold is divided by a shaft tunnel, one-half the capacity of that
lower hold ;
(b) in any space in a 'tween deck or superstructure provided that the wings are tightly
stowed with bagged grain or other suitable cargo to a breadth on each side of not
less than 20 per cent, of the breadth of the ship in way thereof ; and
(c) in those parts of spaces where the maximum breadth of the deckhead within the said
spaces does not exceed one-half of the moulded breadth of the ship.
Regulation 7
FEEDERS
(a) (i) Any hold or compartment which is entirely filled with bulk grain shall be fed
by suitably placed and properly constructed feeders, except as otherwise provided in
paragraph (c) of Regulation 4 and Regulations 8 and 12 of this Chapter so as to secure a
free flow of grain from the feeder to all parts of that hold or compartment.
(ii) Each feeder shall contain not less than 2 per cent, of the quantity of grain carried
in that part of the hold or compartment that it feeds except as otherwise provided for
in paragraph (a) of Regulation 4 of this Chapter.
(b) When bulk grain is carried in deep tanks primarily constructed for the carriage of
liquids to which paragraph (c) of Regulation 6 of this Chapter applies or that are divided
by one or more permanent steel longitudinal divisions fitted grain-tight, feeders to the
tanks may be omitted if the tanks and tank hatchways are completely filled and the
hatch covers secured.
Regulation 8
COMMON LOADING
For the purpose of Regulations 4 and 7 of this Chapter lower holds and 'tween deck
spaces over them may be loaded as one compartment under the following conditions :
(a) longitudinal bulkheads or shifting boards shall be fitted deck to deck in the 'tween
deck of a ship having two decks ; in all other cases the longitudinal bulkheads or
shifting boards shall be fitted for the upper third of the total depth of the common
spaces ;
(6) in order to secure an adequate flow of grain all spaces shall comply with the require
ments of Regulation 9 of this Chapter and openings shall be provided in the wings
of the deck immediately below the uppermost deck forward and aft of the ends of
the hatchways as necessary to provide in combination with the hatchways a maximum
feeding distance of 8 feet (or 2-44 metres) measured in a fore and aft line.
Regulation 9
TRIMMING AND BAGGING OF END SPACES
When the distance, measured in a fore and aft line, from any part of a hold or com
partment to the nearest feeder exceeds 25 feet (or 7-62 metres) the bulk grain in the
end spaces beyond 25 feet (or 7-62 metres) from the nearest feeder shall be levelled off
at a depth of at least 6 feet (or 1-83 metres) below the deck, and the end spaces filled
with bagged grain built up on a suitable platform as required in paragraph (b) of Regu
lation 5 of this Chapter.
Regulation 10
BULK GRAIN IN 'TWEEN DECKS AND SUPERSTRUCTURES
Bulk grain shall not be carried above deck, in the 'tween deck of a two deck ship,
or in the uppermost 'tween deck of a ship having more than two decks except under the
following conditions :
(a) the bulk grain or other cargo shall be stowed so as to ensure maximum stability : in
all cases either a metacentric height (after correction for the free surface effects of
liquids in tanks) shall be maintained throughout the voyage of not less than 12 inches
(or 0-31 metres) in the case of one or two deck ships and 14 inches (or 0-36 metres)
in the case of other ships or, alternatively, the aggregate quantity of bulk grain or
other cargo carried above deck, in the 'tween deck spaces of a two deck ship or in
the uppermost 'tween deck spaces of a ship having more than two decks shall not
exceed 28 per cent, by weight of the total cargo below the 'tween deck where the mas
ter is satisfied that the ship will have adequate stability throughout the voyage ;
the limitation of 28 per cent, specified above shall not apply when the grain carried
above deck or in the uppermost 'tween deck spaces is oats, barley or cotton seed ;
(V) the deck area of any portion of the spaces referred to in this Regulation which con
tains bulk grain and which is only partly filled shall not exceed 1,000 square feet
(or 93 square metres) ; and
v(c) all spaces referred to in this Regulation in which bulk grain is stowed shall be sub
divided by transverse bulkheads at intervals of not more than 100 feet (or 30-50
metres) ; when this distance is exceeded the excess space shall be entirely filled with
bagged grain or other suitable cargo.
Regulation 11
LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF PARTLY FILLED HOLDS AND COMPARTMENTS
Except in the case of ships in which a metacentric height (after correction for the
free surface effects of liquids in tanks) is maintained throughout the voyage of not less
than 12 inches (or 0-31 metres) in the case of one or two deck ships and not less than
14 inches (or 0-36 metres) in the case of other ships, not more than two holds or com
partments shall be partly filled with bulk grain, except that other holds or compartments
may be partly filled with bulk grain if they are filled up to the deckhead with bagged or
other suitable cargo. For the purpose of this Regulation :
(a) superimposed 'tween decks shall be regarded as separate compartments and separate
from any lower hold below them ;
(b) feeders and the partly filled spaces referred to in paragraph (b) of Regulation 10 of
this Chapter shall not be regarded as compartments ; and
(c) holds or compartments provided with one or more grain-tight longitudinal divisions
shall be regarded as one hold or compartment.
Regulation 12
STOWAGE OF SPECIALLY SUITABLE SHIPS
(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Regulations 4 to 11 of this Chapter,
bulk grain may be carried without regard to the requirements specified therein in ships
which are constructed with two or more vertical or sloping grain-tight longitudinal
divisions suitably disposed to limit the effect of any transverse shift of grain under the
following conditions :
(i) as many holds and compartments as possible shall be full and trimmed full ;
(ii) for any specified arrangement of stowage the ship will not list to an angle greater than
5 degrees at any stage of the voyage where :
(1) in holds or compartments which have been trimmed full the grain surface settles
2 per cent, by volume from the original surface and shifts to an angle of 12 degrees
with that surface under all boundaries of these holds and compartments which
have an inclination of less than 30 degrees to the horizontal ; and
(2) in partly filled holds or compartments free grain surfaces settle and shift as in
sub-paragraph (ii) (1) in this paragraph or to such larger angle as may be deemed
necessary by the Administration, or by a Contracting Government on behalf
of the Administration, and grain surfaces if overstowed in accordance with Regu
lation 5 of this Chapter shift to an angle of 8 degrees with the original levelled
surfaces. For the purposes of sub-paragraph (ii) of this paragraph shifting
boards if fitted will be considered to limit the transverse shift of the surface of
the grain ;
i^iii) the master is provided with a grain loading plan covering the stowage arrangements
to be adopted and a stability booklet, both approved by the Administration, or by a
Contracting Government on behalf of the Administration, showing the stability
conditions upon which the calculations given in sub-paragraph (ii) of this paragraph
are based.
(b) The Administration, or a Contracting Government on behalf of the Administra
tion, shall prescribe the precautions to be taken against shifting in all other conditions
of loading of ships designed in accordance with paragraph (a) of this Regulation which
meet the requirements of sub-paragraphs (ii) and (iii) of that paragraph.
(c) The Administration, or a Contracting Government on behalf of the Administra
tion, shall prescribe the precautions to be taken against shifting in a ship of any other
design which meets the requirements of subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of paragraph (a) of
this Regulation.
Regulation 13
WATER BALLAST TANKS
Double bottom tanks which are used to meet a stability requirement in ships loading
bulk grain shall have adequate watertight longitudinal sub-division except where the
width of the tank measured at half length does not exceed 60 per cent, of the ship's
moulded breadth.
Regulation 14
BAGGED GRAIN
Bagged grain shall be carried in sound bags which shall be well filled and securely
closed.
Regulation 15
GRAIN LOADING PLANS
(a) A grain loading plan approved for a ship whether by the Administration or by a
Contracting Government on behalf of the Administration shall be accepted by other
Contracting Governments as evidence that the ship when loaded in accordance with such
plans meet the requirements of this Chapter or equivalent arrangements which have
been accepted under Regulation 5 of Chapter I.
(b) Such plan shall be approved after taking into account the requirements of this
Chapter, the various circumstances of loading on departure and arrival, and the stability
of the ship. It shall indicate the main characteristics of the fittings used to prevent the
shifting of cargo.
(c) Such plan shall be annotated in one or more languages of which one shall be one
of the Convention languages.
(d) A copy of such plan shall be supplied to the master of the ship, who if so required
shall produce it for the inspection of the appropriate authority of the port in which
loading takes place.
(e) Pending the adoption of international regulations concerning the strength of
grain fittings and the provision of feeding holes in hatch coamings, a ship loading grain
 which does not produce a grain loading plan approved by the Administration, or by a
Contracting Government on behalf of the Administration, shall load in accordance with
detailed rules issued to supplement the provisions of this Chapter by the Contracting
Government of the country in which the loading port is situated.
Regulation 16
EXEMPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VOYAGES
The Administration, or a Contracting Government on behalf of the Administration,
may, if it considers that the sheltered nature and conditions of the voyage are such as
to render the application of any of the requirements of Regulations 3 to 15 of this Chapter
unreasonable or unnecessary, exempt from those particular requirements individual
ships or classes of ships.
CHAPTER VII
CARRIAGE OF DANGEROUS GOODS
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
(a) Unless expressly provided otherwise, this Chapter applies to the carriage of
dangerous goods in all ships to which the present Regulations apply.
(b) The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to ship's stores and equipment or
to particular cargoes carried in ships specially built or converted as a whole for that pur
pose, such as tankers.
(c) The carriage of dangerous goods is prohibited except in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(d) To supplement the provisions of this Chapter each Contracting Government
shall issue, or cause to be issued, detailed instructions on the safe packing and stowage
of specific dangerous goods or categories of dangerous goods which shall include any
precautions necessary in their relation to other cargo.
Regulation 2
CLASSIFICATION
Dangerous goods shall be divided into the following classes :
Class 1-Explosives.
Class 2-Gases : compressed, liquefied or dissolved under pressure.
Class 3-Inflammable liquids.
Class 4 (a)-Inflammable solids.
Class 4 (6)-Inflammable solids, or substances, liable to spontaneous combustion.
Class 4 (c)-Inflammable solids, or substances, which in contact with water emit
inflammable gases.
Class 5 (a)-Oxidizing substances.
Class 5 (b)-Organic peroxides.
Class 6 (a)-Poisonous (toxic) substances.
Class 6 (b)-Infectious substances.
Class 7-Radioactive substances.
Class 8-Corrosives.
Class 9-Miscellaneous dangerous substances, that is any other substance which
experience has shown, or may show, to be of such a dangerous character that
the provisions of this Chapter should apply to it.
Regulation 3
PACKING
(a) The packing of dangerous goods shall be (i) well made and in good condition ;
^ii) of such a character that any interior surface with which the contents may come in
contact is not dangerously affected by the substance being conveyed and (iii) capable of
withstanding the ordinary risks of handling and carriage by sea.
(b) Where the use of absorbent or cushioning material is customary in the packing
of liquids in receptacles that material shall be (i) capable of minimising the dangers to
which the liquid may give rise, (ii) so disposed as to prevent movement and ensure that
the receptacle remains surrounded and (iii) where reasonably possible of sufficient quantity
to absorb the liquid in the event of breakage of the receptacle.
(c) Receptacles containing dangerous liquids shall have an ullage at the filling
temperature sufficient to allow for the highest temperature during the course of normal
carriage.
(d) Cylinders or receptacles for gases under pressure shall be adequately constructed,
tested, maintained and correctly filled.
(e) Empty receptacles which have been used previously for the carriage of dangerous
goods shall themselves be treated as dangerous goods unless they have been cleaned
and dried or, when the nature of the former contents permit with safety, have been closed
securely.
Regulation 4
MARKING AND LABELLING
Each receptacle containing dangerous goods shall be marked with the correct tech
nical name (trade names shall not be used) and identified with a distinctive label or stencil
of the label so as to make clear the dangerous character. Each receptacle shall be so
labelled except receptacles containing chemicals packed in limited quantities and large
shipments which can be stowed, handled and identified as a unit.
Regulation 5
DOCUMENTS
(a) In all documents relating to the carriage of dangerous goods by sea where the
goods are named the correct technical name of the goods shall be used (trade names shall
not be used) and the correct description given in accordance with the classification set
out in Regulation 2 of this Chapter.
(b) The shipping documents prepared by the shipper shall include, or be accompanied
by, a certificate or declaration that the shipment offered for carriage is properly packed,
marked and labelled and in proper condition for carriage.
(c) Each ship carrying dangerous goods shall have a special list or manifest setting
forth, in accordance with Regulation 2 of this Chapter, the dangerous goods on board
and the location thereof. A detailed stowage plan which identifies by class and sets out
the location of all dangerous goods on board may be used in place of such special list or
manifest.
Regulation 6
TEMPORARY EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS 4 AND 5
Contracting Governments which have a uniform system of rules for land and sea
transport relating to the carriage of dangerous goods and cannot therefore immediately
apply the provisions of Regulations 4 and 5 of this Chapter may authorise departures
from the provisions of those Regulations for a period not exceeding twelve months from
the date on which the Convention comes into force, provided that dangerous goods as
classified in Regulation 2 of this Chapter are also so classified in the shipping documents
and are labelled accordingly.
Regulation 7
STOWAGE REQUIREMENTS
(a) Dangerous goods shall be stowed safely and appropriately according to the nature
of the goods. Incompatible goods shall be segregated from one another.
(b) Explosives (except ammunition) which present a serious risk shall be stowed in
a magazine which shall be kept securely closed while at sea. Such explosives shall be
segregated from detonators. Electrical apparatus and cables in any compartment in
which explosives are carried shall be designed and used so as to minimise the risk of fire
or explosion.
(c) Goods which give off dangerous vapours shall be stowed in a well ventilated space
or on deck.
(d) In ships carrying inflammable liquids or gases special precautions shall be taken
where necessary against fire or explosion.
(e) Substances which are liable to spontaneous heating or combustion shall not be
carried unless adequate precautions have been taken to prevent the outbreak of fire.
Regulation 8
EXPLOSIVES IN PASSENGER SHIPS
(a) In passenger ships the following explosives only may be carried :
(i) safety cartridges and safety fuses ;
(ii) small quantities of explosives not exceeding 20 pounds (or 9 kilogrammes) total
net weight ;
(iii) distress signals for use in ships or aircraft, if the total weight of such signals does
not exceed 2,240 pounds (or 1,016 kilogrammes) ;
(iv) except in ships carrying unberthed passengers, fireworks which are unlikely to explode
violently.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this Regulation additional
quantities or types of explosives may be carried in passenger ships in which there are
special safety measures approved by the Administration.
CHAPTER VIII
NUCLEAR SHIPS
Regulation 1
APPLICATION
This Chapter applies to all nuclear ships except ships of war.
Regulation 2
APPLICATION OF OTHER CHAPTERS
The Regulations contained in the other Chapters of the present Convention apply
to nuclear ships except as modified by this Chapter.
Regulation 3
EXEMPTIONS
A nuclear ship shall not, in any circumstances, be exempted from compliance with
any Regulations of this Convention.
Regulation 4
APPROVAL OF REACTOR INSTALLATION
The design, construction and standards of inspection and assembly of the reactor
installation shall be subject to the approval and satisfaction of the Administration and
shall take account of the limitations which will be imposed on surveys by the presence
of radiation.
Regulation 5
SUITABILITY OF REACTOR INSTALLATION FOR SERVICE ON BOARD SHIP
The reactor installation shall be designed having regard to the special conditions
of service on board ship both in normal and exceptional circumstances of navigation.
Regulation 6
RADIATION SAFETY
The Administration shall take measures to ensure that there are no unreasonable
radiation or other nuclear hazards, at sea or in port, to the crew, passengers or public,
or to the waterways or food or water resources.
Regulation 7
SAFETY ASSESSMENT
(a) A Safety Assessment shall be prepared to permit evaluation of the nuclear
power plant and safety of the ship to ensure that there are no unreasonable radiation
or other hazards, at sea or in port, to the crew, passengers or public, or to the waterways
or food or water resources. The Administration, when satisfied, shall approve such Safety
Assessment which shall always be kept up-to-date.
(b) The Safety Assessment shall be made available sufficiently in advance to the
Contracting Governments of the countries which a nuclear ship intends to visit so that
they may evaluate the safety of the ship.
Regulation 8
OPERATING MANUAL
A fully detailed Operating Manual shall be prepared for the information and guidance
of the operating personnel in their duties on all matters relating to the operation of the
nuclear power plant and having an important bearing on safety. The Administration,
when satisfied, shall approve such Operating Manual and a copy shall be kept on board
the ship. The Operating Manual shall always be kept up-to-date.
Regulation 9
SURVEYS
Survey of nuclear ships shall include the applicable requirements of Regulation 7
of Chapter I, or of Regulations 8, 9 and 10 of Chapter I, except in so far as surveys are
limited by the presence of radiation. In addition, the surveys shall include any special
requirements of the Safety Assessment. They shall in all cases, notwithstanding the
provisions of Regulations 8 and 10 of Chapter I, be carried out not less frequently than
once a year.
Regulation 10
CERTIFICATES
(a) The provisions of paragraph (a) of Regulation 12 of Chapter I and of Regula
tion 14 of Chapter I shall not apply to nuclear ships.
(b) A Certificate, called a Nuclear Passenger Ship Safety Certificate shall be issued
after inspection and survey to a nuclear passenger ship which complies with the require
ments of Chapters II, III, IV and VIII, and any other relevant requirements of the present
Regulations.
(c) A Certificate, called a Nuclear Cargo Ship Safety Certificate shall be issued after
inspection and survey to a nuclear cargo ship which satisfies the requirements for cargo
ships on survey set out in Regulation 10 of Chapter I, and complies with the requirements
of Chapters II, III, IV and VIII, and any other relevant requirements of the present
Regulations.
(d) Nuclear Passenger Ship Safety Certificates and Nuclear Cargo Ship Safety
Certificates shall state : "That the ship, being a nuclear ship, complied with all require
ments of Chapter VIII of the Convention and conformed to the Safety Assessment ap
proved for the ship".
(e) Nuclear Passenger Ship Safety Certificates and Nuclear Cargo Ship Safety Cer
tificates shall be valid for a period of not more than 12 months.
(f) Nuclear Passenger Ship Safety Certificates and Nuclear Cargo Ship Safety Cer
tificates shall be issued either by the Administration or by any person or organization
duly authorised by it. In every case, that Administration assumes full responsibility
for the certificate.
Regulation 11
SPECIAL CONTROL
In addition to the control established by Regulation 19 of Chapter I, nuclear ships
shall be subject to special control before entering the ports and in the ports of Contract
ing Governments, directed towards verifying that there is on board a valid Nuclear
Ship Safety Certificate and that there are no unreasonable radiation or other hazards
at sea or in port, to the crew, passengers or public, or to the waterways or food or water
resources.
Regulation 12
CASUALTIES
In the event of any accident likely to lead to an environmental hazard the master
of a nuclear ship shall immediately inform the Administration. The master shall also
immediately inform the competent Governmental authority of the country in whose
waters the ship may be, or whose waters the ship approaches in a damaged condition.


APPENDIX
Form of Safety Certificate for Passenger Ships
PASSENGER SHIP SAFETY CERTIFICATE

