INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON CERTAIN
RULES CONCERNING CIVIL JURISDICTION IN MAT
TERS OF COLLISION. SIGNED AT BRUSSELS, ON
10 MAY 1952
The High Contracting Parties,
Having recognised the advisability of establishing by agreement certain
uniform rules relating to civil jurisdiction in matters of collision, have decided
to conclude a Convention for this purpose and thereto have agreed as follows :
Article 1
(1) An action for collision occurring between seagoing vessels, or between
seagoing vessels and inland navigation craft, can only be introduced :
(a) either before the Court where the defendant has his habitual residence or a
place of business;
(b) or before the Court of the place where arrest has been effected of the de
fendant ship or of any other ship belonging to the defendant which can be
lawfully arrested, or where arrest could have been effected and bail or
other security has been furnished ;
(c) or before the Court of the place of collision when the collision has occurred
within the limits of a port or in inland waters.
(2) It shall be for the Plaintiff to decide in which of the Courts referred to
in section 1 of this article the action shall be instituted.
(3) A claimant shall not be allowed to bring a further action against the
same defendant on the same facts in another jurisdiction, without discontinuing
an action already instituted.
Article 2
The provisions of Article 1 shall not in any way prejudice the right of the
parties to bring an action in respect of a collision before a Court they have chosen
by agreement or to refer it to arbitration.
Article 3
(1) Counterclaims arising out of the same collision can be brought before
the Court having jurisdiction over the principal action in accordance with the
provisions of Article 1.
(2) In the event of there being several claimants, any claimant may bring his
action before the Court previously seized of an action against the same party
arising out of the same collision.
(3) In the case of a collision or collisions in which two or more vessels are
involved nothing in this Convention shall prevent any Court seized of an action
by reason of the provisions of this Convention, from exercising jurisdiction
under its national laws in further actions arising out of the same incident.
Article 4
This Convention shall also apply to an action for damage caused by one ship
to another or to the property or persons on board such ships through the carrying
out of or the omission to carry out a man uvre or through non-compliance with
regulations even when there has been no actual collision.
Article 5
Nothing contained in this Convention shall modify the rules of law now or
hereafter in force in the various contracting States in regard to collisions involving
warships or vessels owned by or in the service of a State.
Article 6
This Convention does not affect claims arising from contracts of carriage
of from any other contracts.
Article 7
This Convention shall not apply in cases covered by the provisions of the
revised Rhine Navigation Convention of 17 October 1868.
Article 8
The provisions of this Convention shall be applied as regards all persons
interested when all the vessels concerned in any action belong to States of the
High Contracting Parties.
Provided always that :
(1) As regards persons interested who belong to a non-contracting State, the
application of the above provisions may be made by each of the contracting
States conditional upon reciprocity;
(2) Where all the persons interested belong to the same State as the court trying
the case, the provisions of the national law and not of the Convention are
applicable.
Article 9
The High Contracting Parties undertake to submit to arbitration any
disputes between States arising out of the interpretation or application of this
Convention, but this shall be without prejudice to the obligations of those High
Contracting Parties who have agreed to submit their disputes to the International
Court of Justice.
Article 10
This Convention shall be open for signature by the States represented at
the Ninth Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Law. The protocol of signature
shall be drawn up through the good offices of the Belgian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
Article 11
This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification shall
be deposited with the Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs which shall notify all
signatory and acceding States of the deposit of any such instruments.
Article 12
(a) This Convention shall come into force between the two States which
first ratify it, six months after the date of the deposit of the second instrument
of ratification.
(6) This Convention shall come into force in respect of each signatory
State which ratifies if after the deposit of the second instrument of ratification
six months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification of that
State.
Article 13
Any State not represented at the Ninth Diplomatic Conference on Maritime
Law may accede to this Convention.
The accession of any State shall be notified to the Belgian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs which shall inform through diplomatic channels all signatory
and acceding States of such notification.
The Convention shall come into force in respect of the acceding State six
months after the date of the receipt of such notification but not before the Con
vention has come into force in accordance with the provisions of Article 12 a).
Article 14
Any High Contracting Party may three years after the coming into force of
this Convention in respect of such High Contracting Party or at any time there
after request that a conference be convened in order to consider amendments to
the Convention.
Any High Contracting Party proposing to avail itself of this right shall
notify the Belgian Government which shall convene the conference within six
months thereafter.
Article 15
Any High Contracting Party shall have the right to denounce this Conven
tion at any time after the coming into force thereof in respect of such High Con
tracting Party. This denunciation shall take effect one year after the date on
which notification thereof has been received by the Belgian Government which
shall inform through diplomatic channels all the other High Contracting Parties
of such notification.
Article 16
(a) Any High Contracting Party may at the time of its ratification of or
accession to this Convention or at any time thereafter declare by written notifica
tion to the Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that the Convention shall extend
to any of the territories for whose international relations it is responsible. The
Convention shall six months after the date of the receipt of such notification by
the Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs extend to the territories named therein,
but not before the date of the coming into force of the Convention in respect
of such High Contracting Party.
(b) A High Contracting Party which has made a declaration under paragraph
a) of this Article extending the Convention to any territory for whose interna
tional relations it is responsible may at any time thereafter declare by notification
given to the Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that the Convention shall cease
to extend to such territory and the Convention shall one year after the receipt of
the notification by the Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs cease to extend thereto.
(c) The Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall inform through diplomatic
channels all signatory and acceding States of any notification received by it under
this Article.
DONE in Brussels, in a single original in the French and English languages,
the two texts being equally authentic, on May 10, 1952.
