Agreement of trading and economic cooperation between the HKJ and the
government of the state of Israel (SI).
According to peace agreement signed by the government of the HKJ and the
government of SI on 26 October 1994, the two governments of HKJ and that of SI
referred to hereinafter by (the contracting parties).
and Pursuant to Article (7) of peace treaty in compliance with clause (2B) of the same
article which calls for negotiations to reach an agreement of economic and trading
cooperation
(within a period not exceeding six months from the date of exchanging and ratifying
documents of this agreement) and for the sake of certification, the two parties re-stress
the seventh article as follows !
1. As a starting point that considers economic development and prosperity as two
pillars for peace and security and desirable relationships between states, nations
and human beings,
the two parties in light of the understanding aspects reached, stress their mutual
wishes to promote the economic cooperation interalia per and within the wider
framework of regional economic cooperation.
2. And for realizing this goal, the two retries have agreed on the following:
A. To remove all distinction barriers that hinder reaching normal economic
relations, and to scrap off all economic boycott against the other party and
to cooperate to terminate the economic boycott standing out against each
other by third parties.
B. In recognition by the two parties that relations interalia should be guided
by the free-streamlined principles for goods and services with no
obstacles, they shall enter into negotiations to reach the conclusion of
agreements related to economic cooperation including trading activity and
establishing free trading zone / zones, investment, banking work,
industrial and manpower cooperation with the aim of establishing
beneficial relations based on agreed upon principles. and On human
development considerations, region-wide.
These negotiations shall be finished within a maximum of six months of
the date of exchanging documents ratifying this agreement.
C. To cooperate bilaterally and in the multi-party circles, promotion of their
economies and the economic neighboring relations with other regional
parties.
and In recognition of the importance of the economic development and
prosperity as peace and security supports and harmonized relations
and In recognition of the role of the economy and commerce as important
and basic elements in the formation of developing the bilateral relations 
based on established, fair and long-term range.
and in recognition that geographical neighborhood between the two
parties, and the long common borders, and their economic and
commercial structures promote cooperation interalia in the economic
industrial and technical fields and infrastructure.
and Based on their wish to cooperate bilaterally, and in multiparty circles
with the view of developing their economies.
And based on their wish to develop their economic and commercial
relations interalia on the basis of mutual benefit with the view of reducing
the differences in the levels of the economic development between them.
They (the two parties) shall seek to find out the positive conditions to
develop their contacts and economic cooperation between workers on
economy and the concerned establishments in their countries, and so have
agreed on the following:
First Atricle
The two parties shall take all appropriate measures to encourage economic and
commercial cooperation between them to make sure that it’s developed in a regular way.
Second Article
1. The two parties shall scrap all forms of boycott and shall grant in all matters
related to the products of each in respect of customs due to the other party the
treatment of the best favored state in relation to the following:
A. Customs fees, other different fees applicable to imported and exported
items
B. The rules and procedures related to imports and exports including those
related to customs clearance, transit, storage and transshipment
C. Taxations and other various internal fees applicable directly or indirectly
on imported goods.
D. Sales, purchases, transport, distribution, storage and introducing imported
goods in their internal markets.
2. Each party shall grant the products of local origin customs wise to the other party
indiscriminate treatment in respect of the application of the quantitative
determinants, license granting and foreign currency and in particular what relates
to purchase and restriction of foreign currency to settlement of the payments
related to imported goods and services.
3. Terms and conditions set forth in Para 1 and 2 of this article don’t apply to any of
the following benefits.
A. Arising from participating in the customs union or free trade zone or
regional economic organization wherein any of the parties is member
thereof or may become so in the future.
B. Arising from the benefits and advantages and privileges and exemptions 
granted or that shall be granted by Jordan to the Arab states members in
the Arab league or the Palestinian self-rule authority.
C. The One granted by any of the two parties or may be granted to any state
under the international agreements.
The Third Article
The two parties may agree to reduce the custom fees on the goods listed in the protocol
signed between them, which specifies the goods lists of each party to be exempted
partially or totally from custom fees.
The Fourth Article
Trading and economic cooperation between the two parties shall be made on the basis of
the normal trading among business partners in both countries pursuant to laws and
regulations applicable in both countries and the current agreement and the contracts
concluded between the artificial and legal parties in both countries.
The Fifth Article
The two parties shall allow under applicable laws and regulations in both countries the
entry of some imported and exported items on transitional basis without levying custom
fees or value added taxation or duty fees or purchases fees or any other fees of any
similar effect which shall include the following materials
A. The trading samples, publicly materials, which have no trading value pursuant to
general convention for year 1952 facilitating importing of trade samples and
publicist materials.
B. The items of public fairs (exhibitions) and commercial items imported on
transitional basis pursuant to laws and regulations applicable by each party.
C. The private containers and the wrapped up items used in the international trading
on return basis pursuant to applicable laws and regulations by both parties.
D. Repairing items on condition they were imported on transition basis and to be reexported.
The Sixth Article
The two parties shall encourage information exchange about matters related to
facilitating the development of trade and economic cooperation between them.
The two parties shall agree to encourage expansion of the economic cooperation in trade
and industry by means of which are:
A. To encourage the joint industrial activities including the activities of developing
markets in their countries and joint activities in third countries as well.
B. To facilitate the transit movement and exporting of goods.
C. To assist and cooperate in establishing promotion and marketing channels.
D. To encourage direct contacts among the commercial industrial and economic
agencies in the two countries.
E. To help and facilitate the visits of businessmen for the two countries.
F. To protect and enhance environment through joint cooperation with the
framework of providing the productive operations, devices, equipments and
services properly suited for environment.
G. To encourage and promote the activities aiming at facilitating trade interalia
including holding commercial and public fairs , Conferences, publicity,
advertising, consultant services and other services.
The Seventh Article
The two parties have agreed to make urgent consultations if requested by any of them, if
imports by any of the parties cause or may cause a threat of damage to local
manufacturers of similar or competitive goods in direct way, and that is with the aim of
seeking quick solutions to the arising problems.
In critical situations, and when the importing party views the necessity for quick action
or tackling such damages, he may take the appropriate actions without prior consultation
provided that he starts consultations directly after the action is taken and when such
actions have been used based on this article the two parties shall seek to give priority to
actions or measures that are harmful to the effectiveness of this Agreement.
The Eighth Article
The two parties shall exert their effort to settle disputes that may arise as a result of
interpretation or application of this article through negotiations.
The Ninth Article
Each party shall allow, pursuant to rules of his laws and regulations to operate trade
representation of lawful capacity to the other party in his country, and shall provide
suitable conditions, as far as he can, for his activities.
The Tenth Article
This agreement shall not lead to any prejudice against any of the two parties to impose
any restrictions or determinants on the imports and exports and the transit trade pursuant
to the rules andregulations observed by that party which aim to protect the interests of
security and public order or moralistic values and to protect the life of man, animal,
plants, health, national wealthies of historical, artistic antique values and the operations
dealing with gold, silver, and precious metals. However, these restrictions should not
form instruments for discrimination or concealed determinant for the trading between
the two parties.
The Eleventh Article
The two parties. Shall encourage the participation of their country establishments and
companies in international fairs (exhibitions) held in the country of the other and each
shall provide necessary assistance within the limits of the laws and regulations
applicable by them.
The Twelfth Article
The two parties shall provide the adequate, effective and indiscriminate protection and
shall apply same in respect to the rights of the intellectual, commercial and industrial
property, as well as protection for the literary and artistic works within the laws
and regulation applicable by them, and shall agree to comply with the clauses of Paris
conference held in Paris on 20th Mar, 1883 to protect the industrial property.
Article Thirteen
Each party may adopt protection mechanisms such as taking appropriate measures
towards dumping and sustaining goods imported from the other party and to apply the
fees of value – balance or dump and allow the temporary protection measures for their
local industries which may be harmed due to sharp rise in the imports or to dump or to 
unfair practices against the other party.
These measures shall be taken under prevailing rules for each party in conformity with
the international, acceptable practices, and shall not be groundless biased.
Article Fourteen
1. Each party may apply temporary commercial measures when a threat is posed or
a prejudice against the payments balance, and each party may apply temporary
commercial measures to avail adequate time to the amendment actions at the
level of the overall economy to address the problems of the payments balance so
as to produce effect.
These temporary commercial measures shall not be taken to protect a specific or
particular industry or specific or particular sector.
2. The temporary commercial measures applicable pursuant to Para (6) above shall
fit in time and effect with the degree of fault in the payments balance of the
harmed party who takes up measures, which shall slow down in pace with the
status (condition) of the payments balance of the harmed party who takes up
measures, which shall slow down in pace with the status (condition) of the
payments balance of the harmed party.
3. When the temporary commercial measures are taken, each party shall allow their
imports created in the other party a type of treatment not less preferential than
similar ones in a third country (state) .
Article Fifteen
The two parties shall undertake to fix the value of goods for the purpose of levying
customs fees on them according to the normal practices followed by them without bias
against the other party.
Article Sixteen
1. The two parties shall undertake to cooperate to make sure that trading interalia is
established on the strength of the rules of this Agreement, laws and regulations
applicable by their countries.
2. The customs authorities of both countries shall cooperate to block out smuggling,
escaping from taxes, and unlawful drugs trading.
3. The two parties shall cooperate in all customs matters related to the bilateral
customs relations, and that each shall help the other in this respect.
4. The customs authorities of both parties shall provide the high, usual. Customs
services used in their countries to all related trade activities interalia, besides
rendering this same high level of customs level of services at the border crossing
points for both countries.
5. The two parties shall aspire and cooperate to simplify the bilateral customs
procedures, and transfer the information related to the bilateral customs
procedures
6. The customs authorities of both parties shall agree on the methods and
procedures related to the application of this article .
Article Seventeen
Regarding the metrology and technical systems, the two parties have agreed on the
following:
1. To encourage the natural recognition of the certificates and reports of lab tests
issued by the concerned institutions in both countries per the metrology
applicable by the importing party.
2. To exchange laws, regulations, metrology and technical standards.
3. To exchange information in the fields of measurements, tests labs and approve
same. Exchange product certificates and approve the systems of quality
department per ISO 9000.
Article Eighteen
The two parties shall consult through their concerned in situations in relation to the
bilateral labor cases.
The individuals employed legally by the other party shall enjoy the rights and social
insurance and the other privileges normally granted by each party to the workers from
other states.
Article Nineteen
The two parties have agreed to setup a joint Jordanian – Israeli committee for trade and
economic cooperation to facilitate the application of this agreement.
1. The committee shall meet once a year or upon request by any of the parties,
whereas the meetings shall be held in rotation in Jordan and Israel.
2. The committee shall undertake functions of which are :
A. To check implementation of the rules of this Agreement and to look into
any actions that may be taken with the view of meeting its provisions.
B. To discuss the matters related to promoting and developing the trade
relations and economic cooperation between the two parties.
C. To explore the possibilities to promote and expand the scopes of trade and
economic relations including cooperation in the fields of industry of
investment on the bases of mutual benefit and to probe for any new fields
for cooperation .
D. To consult about any problem that may arise during the process of
developing the trading and economic relations between the two parties.
E. The committee shall submit reports and recommendation to both parties
related to matters described above based upon joint agreement.
Article Twenty one
This agreement shall be subject to approval and endorsement pursuant to national rules
of laws and Procedures of each party and shall come through for implementation within
(30) days of the date of exchanging diplomatic missions ensuring approval or
ratification
Article Twenty two
This agreement shall be operating for three years and shall be renewed automatically for
another three years straight by tacit approval unless one of the parties shall decide to
discontinue operation in writing through a prior notice to the other party by three 
months from the date of its expiry.
Signed in Ein Bokeik
On 25 of Oct 1995 A. D. Corresponding the first day of Hisban month hebrew year
5765, and the first day of Jumad II of 1416 H.
Two original copies in Arab, Hebrew and English languages. All of these versions are
original. Incase of dispute, the one in English shall prevail
Signature
For HKJ
Eng. Ali Abu Al Raghib
Minister of Industry and Commerce
Signature
Mikha Khreish
Minister of Commerce and
Industry


ANNEX TEXT: 


Annexed Protocol
To The Agreement
Of Trade and Economic cooperation
In accordance with the trade and economic cooperation Agreement. Signed to day
between the HKJ government, and SI government, referred to herein after by the parties
and in accordance to Article (3) in the Agreement, the two parts share agreed on the
following:
Article 1
A. 1. The basis for the reduction of the customs tariff on the goods of Jordanian
origin listed in table (1) shall be the fees of the Israeli customs tariff
provided for in the table referred to above.
2. The basis of the reductions of customs tariff on the goods of Israeli origin
listed in table (2) shall be the fees of the customs tariff prevailing on the
date (day) of clearing the goods in the customs office.
B. The reductions of customs tariff shall (be) (made) per the following tables :
1. As for goods of Jordanian origin, imported to the Israeli customs (region)
area and listed in table (1) the tariff fees shall be reduced as detailed in
table (1) lie at the rate of 100% for list (A) and at the rate of 50% for list
(B) and at the rate of 20% for list (C)
2. As for the goods of Israeli origin imported to the customs area (region)
listed in table (2), the tariff fees shall be reduced at the rate of 10% of the
Jordan tariff fees applicable as of the date of clearing the goods in
customs, and at the rate of 5% subsequently as of the date of the first day
of the third year marking the implementation of this protocol.
Article 2
This protocol shall be subject to approval and ratification per national laws and
procedures of each party and shall become applicable within thirty days of the date of
exchanging last diplomatic documents ascertaining this approval or ascertaining this
approval or ascertaining thereon.
Article 3
This protocol shall remain valid for three years, during which the two parties shall
negotiate to expand the stretch of fee reduction by both parties to ensure the betterment
of (access to markets) introduction of goods to markets of each party.
Article 4
The origin bases that should be made applicable shall be those provided for in annex (1)
and shall be considered indivisible part of this protocol.
Signed in Ein Bokeik on 25 Oct 1995 correspond. 1 of Hisban month 5756 Hebrew, 1
Jumad II 1416H, of two originals in Hebrew, Arabic and English each shall be
considered original. In case of dispute Eng.
