Fisheries Off the United States Coasts
Agreement amending and extending the agreement of July 26,
1982, as amended and extended.
Effected by exchange of notes
Signed at Washington May 29 and June 19, 1991;
Entered into force November 26, 1991;
Effective July 1, 1991.
NOTE I.
The Secretary of State to the Korean Ambassador
His Excellency
Hong-Choo Hyun,
Ambassador of the Republic of Korea.
Excellency:
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON
May 29, 1991
I have the honor to refer to the Agreement between the Government of the
United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Korea
Concerning Fisheries off the Coasts of the United States, signed at Washington
on July 26, 1982, as amended and extended (hereinafter referred to as "the
  Agreement") and due to expire on July 1, 1991. Noting the desire by the
United States to address cooperatively with Korea the recommendations outlined
in United Nations General Assembly Resolution 44/225 of December 1989 on
Large-Scale Pelagic Driftnet Fishing, as well as concerns about the burgeoning
fishery for pollock in the central Bering Sea area, I have the honor to propose
that, in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI, the Agreement be
extended until December 31, 1993. I have the honor to propose that the Agreement
be further amended as follows:
1. In Article II, paragraph 1, delete " ( except highly migratory species),".
2. In Article II, delete existing paragraph 2 in its entirety and replace it with:
"2. "fish" means all finfish, molluscs, crustaceans, and other forms of
  marine animal and plant life, other than marine mammals and birds;"
  3. In Article II, at the end of subparagraph 6. b., add the word "and", delete
  paragraph 7 and renumber the present paragraph 8 as paragraph 7.
  4. In Article IV, paragraph 7, delete "; and" and replace with "; ".
  5. In Article IV, add a new paragraph 8 as follows:
    "8. whether, and to what extent, such nations are cooperating with the
United States in matters pertaining to the fulfillment of the recommendations
outlined in United Nations General Assembly Resolution 44/225 of
December 1989 on Large-scale Pelagic Driftnet Fishing and in the conservation
of the pollock resource in the central Bering Sea; and"
  6. In Article IV, renumber existing paragraph 8 as new paragraph 9 and insert
  the words "Government of the" before "United States".
  7. In Article XII, add a new paragraph 5 as follows:
    "5. The Government of the Republic of Korea shall cooperate with the
Government of the United States of America in matters pertaining to the
fulfillment of the recommendations outlined in United Nations General
Assembly Resolution 44/225 of December 1989 on Large-scale Pelagic
Driftnet Fishing and in the conservation of the pollock resource in the
central Bering Sea."
  I have the further honor to propose that, if these proposals are acceptable
  to the Government of the Republic of Korea, this Note and the Embassy's Note
in reply to that effect shall constitute an Agreement between the two Governments,
which will enter into force on a date to be agreed upon in a subsequent
exchange of diplomatic notes between the two Governments following the
completion of necessary internal procedures.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
For the Secretary of State:
David A. Colson
NOTE II.
The Korean Ambassador to the Secretary of State
EMBASSY OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency's Note of
  May 29, 1991 which reads as follows:
    [Note I]
  I have the honour to inform you that the extension of the Agreement
  between the Government of the Republic of Korea and the Government of the
  United States of America concerning Fisheries off the coasts of the United States
  signed at Washington on July 26, 1982, as amended and extended, until December
  31, 1993 and the amendments proposed above are acceptable to the Government
  of the Republic of Korea and to confirm that Your Excellency's Note and
this Note in reply shall constitute an agreement between the two Governments,
which will enter into force on a date to be agreed upon in a subsequent exchange
of diplomatic notes between the two Governments following the completion of
necessary internal procedures.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
Washington, D.C.
June 19, 1991
