An Agreement Between
The Syria Arab Republic
and The Lebanese Republic
For
The Sharing of
the Great Southern River Basin Waters
and The Building of
Joint Dam on it
As a substantiation of the joint relations and the Arabic brotherhood, and
starting from the sincere cooperation between them in the joint international
waters scope, and leading on the regulations of the international law especially
the regulations of the convention on the law of the non - navigational uses of
international watercoursesin the year 1997, which was retified by the two
governments and which constitutes the solid base of a reasonable and equitable
sharing of joint international rivers water.
After being informed about the results of the negotiations that was held between
the delegations of the two countries, and in appreciation of the common
advantage for both countries through sharing the Great Southern River Basin
water in a reasonableand equitable and the building of a commen dam on the
main course of the river on Edlin - Nora Tahta Site.
So the government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the government of the
Lebanese Republic have decided to conclude this agreement to deputize Messrs :
H.E. Eng. Muhammad Redwan Martini Minister of irrigation as a
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic governmenL
H.E. Dr. Muhammad Abdual Al- Hammed Baidoun M.inister of Energy and
water as a representation of the Lebanese Republic Government
THE FIRST ARTICLE
Here in after we mention and clarify the meaning of the word and statements
used in this agreement :
Syria: The Syrian Arab Republic
Lebanon: The Lebanese Republic
The state (side) country : Syria or Lebanon due to meaning requirements.
The competent Minister: The minister of irrigation in Syria, and the minister of
energy and water in Lebanon.
The Great Southern River: it is the borderline river situated on the north of
Lebanon and South the Syrian coast.
The Dam and reservoir Edlin - Nora Tahta: it is a dam for storing water on the
Great Southern River, established in the Syrian and Lebanese Lands near Edlin
- Nora Tahta site.
Joint committee: the Syria,n Lebanese committee for shared water.
The Average Annual water resources: which is estimated to be 150 m.m3
(million cubic meters).
THE SECOND ARTlCLE
The introduction of this a.greement and the annexes number /1/ and number /2/
are considered to be inseparable part of the agreement.
THE THIRD ARTICLE
Basing on what was mentioned in the introduction of this agreement and taking
into consideration all the related factors Laid down in the sixth article of the
convention on the law of the non - navigational uses of international
watercourses, and for natural and legal reasons:
The two countries has decided to share the water of the Great Southern River in
a rate (60%) sixty percent for Syria of all the annual water resources and (40%)
forty percent for Lebanon of all the annual water resources.
THE FOURTH ARTICLE
The percentage state in article 3 of this agreement applies to sharing the water
resources of river basin i n all circumstances whether the year was wet, normal or
dry.
THE FIFTH ARTICLE
Both the states have the right to make use of their shares determined in article 3
of this agreement according to the suitable time and place during the water year
fot each of these two states, maintaining the environment system according tc
the criteria adopted by 1he main Syrian Lebanese committee for joint water
must be taken into consideration.
THE SIXTH ARTICLE
In view of the volume of :annual water resources of the river water basin and th,
water needs for the different purposes (drinking, irrigation, industry) in botl
counties. the two states decided to establish a ioint dam at the site of Idleen
Nura Al - Tahta with a total storage of about 70 m.m3 (70 million m3) accordio.g
to the technical and economical feasibility studies.
THE SEVENTH ARTICLE
The main Syrian Lebanese committee for joint water which formed earlier is
charged with implementing the rules of this agreemP.nt and laying out the
internal regime which organizes its work and to be endorsed by the minister of
irrigation in Syria and the minister of energy and water in Lebanon.
The committee undertakes all the mission entrusted to i t according to the rules of
this agreement, and it also practices all the rights and obligation and considering
all cases resulting from applying it.
THE EIGHTIETH ARTICLE
The main Syrian Lebanese committee for joint water form a committee or
subcommittee from both sides working under its supervision according to need.
Ia case of any disagreement between the member of the joint committee and
being not able to reach a decisive result the committee should present an
immediate report thereby to the two concerned ministers to settle tht
disagreement by contacting each other directly and fmding objective solution
that guarantee the rights of the two countries according to the rules of tbii
agreement.
THE NINTH ARTICLE
The above mentioned joint committee is charged in article 8 of this agreement
with taking all the measures necessary to study and construct the joint dam a
the site of Idleen - Nura Al- Tabta according to what is stated in annex No. /1
enclosed with agreement.
THE TENTH ARTICLE
Both Syria and Lebanon bear the all costs necessary to study and construct th
joint dam in half provided that the two sides try to get the necessary financin;
from self or external sources.
THE ELEVENTH ARTICLE
The international borders existing currently between the two states remain a
they are considered drawn on water surface whatsoever the water volume in th
reservoir mi2ht be and which will result from constructing the joint dam.
If Syria or Lebanon desired to use quantities from the water upstream of the
dam especially in dry seasons within their shares (60%, 40% respectively)
provided that they maintain the environment system as stated in the above
mentioned article S, that would discount from their shares in the dam stock. The
state that does not use its share of the stored water io the dam at the end of the
water year according to the program of taking water stated in annex No ./2/ in
this agreement can not use this shore in the next years.
THE THIRTEENTH ARTICLE
The members of the joint committee, members of the sub - committee and
workers in the project benefit from the facilities necessary to study, implement
and exploit in the lands of the two states and they have the freedom to move
without any restrictions or fees.
THE FOURTEENTH ARTICLE
This agreement is to be endorsed according to the constitutional procedures
followed in both countries and it will become valid starting from the date of
exchanging the concluding documents.
It is permitted to amend this agreement by annexes to be endorsed and to
exchange the concluding documents according to the procedures of endorsing
and concluding this agreement.
THE FIFTEENTH ARTICLE
This agreement was signed in Beirut on 20/4/2002 in Arabic in two original
copies that have the same force and sent t o both states.
Behave the Lebanese Republic
Minister of Energy and water
Mohammed Abdul Al Hammed Baidoun
Behave the Syria Arab Republic
Minister of Irrigation
Eng. Mohammed Redwan martini
