FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA AND THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
 
PREAMBLE
The Republic of Turkey (hereinafter referred to as "Turkey") and the Republic of Latvia (hereinafter referred to as "Latvia");
RECALLING their intention to participate actively in the process of economic integration in Europe and expressing their preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways and means to strengthen this process;
REFERRING to the Agreement Establishing an Association between Turkey and the European Economic Community and Agreement on Free Trade and Trade-Related Matters between the European Communities and the Republic of Latvia;
HAVING regard to the experience gained from the co-operation developed between the Parties to this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "the Parties") as well as between them and their main trading partners;
DECLARING their willingness to take action with a view to promoting harmonious development of their trade as well as to expanding and diversifying their mutual co-operation in the fields of common interest, including fields not covered by this Agreement, thus creating a framework and supportive environment based on equality, non discrimination, and a balance of rights and obligations;
RESOLVED to lay down for this purpose provisions aimed at the progressive abolition of the obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the provisions of these instruments, in particular those concerning the establishment of free trade areas;
RECALLING the mutual interest of the Parties in the continual reinforcement of the multilateral trading system and considering their relations to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (herein after referred to as "GATT") and the World Trade Organization (herein after referred to as "WTO"), the provisions and instruments of which constitute a basis for their foreign trade policy;
CONSIDERING the respective commitments of the Parties to free trade and in particular to compliance with the rights and obligations arising out of the GATT and the WTO.
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the following Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement"):
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
	1.	Turkey and Latvia establish a free trade area upon the entry into force of this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in conformity with those of the GATT 1994 and the WTO.
	2.	The objectives of this Agreement are:
	A.	to promote, through the expansion of reciprocal trade, the harmonious development of the economic relations between the Parties;
	B.	to provide fair conditions of competition for trade between the Parties;
	C.	to contribute in this way, by removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade;
	D.	to enhance cooperation between the Parties.
ARTICLE 2
Basic Duties
	1.	For commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Latvian Combined Nomenclature shall be applied to the classification of goods for imports into Latvia. The Turkish Customs Tariffs shall be applied to the classification of goods for imports into Turkey.
	2.	For each product originating in the Parties the basic duty to which successive reductions set out in this Agreement are to be applied shall be the MFN duty that applied in the Parties, erga omnes, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
	3.	If after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff agreement concluded as a result of the GATT Uruguay Round, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 2 as from that date when such reductions are applied.
	4.	The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective basic duties.
 
CHAPTER I
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 3
Scope
	1.	The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the exception of the products listed in Annex I.
ARTICLE 4
Customs Duties on Imports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
	1.	No new customs duty on imports or charge having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
	2.	The Parties shall abolish on their imports from each other all customs duties and charges having equivalent effect on imports on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, with the exception of those listed in Annex II.
	3.	Customs duties for products originating in the Parties which are listed in Annex II to this Agreement shall be abolished in accordance with the conditions set out therein.
ARTICLE 5
Customs Duties of a Fiscal Nature
No Customs duties of a fiscal nature shall be introduced in trade between the Parties. The provisions of Article 4 concerning the abolition of customs duties on imports shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
ARTICLE 6
Customs Duties on Exports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
	1.	No new customs duty on exports or charge having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties.
	2.	Customs duties on exports and any charges having equivalent effect shall be abolished between the Parties upon entry into force of this Agreement, with the exception of those listed in Annex II, which shall be abolished by Latvia at the latest by the end of 1998 .
 
ARTICLE 7
Quantitative Restrictions on Imports and Measures Having Equivalent Effect
	1.	No new quantitative restriction on imports or measure having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
	2.	Quantitative restrictions on imports shall be abolished between the Parties upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8
Quantitative Restrictions on Exports and Measures Having Equivalent Effect
	1.	No new quantitative restriction on exports or measure having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties as from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
	2.	Quantitative restrictions on exports and any measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 9
Trade in Textile Products
Protocol A lays down the other arrangements applicable to the textile products.
CHAPTER II
AGRICULTURAL, PROCESSED AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 10
Scope
	1.	The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural, processed agricultural and fishery products originating in the Parties.
	2.	The term "agricultural products" means for the purpose of this Agreement the products falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and the products listed in Annex I.
	3.	In trade between the Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duty on import or exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased.
ARTICLE 11
Exchange of Concessions
	1.	The Parties to this Agreement declare their readiness to foster, in so far as their agricultural policies allow, the harmonious development of trade in agricultural products and to discuss this issue periodically in the Joint Committee.
	2.	In pursuance of this objective Protocol B providing for measures to facilitate trade in agricultural, processed agricultural and fishery products has been concluded between the Parties.
ARTICLE 12
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
The parties shall not apply their regulations in sanitary and phytosanitary matters as an arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between them.
CHAPTER III
RIGHT OF ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES
ARTICLE 13
	1.	The Parties shall seek to widen the scope of the Agreement to cover the right of establishment of firms of one Party in the territory of the other Party and the liberalization of the provision of services by one Party's firms to consumers of services in the other.
	2.	The Parties will discuss this cooperation in the Joint Committee with the aim of developing and deepening their relations under this Article.
CHAPTER IV
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 14
Internal Taxation
	1.	The Parties to this Agreement shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products originating in the Parties.
	2.	Exporters may not benefit from repayment of internal taxes in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxes imposed on products exported to the territory of one of the Parties.
 
ARTICLE 15
Trade Relations Governed by Other Agreements
	1.	This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that these do not negatively affect the trade regime and in particular the provisions concerning rules of origin provided for by this Agreement.
	2.	Exchange of information between the Parties shall take place, on request, within the Joint Committee concerning agreements establishing such customs unions or free trade areas.
ARTICLE 16
Structural Adjustment
	1.	Exceptional measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article 4 may be taken by the Parties in the form of increased customs import duties.
	2.	These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important social problems.
	3.	Customs duties on imports applicable in the Parties to products originating in the other Party introduced by these measures may not exceed 25 % ad valorem and shall maintain an element of preference for products originating in the other Party. The total value of imports of the products which are subject to these measures may not exceed 15 % of total imports of industrial products from the other Party as defined in Article 3, during the last year for which statistics are available.
	4.	These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding three years and shall cease to apply at the latest by the end of the third year from the date of entry into force of the Agreement.
	5.	No such measure can be introduced in respect of a product if more than three years have elapsed since the elimination of all duties and quantitative restrictions or charges or measures having an equivalent effect concerning that product.
	6.	The Parties shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures they intend to take and, at the request of either Party, consultations shall be held in the Joint Committee on such measures and the sectors to which they apply before they are applied. When taking such measures the Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the customs duties introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a phasing out of these duties starting at the latest two years after their introduction at equal annual rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a different schedule.
ARTICLE 17
Dumping
If a Party finds that dumping, within the meaning of Article VI of GATT is taking place in trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures against this practice in accordance with Article VI of the GATT and WTO Agreement on implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the rules established by agreements related to that Article, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 21.
ARTICLE 18
General Safeguards
Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause, or threaten to cause:
	A.	serious injury to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the territory of one of the Parties, or
	B.	serious disturbances in any sector of the economy or difficulties which could bring about serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region,
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 21 of this Agreement, Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on safeguards.
ARTICLE 19
Re-export and Serious Shortage
Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 4-8 leads to:
	1.	re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party to this Agreement maintains, for the product concerned, quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or charges having equivalent effect; or
	2.	a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise, or are likely to give rise to major difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 21. The measures shall be non-discriminatory and be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
ARTICLE 20
State Monopolies
The Parties shall progressively adjust any state monopolies of a commercial character so as to ensure that by the end of 1998, no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed will exist between nationals of the Parties. The Joint Committee will be informed about the measures adopted to implement this objective.
ARTICLE 21
Procedure for the Application of Safeguard Measures
	1.	Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in this Article, the Parties to this Agreement shall endeavor to solve any differences between themselves through direct consultations, and shall inform the other Party.
	2.	In the cases specified in Articles 16, 17, 18 and 19 a Party which is considering to resort to safeguard measures shall promptly notify the Joint Committee. The Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with all relevant information and give it the assistance required to examine the case. Consultations between the Parties shall take place without delay in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
	3.	If, within one month of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the Party in question fails to put an end to the practice objected to or to the difficulties notified and in the absence of a decision by the Joint Committee in the matter, the concerned Party may adopt the safeguard measures it considers necessary to remedy the situation.
	4.	The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee. They shall be restricted, with regard to their extent and to their duration, to what is strictly necessary in order to rectify the situation giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the damage caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures that will least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.
	5.	The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of regular consultations within the Joint Committee with a view to their relaxation, or abolition when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
	6.	Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination impossible, the Party concerned may, in the case of Articles 16, 17, 18, 19, 25 and 26, apply forthwith the precautionary measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified without delay to the Joint Committee and consultations between the Parties to this Agreement shall take place within the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 22
Rules of Origin and Cooperation in Customs Administration
	1.	Protocol C lays down the rules of origin and methods of administrative cooperation.
	2.	The Parties shall take all appropriate measures, including arrangements regarding administrative cooperation, to ensure that the provisions of Articles 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this Agreement and Protocol C are effectively and harmoniously applied, taking into account the need to reduce as far as possible the formalities imposed on trade and the need to achieve mutually satisfactory solutions to any difficulties arising out of the operation of those provisions.
ARTICLE 23
General Exceptions
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public order or public security, the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants and of environment, the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value, or the protection of industrial and commercial property, or rules relating to gold or silver or the conservation of exhaustible natural resources. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 24
Payments
The Parties undertake to authorize, in freely convertible currency, in accordance to the provisions of Article VIII of the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, any payments on the current account of balance of payments to the extent that the transactions underlying the payments concern movements of goods.
ARTICLE 25
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings, Public Aid
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement, in so far as they affect trade between the Parties:
a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof;
c) any public aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favoring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to products referred in Chapter II.
	2.	Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of public aid inter alia by reporting annually to the other Party on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given and by providing, upon request, information on aid schemes. Upon request by one Party, the other Party shall provide information on particular individual cases of public aid.
	3.	If Turkey or Latvia considers that a particular practice is incompatible with the terms of the first paragraph of this Article, and:
a) is not adequately dealt with under the implementing rules referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, or
b) in the absence of such rules, and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of the other Party or material injury to its domestic industry,
it may take appropriate measures under the conditions of and accordance with the provisions laid down in Article 21 of this Agreement.
	4.	In the case of practices incompatible with paragraph 1.c) of this Article, such appropriate measures may, where the WTO/GATT 1994 applies thereto, only be adopted in conformity with the procedures and under the conditions laid down by the WTO/GATT 1994 and any other relevant instrument negotiated under its auspices which are applicable between the Parties.
	5.	Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary adopted in conformity with paragraph 3 of this Article, the Parties shall exchange information taking into account the limitations imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy.
ARTICLE 26
Balance of Payments Difficulties
Where either Party is in serious balance of payment difficulties or under threat thereof, Turkey and Latvia as the case may be, may, in accordance with the conditions laid down within the framework of GATT and with Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of International Monetary Fund, adopt restrictive measures including measures related to imports, which shall be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payment situation. Either Party, as the case may be, shall inform the other Party forthwith and present to the other Party, as soon as possible, of a time schedule of their removal.
ARTICLE 27
Intellectual, Industrial and Commercial Property
	1.	Pursuant to the provisions of this Article and of Annex IV, by 1.1.1999, the Parties shall ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights in accordance with the international standards, including effective means of enforcing such rights.
	2.	If problems in the area of intellectual, industrial and commercial property affecting trading conditions were to occur, urgent consultations within the Joint Committee will be undertaken, at the request of either party, with a view to reaching mutually satisfactory solutions.
ARTICLE 28
Public Procurement
	1.	The Parties consider the opening up of the award of public contracts on the basis of non-discrimination and reciprocity, to be a desirable objective.
	2.	As of the entry into force of this Agreement, both Parties shall grant each other's companies access to contract award procedures a treatment no less favorable than that granted to companies of any other country according to the provisions of their internal legislation.
ARTICLE 29
Establishment of the Joint Committee
	1.	A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Party shall be represented. The Joint Committee shall be responsible for the administration of this Agreement and shall ensure its proper implementation.
	2.	For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall exchange information and, at the request of any Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Parties.
	3.	The Joint Committee may, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 30, take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement. On other matters the Joint Committee may make recommendations.
ARTICLE 30
Procedures of the Joint Committee
	1.	For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet at an appropriate level whenever necessary upon request but at least once a year. Either Party may request a meeting to be held.
	2.	The Joint Committee shall act by common agreement.
	3.	If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Party to this Agreement has accepted a decision subject to the fulfillment of constitutional requirements, the decision shall enter into force, if no later date is contained therein, on the day the lifting of the reservation notified.
	4.	The Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure which shall, inter alia, contain provisions for convening meetings and for the designation of the Chairman and his/her term of office.
	5.	The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working parties as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
ARTICLE 31
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures which it considers necessary:
a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of international obligations or national policies;
i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other goods provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military purposes materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
iii) in time of war or other serious international tension constituting threat of war.
 
ARTICLE 32
Fulfillment of Obligations
	1.	The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement and the fulfillment of their obligations under this Agreement.
	2.	If either Party considers that the other has failed to fulfill an obligation under this Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 21.
ARTICLE 33
Evolutionary Clause
	1.	Where either Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the economies of the Parties to develop the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Party. The Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine this request and, where appropriate, to make recommendations to them, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
	2.	Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be subject to ratification or approval by the Parties to this Agreement in accordance with their internal legal procedures.
ARTICLE 34
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement other than those referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 29, which are approved by the Joint Committee shall be submitted to the Parties for ratification or acceptance in accordance with their internal legal procedures and shall enter into force in accordance with the provisions of Article 37.
ARTICLE 35
Protocols and Annexes
Protocols and Annexes to this Agreement are an integral part of this Agreement. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Protocols and Annexes in accordance with the provision of paragraph 3 of the Article 30.
 
ARTICLE 36
Expiration
Each party may denounce this Agreement by means of a written notification to the other Party. This Agreement shall cease to apply six months after the date of receipt of such notification.
ARTICLE 37
Entry into Force
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month, following the date on which the Parties have notified each other through diplomatic channels, that their internal legal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized thereto, have signed this Agreement.
 
DONE at Ankara, this 16 th day of June, 1998, in two originals each in the English language both texts being equally authentic
ANNEX TEXT:

ANNEX I
List of products referred to in Article 3
HEADING
BRIEF PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
2905 43 00
- - Mannitol
2905 44
- - D-glucitol (sorbitol)
3302
Mixtures of odoriferous substances and mixtures (including alcoholic solutions) with a basis of one or more of these substances, of a kind used as raw materials in industry; other preparations based on odoriferous substances, of a kind used for the manufacture of beverages:
3302 10 29
- - - - - Other
3501 10
- Casein:
3501 10 10
- - For the manufacture of regenerated textile fibres
3501 10 50
- - For industrial uses Other than the manufacture of foodstuffs or fodder
3501 10 90
- - Other
3501 90
- Other:
3501 90 90
- - Other
3502
Albumins (including concentrates of two or more whey proteins, containing by weight more than 80% whey proteins, calculated on the dry matter), albuminates and Other albumin derivatives:
 
- Egg albumin:
3502 11
- - Dried:
3502 11 10
- - - Unfit, or to be rendered unfit, for human consumption
3502 11 90
- - - Other
3502 19
- - Other:
3502 19 10
- - - Unfit, or to be rendered unfit, for human consumption
3502 19 90
- - - Other
3502 20
- Milk albumin, including concentrates of two or more whey proteins:
3502 20 10
- - Unfit, or to be rendered unfit, for human consumption
 
- - Other:
3502 20 91
- - - Dried (for example, in sheets, scales, flakes, powder)
3502 20 99
- - - Other
 
- Other:
 
- - Albumins, Other than egg albumin and milk albumin (lactalbumin):
3502 90 20
- - - Unfit, or to be rendered unfit, for human consumption
3502 90 70
- - - Other
3502 90 90
- - Albuminates and Other albumin derivatives
3505 10
- Dextrins and Other modified starches
3505 10 10
- - Dextrins
3505 10 90
- - Other
3505 20
- Glues
3809
Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or fixing of dyestuffs and Other products and preparations (for example, dressings and mordants), of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or like industries, not elsewhere specified or included:
3809 10
- With a basis of amylaceous substances
 
- Other:
3809 91 00
- - Of a kind used in the textile or like industries (excluding 3809 91 00 90 11 19)
3809 92 00
- - Of a kind used in the paper or like industries (excluding 3809 92 00 90 00)
3809 93 00
- - Of a kind used in the leather or like industries (excluding 3809 93 00 90 00)
3824 60
- Sorbitol Other than that of subheading 2905 44
4501
Natural cork, raw or simply prepared; waste cork; crushed, granulated or ground cork:
4501 10 00
- Natural cork, raw or simply prepared
4501 90 00
- Other
5201 00
Cotton, not carded or combed
5301
Flax, raw or processed but not spun; flax tow and waste (including yarn waste and gartnetted stock)
5302
True hemp (Cannabis sativa L.), raw or processed but not spun; tow and waste of true hemp (including yarn waste and gartnetted stock)
 
ANNEX II
The customs duties for the products listed below shall be:
- reduced to the 70% of the basic duty with the entry into force of the Agreement,
- reduced to the 40% of the basic duty on 1.1.1999,
- eliminated on 1.1.2000.
ANNEX IV
referred to in Article 27
	1.	Paragraph 1 of Article 27 concerns the following multilateral conventions:
	•	Bern Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Paris Act, 1971);
	•	International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations (Rome, 1961);
	•	Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the purposes of the Registration of Marks (Geneva, 1977 and amended in 1979);
	•	Protocol relating to the Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks (Madrid, 1989);
	•	Budapest Treaty of the International Recognition of the Deposit of Micro-organisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedures (1977, modified in 1980);
	•	International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) (Geneva Act, 1991).
The Joint Committee may decide that paragraph 1 of Article 27 shall apply to other multilateral conventions.
	2.	The Parties confirm the importance they attach to the obligations arising from the following multilateral conventions:
	•	Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks (Stockholm Act, 1967 and amended in 1979);
	•	Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (Stockholm Act 1967 and amended in 1979);
	•	Patent Co-operation Treaty (Washington 1970, amended in 1979 and modified in 1984).
 
PROTOCOL A
referred to in Article 9
 
Trade in textile products between Turkey and Latvia shall continue to be regulated by the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Turkey and the Government of Latvia concerning trade in textiles and clothing, accepted by Note Verbale of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Latvia dated 11 January 1996 and numbered 32/n-52-43 addressed to the Embassy of Turkey in Lithuania.
This MOU will become null and void when the European Community abolishes the arrangements referred in the above mentioned Protocol.
 
 
PROTOCOL B
(referred to in Article 11)
EXCHANGE OF AGRICULTURAL CONCESSIONS BETWEEN LATVIA AND TURKEY
 
	1.	The Products originating in Turkey listed in Annex A to this Protocol shall be imported into Latvia according to the conditions established in that Annex.
	2.	  
	3.	The Products originating in Latvia listed in Annex B to this Protocol shall be imported into Turkey according to the conditions established in that Annex.
Annex A
Imports into Latvia of the following products originating in Turkey shall be subject to the concessions set out below.
Annex B
Imports into Turkey of the following products originating in Latvia shall be subject to the concessions set out below.
PROTOCOL C
concerning the definition of the concept of "originating products" and methods of administrative cooperation
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
- Article 1 Definitions
TITLE II DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
- Article 2 General requirements - Article 3 Bilateral cumulation of origin - Article 4 Diagonal cumulation of origin
- Article 5 Wholly obtained products - Article 6 Sufficiently worked or processed products - Article 7 Insufficient working or processing operations - Article 8 Unit of qualification - Article 9 Accessories, spare parts and tools - Article 10 Sets - Article 11 Neutral elements
TITLE III TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
- Article 12 Principle of territoriality - Article 13 Direct transport - Article 14 Exhibitions
TITLE IV DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
- Article 15 Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
TITLE V PROOF OF ORIGIN
- Article 16 General requirements - Article 17 Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 - Article 18 Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively - Article 19 Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1 - Article 20 Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin issued or made out previously
- Article 21 Conditions for making out an invoice declaration - Article 22 Approved exporter Article 23 Validity of proof of origin - Article 24 Submission of proof of origin - Article 25 Importation by installments - Article 26 Exemptions from proof of origin - Article 27 Supporting documents - Article 28 Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents - Article 29 Discrepancies and formal errors - Article 30 Amounts expressed in ECU
TITLE VI ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION
- Article 31 Mutual assistance - Article 32 Verification of proofs of origin - Article 33 Dispute settlement - Article 34 Penalties - Article 35 Free zones
TITLE VII FINAL PROVISIONS
- Article 36 Sub Committee on customs and origin matters
- Article 37 Annexes - Article 38 Amendments to the Protocol
 
TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) "manufacture" means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;
(b) "material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the manufacture of the product;
(c) "product" means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;
(d) "goods" means both materials and products;
(e) "customs value" means the value as determined in accordance with the 1994 Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);
(f) "ex-works price" means the price paid for the product ex works to the manufacturer in Latvia or Turkey in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;
(g) "value of materials" means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in Latvia or Turkey;
(h) "value of originating materials" means the value of such materials as defined in subparagraph (g) applied mutatis mutandis ;
(i) "added value" shall be taken to be the ex-works price minus the customs value of each of the products incorporated which did not originate in the country in which those products were obtained;
(j) "chapters" and "headings" mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes) used in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as "the Harmonized System" or "HS";
(k) "classified" refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular heading;
(l) "consignment" means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;
(m) "territories" includes territorial waters.
 
TITLE II
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
Article 2
General requirements
1. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in Latvia:
(a) products wholly obtained in Latvia within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol;
(b) products obtained in Latvia incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in Latvia within the meaning of Article 6 of this Protocol.
2. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in Turkey:
(a) products wholly obtained in Turkey within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol;
(b) products obtained in Turkey incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in Turkey within the meaning of Article 6 of this Protocol.
Article 3
Bilateral cumulation of origin
1. Materials originating in Latvia shall be considered as materials originating in Turkey when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred to in Article 7(1) of this Protocol.
2. Materials originating in Turkey shall be considered as materials originating in Latvia when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred to in Article 7(1) of this Protocol.
Article 4
Diagonal cumulation of origin
	1.	Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, materials originating in the European Communities, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, Bulgaria, Romania, Estonia, Lithuania, Slovenia, Iceland, Norway or Switzerland within the meaning of the Agreements between Latvia and Turkey and these countries shall be considered as originating in Latvia or Turkey when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing.
	2.	Products which have acquired originating status by virtue of paragraph 1 shall only continue to be considered as products originating in Latvia or Turkey when the value added there exceeds the value of the materials used originating in any one of the other countries referred to in paragraph 1. If this is not so, the products concerned shall be considered as originating in the country referred to in paragraph 1 which accounts for the highest value of originating materials used. In the allocation of origin, no account shall be taken of materials originating in the other countries referred to in paragraph 1 which have undergone sufficient working or processing in Latvia or Turkey.
	3.	The cumulation provided for in this Article may only be applied where the materials used have acquired the status of originating products by an application of rules of origin identical to the rules in this Protocol. Latvia and Turkey shall provide each other, with details of agreements and their corresponding rules of origin which have been concluded with the other countries referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 5
Wholly obtained products
I. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in Latvia or Turkey:
(a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed;
(b) vegetable products harvested there;
(c) live animals born and raised there;
(d) products from live animals raised there;
(e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;
(f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the territorial waters of Latvia or Turkey by their vessels;
(g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in subparagraph (f);
(h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including used tyres fit only for retreading or for use as waste;
(i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;
(j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside their territorial waters provided that they have sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;
(k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in subparagraphs (a) to (j).
2. The terms "their vessels" and "their factory ships" in paragraph 1(f) and (g) shall apply only to vessels and factory ships:
(a) which are registered or recorded in Latvia or Turkey;
(b) which sail under the flag of Latvia or Turkey;
(c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50 per cent by nationals of Latvia or of Turkey, or by a company with its head office in one of the Parties, of which the manager or managers, Chairman of the Board of Directors or the Supervisory Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are nationals of Latvia or Turkey and of which, in addition, in the case of partnerships or limited companies, at least half the capital belongs to Latvia or Turkey or to public bodies or nationals of Latvia or Turkey;
(d) of which the master and officers are nationals of Latvia or of Turkey, and
(e) of which at least 75 per cent of the crew are nationals of Latvia or of Turkey.
Article 6
Sufficiently worked or processed products
1. For the purposes of Article 2, products which are not wholly obtained are considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list in Annex II of this Protocol are fulfilled.
The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by this Agreement, the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. Accordingly, it follows that if a product, which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in the list, should not be used in the manufacture of a product may nevertheless be used, provided that:
(a) their total value does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the product;
(b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating materials are not exceeded through the application of this paragraph.
This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply except as provided in Article 7.
Article 7
Insufficient working or processing operations
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 6 are satisfied:
	A.	operations to ensure the preservation of products in good condition during transport and storage (ventilation, spreading out, drying, chilling, placing in salt, sulphur dioxide or other aqueous solutions, removal of damaged parts, and like operations);
	B.	simple operations consisting of removal of dust, sifting or screening, sorting, classifying, matching (including the making-up of sets of articles), washing, painting, cutting up;
	C.	(i) changes of packaging and breaking up and assembly of packages;
	D.	(ii) simple placing in bottles, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards etc., and all other simple packaging operations; 
	E.	affixing marks, labels and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;
	F.	simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds, where one or more components of the mixtures do not meet the conditions laid down in this Protocol to enable them to be considered as originating in Latvia or Turkey;
	G.	simple assembly of parts to constitute a complete product;
	H.	a combination of two or more operations specified in subparagraphs (a) to (f);
	I.	slaughter of animals.
2. All the operations carried out in either Latvia or Turkey on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.
Article 8
Unit of qualification
1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonized System.
Accordingly, it follows that:
	A.	when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonized System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification;
	B.	when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonized System, each product must be taken individually when applying the provisions of this Protocol.
2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonized System, packaging is included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.
Article 9
Accessories, spare parts and tools
Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.
Article 10
Sets
Sets, as defined in general rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded as originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15 per cent of the ex-works price of the set.
Article 11
Neutral elements
In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture :
	A.	energy and fuel;
	B.	plant and equipment;
	C.	machines and tools;
	D.	goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product.
TITLE III
TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Article 12
Principle of territoriality
1. The conditions set out in Title II relative to the acquisition of originating status must be fulfilled without interruption in Latvia or Turkey, except as provided for in Article 4.
2. If originating goods exported from Latvia or Turkey to another country are returned, except in so far as provided for in Article 4 they must be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
	A.	the goods returned are the same goods as those exported; and
	B.	they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.
Article 13
Direct transport
1. The preferential treatment provided for under the Agreement applies only to products, satisfying the requirements of this Protocol, which are transported directly between Latvia and Turkey or through the territories of the other countries referred to in Article 4. However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion arise, trans-shipment or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition.
Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of Latvia or Turkey.
2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the customs authorities of the importing country by the production of:
(a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting country through the country of transit; or
(b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:
	I.	giving an exact description of the products;
	II.	stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable, the names of the ships, or the other means of transport used; and
	III.	certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or
(c) failing these, any substantiating documents.
Article 14
Exhibitions
1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in a country other than those referred to in Article 4 and sold after the exhibition for importation in Latvia or Turkey shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that :
	A.	an exporter has consigned these products from Latvia or Turkey to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;
	B.	the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in Latvia or Turkey;
	C.	the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and
	D.	the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.
2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organized for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs control.
TITLE IV
DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
Article 15
Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
	1.	Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in Latvia, in Turkey or in one of the other countries referred to in Article 4 for which a proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V shall not be subject in Latvia or Turkey to drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.
	2.	The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund, remission or non-payment, partial or complete, of customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect, applicable in Latvia or Turkey to materials used in the manufacture, where such refund, remission or non-payment applies, expressly or in effect, when products obtained from the said materials are exported and not when they are retained for home use there.
	3.	The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit at any time, upon request from the customs authorities, all appropriate documents proving that no drawback has been obtained in respect of the non-originating materials used in the manufacture of the products concerned and that all customs duties or charges having equivalent effect applicable to such materials have actually been paid.
	4.	The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging within the meaning of Article 8 (2), accessories, spare parts and tools within the meaning of Article 9 and products in a set within the meaning of Article 10 when such items are non-originating.
	5.	The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials which are of the kind to which the Agreement applies. Furthermore, they shall not preclude the application of an export refund system for agricultural products, applicable upon export in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement.
TITLE V
PROOF OF ORIGIN
Article 16
General requirements
1. Products originating in Latvia shall, on importation into Turkey and products originating in Turkey shall, on importation into Latvia benefit from this Agreement upon submission of either :
	A.	a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III; or
	B.	in the cases specified in Article 21(1), a declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV, given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified (hereinafter referred to as the "invoice declaration").
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 26, benefit from this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above.
Article 17
Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1
	1.	A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting country on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorized representative.
	2.	For this purpose, the exporter or his authorized representative shall fill out both the movement certificate EUR.1 and the application form, specimens of which appear in Annex III. These forms shall be completed in the Latvian, Turkish or English languages and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.
	3.	The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country where the movement certificate EUR.1 is issued, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfillment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
	4.	A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of Latvia or Turkey if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Latvia, Turkey or in one of the other countries referred to in Article 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol.
	5.	The issuing customs authorities shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfillment of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate. The issuing customs authorities shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
	6.	The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in Box 11 of the certificate.
	7.	A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.
Article 18
Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 17(7), a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:
	A.	it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or
	B.	it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate EUR.1 was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.
2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and state the reasons for his request.
3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the corresponding file.
4. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively must be endorsed with one of the following phrases:
"IZDOTS P?C PRE?U EKSPORTA"
"SONRADAN VER?LM??T?R"
"ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY"
5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the movement certificate EUR.1.
Article 19
Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
	1.	In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.
	2.	The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with one of the following words:
	3.	"DUBLIK?TS" "IKINCI NÜSHADIR" "DUPLICATE" 
	4.	The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.
	5.	The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as from that date.
 
Article 20
Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin issued or made out previously
When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in Latvia or Turkey, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere within Latvia or Turkey. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.
 
Article 21
Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
1. An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 16(1)(b) may be made out:
	A.	by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 22, or
	B.	by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products whose total value does not exceed ECU 6 000.
2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Latvia, Turkey or in one of the other countries referred to in Article 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol.
3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfillment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV, using one of the linguistic versions set out in that Annex and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed characters.
5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 22 shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of the exporting country a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.
6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing country no longer than two years after the importation of the products to which it relates.
Article 22
Approved exporter
	1.	The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorize any exporter who makes frequent shipments of products under this Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorization must offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfillment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
	2.	The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.
	3.	The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorization number which shall appear on the invoice declaration.
	4.	The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorization by the approved exporter.
	5.	The customs authorities may withdraw the authorization at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, does not fulfill the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorization.
Article 23
Validity of proof of origin
	1.	A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the exporting country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing country.
	2.	Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.
	3.	In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing country may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the said final date.
 Article 24
Submission of proof of origin
Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in accordance with the procedures applicable in that Party. The said authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement.
Article 25
Importation by installments
Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of the importing country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or heading Nos. 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonized System are imported by installments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first installment.
Article 26
Exemptions from proof of origin
	1.	Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of travelers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, this declaration can be made on the customs declaration C2/CP3 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.
	2.	Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travelers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.
	3.	Furthermore, the total value of these products must not exceed ECU 500 in the case of small packages or ECU 1200 in the case of products forming part of travelers' personal luggage.
 Article 27
Supporting documents
The documents referred to in Articles 17(3) and 21(3) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice declaration can be considered as products originating in Latvia, Turkey or in one of the other countries referred to in Article 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol may consist inter alia of the following:
	A.	direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;
	B.	documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Latvia or Turkey where these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
	C.	documents proving the working or processing of materials in Latvia or Turkey, issued or made out in Latvia or Turkey, where these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
	D.	movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Latvia or Turkey in accordance with this Protocol, or in one of the other countries referred to in Article 4, in accordance with rules of origin which are identical to the rules in this Protocol.
Article 28
Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
	1.	The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the documents referred to in Article 17(3).
	2.	The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least three years a copy of this invoice declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 21(3).
	3.	The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the application form referred to in Article 17(2).
	4.	The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep for at least three years the movement certificates EUR.1 and the invoice declarations submitted to them.
 Article 29
Discrepancies and formal errors
	1.	The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products submitted.
	2.	Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.
Article 30
Amounts expressed in ECU
	1.	Amounts in the national currency of the exporting country equivalent to the amounts expressed in ECU shall be fixed by the exporting country and communicated to the importing country.
	2.	When the amounts exceed the corresponding amounts fixed by the importing country, the latter shall accept them if the products are invoiced in the currency of the exporting country. When the products are invoiced in the currency of another country referred to in Article 4, the importing country shall recognize the amount notified by the country concerned.
	3.	The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that national currency of the amounts expressed in ECU as at the first working day in October 1996.
	4.	The amounts expressed in ECU and their equivalents in the national currencies of Latvia and Turkey shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee at the request of Latvia or Turkey. When carrying out this review, the Joint Committee shall ensure that there will be no decrease in the amounts to be used in any national currency and shall furthermore consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in ECU.
 
 TITLE VI
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION
Article 31
Mutual assistance
	1.	The customs authorities of Latvia and of Turkey shall provide each other with specimen impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of movement certificates EUR.1 and with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for verifying those certificates and invoice declarations.
	2.	In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, Latvia and Turkey shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.1 or the invoice declarations and the correctness of the information given in these documents.
Article 32
Verification of proofs of origin
	1.	Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfillment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
	2.	For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs authorities of the importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of these documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.
	3.	The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting country. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.
	4.	If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.
	5.	The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Latvia, Turkey or one of the other countries referred to in Article 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol.
	6.	If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.
Article 33
Dispute settlement
Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 32 which cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification or where they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Joint Committee.
In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the importing country shall be under the legislation of the said Party.
Article 34
Penalties
Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for products.
Article 35
Free Zones
	1.	Latvia and Turkey shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products traded under cover of a proof of origin which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory, are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.
	2.	By means of an exemption to the provisions contained in paragraph 1, when products originating in Latvia or Turkey are imported into a free zone under cover of a proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned shall issue a new EUR.1 certificate at the exporter's request, if the treatment or processing undergone is in conformity with the provisions of this Protocol.
 TITLE VII
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 36
Sub-Committee on customs and origin matters
A Sub-Committee on customs and origin matters shall be set up under the Joint Committee to assist it in carrying out its duties and to ensure a continuous information and consultation processed between experts.
It shall be composed of experts from both Parties responsible for questions related to customs and origin matters.
Article 37
Annexes
The Annexes to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.
Article 38
Amendments to the Protocol
The Joint Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this Protocol.
JOINT DECLARATION ON PROTOCOL C
 
Having regard to the Decision No 1/95 of the EC - Turkey Association Council on the Customs Union and the Agreement on Free Trade and Trade Related Matters between the European Communities and Latvia;
Considering that an extended system of cumulation shall enable the use of materials originating in Turkey, Latvia, the EC, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, Bulgaria, Romania, Lithuania, Estonia, Slovenia, Iceland, Norway or Switzerland in order to facilitate trade, prevent possible trade diversions and improve the effectiveness of respective arrangements on trade among these countries;
The Parties hereby declare that, related provisions of the Protocol C concerning the EC, Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, Bulgaria, Romania, Lithuania, Estonia, Slovenia, Iceland, Norway or Switzerland shall be applicable after concluding agreements by Turkey and Latvia or after amending related Articles of the existing agreements with these countries and exchanging of letters between Turkey and Latvia about implementation thereof. Taking into consideration the Customs Union between Turkey and the EC, necessary arrangement should be made accordingly. Turkey shall inform Latvian side on the progress made in this respect between Turkey and the EC.
ANNEX I
INTRODUCTORY NOTES TO THE LIST IN ANNEX II
Note 1:
The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or processed within the meaning of Article 6 of the Protocol.
Note 2:
2.1 The first two columns in the list describe the product obtained. The first column gives the heading number or chapter number used in the Harmonized System and the second column gives the description of goods used in that system for that heading or chapter. For each entry in the first two columns a rule is specified in columns 3 or 4. Where, in some cases, the entry in the first column is preceded by an 'ex', this signifies that the rules in columns 3 or 4 apply only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.
2.2 Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 1 or a chapter number is given and the description of products in column 2 is therefore given in general terms, the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4 apply to all products which, under the Harmonized System, are classified in headings of the chapter or in any of the headings grouped together in column 1.
2.3 Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within a heading, each indent contains the description of that part of the heading covered by the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4.
2.4 Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both columns 3 and 4, the exporter may opt, as an alternative, to apply either the rule set out in column 3 or that set out in column 4. If no origin rule is given in column 4, the rule set out in column 3 has to be applied.
Note 3:
3.1 The provisions of Article 6 of the Protocol concerning products having acquired originating status which are used in the manufacture of other products apply regardless of whether this status has been acquired inside the factory where these products are used or in another factory in Latvia or in Turkey.
Example:
An engine of heading No 8407, for which the rule states that the value of the non-originating materials which may be incorporated may not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works price, is made from "other alloy steel roughly shaped by forging" of heading No ex 7224.
If this forging has been forged in Turkey from a non-originating ingot, it has already acquired originating status by virtue of the rule for heading No ex 7224 in the list. The forging can then count as originating in the value calculation for the engine regardless of whether it was produced in the same factory or in another factory in Turkey. The value of the non-originating ingot is thus not taken into account when adding up the value of the non-originating materials used.
3.2 The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or processing required and the carrying out of more working or processing also confers originating status; conversely, the carrying out of less working or processing cannot confer originating status. Thus if a rule provides that non-originating material at a certain level of manufacture may be used, the use of such material at an earlier stage of manufacture is allowed and the use of such material at a later stage is not.
3.3 Without prejudice to Note 3.2 where a rule states that "materials of any heading" may be used, materials of the same heading as the product may also be used, subject, however, to any specific limitations which may also be contained in the rule. However, the expression "manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No ... " means that only materials classified in the same heading as the product of a different description than that of the product as given in column 2 of the list may be used.
3.4 When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufactured from more than one material, this means that any one or more materials may be used. It does not require that all be used.
Example:
The rule for fabrics of heading Nos 5208 to 5212 provides that natural fibres may be used and that chemical materials, among other materials, may also be used. This does not mean that both have to be used; it is possible to use one or the other or both.
3.5 Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a particular material, the condition obviously does not prevent the use of other materials which, because of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See also Note 6.2 below in relation to textiles).
Example:
The rule for prepared foods of heading No. 1904 which specifically excludes the use of cereals and their derivatives does not prevent the use of mineral salts, chemicals and other additives which are not products from cereals.
However, this does not apply to products which, although they cannot be manufactured from the particular material specified in the list, can be produced from a material of the same nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.
Example:
In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made from non-woven materials, if the use of only non-originating yarn is allowed for this class of article, it is not possible to start from non-woven cloth - even if non-woven cloths cannot normally be made from yarn. In such cases, the starting material would normally be at the stage before yarn - that is the fibre stage.
3.6 Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the maximum value of non-originating materials that can be used, then these percentages may not be added together. In other words, the maximum value of all the non-originating materials used may never exceed the highest of the percentages given. Furthermore, the individual percentages must not be exceeded in relation to the particular materials they apply to.
Note 4:
4.1 The term "natural fibres" is used in the list to refer to fibres other than artificial or synthetic fibres. It is restricted to the stages before spinning takes place, including waste, and, unless otherwise specified, includes fibres that have been carded, combed or otherwise processed but not spun.
4.2 The term "natural fibres" includes horsehair of heading No 0503, silk of heading Nos 5002 and 5003 as well as the wool fibres, fine or coarse animal hair of heading Nos 5101 to 5105, the cotton fibres of heading Nos 5201 to 5203 and the other vegetable fibres of heading Nos 5301 to 5305.
4.3 The terms "textile pulp", "chemical materials" and "paper-making materials" are used in the list to describe the materials not classified in Chapters 50 to 63, which can be used to manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or yarns.
4.4 The term "man-made staple fibres" is used in the list to refer to synthetic or artificial filament tow, staple fibres or waste, of heading Nos 5501 to 5507.
Note 5:
5.1 Where for a given product in the list a reference is made to this note, the conditions set out in column 3 shall not be applied to any basic textile materials, used in the manufacture of this product, which, taken together, represent 10 per cent or less of the total weight of all the basic textile materials used. (See also Notes 5.3 and 5.4 below).
5.2 However, the tolerance mentioned in Note 5.1 may only be applied to mixed products which have been made from two or more basic textile materials.
The following are the basic textile materials:
- silk,
- wool,
- coarse animal hair,
- fine animal hair,
- horsehair,
- cotton,
- paper-making materials and paper,
- flax,
- true hemp,
- jute and other textile bast fibres,
- sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave,
- coconut, abaca, ramie and other vegetable textile fibres,
- synthetic man-made filaments,
- artificial man-made filaments,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polypropylene,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyamide,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyacrylonitrile,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polytetrafluoroethylene,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyphenylene sulphide,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyvinyl chloride,
- other synthetic man-made staple fibres,
- artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose,
- other artificial man-made staple fibres,
- yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped,
- yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyester whether or not gimped,
- products of heading No 5605 (metallized yarn) incorporating strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film ,
- other products of heading No 5605.
Example:
A yarn of heading No 5205 made from cotton fibres of heading No 5203 and synthetic staple fibres of heading No 5506 is a mixed yarn. Therefore, non-originating synthetic staple fibres that do not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) may be used up to a weight of 10 per cent of the yarn.
Example:
A woollen fabric of heading No 5112 made from woollen yarn of heading No 5107 and synthetic yarn of staple fibres of heading No 5509 is a mixed fabric. Therefore synthetic yarn which does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) or woollen yarn that does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from natural fibres, not carded or combed or otherwise prepared
for spinning) or a combination of the two may be used provided their total weight does not exceed 10 per cent of the weight of the fabric.
Example:
Tufted textile fabric of heading No 5802 made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and cotton fabric of heading No 5210 is only a mixed product if the cotton fabric is itself a mixed fabric being made from yarns classified in two separate headings or if the cotton yarns used are themselves mixtures.
Example:
If the tufted textile fabric concerned had been made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and synthetic fabric of heading No 5407, then, obviously, the yarns used are two separate basic textile materials and the tufted textile fabric is accordingly a mixed product.
Example:
A carpet with tufts made from both artificial yarns and cotton yarns and with a jute backing is a mixed product because three basic textile materials are used. Thus, any non-originating materials that are at a later stage of manufacture than the rule allows may be used, provided their total weight does not exceed 10 per cent of the weight of the textile materials of the carpet. Thus, both the jute backing and/or the artificial yarns could be imported at that stage of manufacture, provided the weight conditions are met.
5.3 In the case of products incorporating "yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped" this tolerance is 20 per cent in respect of this yarn.
5.4 In the case of products incorporating "strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of an adhesive between two layers of plastic film", this tolerance is 30 per cent in respect of this strip.
Note 6:
6.1 In the case of those textile products which are marked in the list by a footnote referring to this note, textile materials, with the exception of linings and interlinings, which do not satisfy the rule set out in the list in column 3 for the made-up product concerned may be used provided that they are classified in a heading other than that of the product and that their value does not exceed 8 per cent of the ex-works price of the product.
6.2 Without prejudice to Note 6.3, materials which are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63 may be used freely in the manufacture of textile products, whether or not they contain textiles.
Example:
If a rule in the list provides that for a particular textile item, such as trousers, yarn must be used, this does not prevent the use of metal items, such as buttons, because buttons are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63. For the same reason, it does not prevent the use of slide-fasteners even though slide-fasteners normally contain textiles.
6.3 Where a percentage rule applies, the value of materials which are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63 must be taken into account when calculating the value of the non-originating materials incorporated.
Note 7
7.1 For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, the "specific processes" are the following:
(a) vacuum distillation;
(b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process;
(c) cracking;
(d) reforming;
(e) extraction by means of selective solvents;
(f) the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralization with alkaline agents; decolorization and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;
(g) polymerization;
(h) alkylation;
(i) isomerization.
7.2 For the purposes of heading Nos 2710, 2711 and 2712, the "specific processes" are the following:
(a) vacuum distillation;
(b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process 1 ;
(c) cracking;
(d) reforming;
(e) extraction by means of selective solvents;
(f) the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralization with alkaline agents; decolorization and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;
(g) polymerization;
(h) alkylation;
(ij) isomerization;
(k) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, desulphurization with hydrogen resulting in a reduction of at least 85 per cent of the sulphur content of the products processed (ASTM D 1266-59 T method);
(l) in respect of products falling within heading No 2710 only, deparaffining by a process other than filtering;
(m) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, treatment with hydrogen at a pressure of more than 20 bar and a temperature of more than 250°C with the use of a catalyst, other than to effect desulphurization, when the hydrogen constitutes an active element in a chemical reaction. The further treatment with hydrogen of lubricating oils of heading No ex 2710 (e.g. hydrofinishing or decolorization) in order, more especially, to improve colour or stability shall not, however, be deemed to be a specific process;
(n) in respect of fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, atmospheric distillation, on condition that less than 30 per cent of these products distil, by volume, including losses, at 300°C by the ASTM D 86 method;
(o) in respect of heavy oils other than gas oils and fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, treatment by means of a high-frequency electrical brush-discharge.
7.3 For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, simple operations such as cleaning, decanting, desalting, water separation, filtering, colouring, marking, obtaining a sulphur content as a result of mixing products with different sulphur contents, any combination of these operations or like operations do not confer origin.
 
ANNEX II TO PROTOCOL C
 
LIST OF WORKING OR PROCESSING REQUIRED TO BE CARRIED OUT ON NON-ORIGINATING MATERIALS IN ORDER THAT THE PRODUCT MANUFACTURED CAN OBTAIN ORIGINATING STATUS
