INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE PREVENTION OF POLLUTION 
FROM SHIPS, 1973

Adopted at London on 2 November 1973


The Parties to the Convention,

Being conscious of the need to preserve the human 
environment in general and the marine environment in 
particular,

Recognizing that deliberate, negligent or accidental release 
of oil and other harmful substances from ships constitutes a 
serious source of pollution,

Recognizing also the importance of the International 
Convention for the Prevention of Polution of the Sea by Oil, 
1954, as being the first multilateral instrument to be 
concluded with the prime objective of protecting the 
environment, and appreciating the significant contribution 
which that Convention has made in preserving the seas and 
coastal environment from pollution,

Desiring to achieve the complete elimination of intentional 
pollution of the marine environment by oil and other harmful 
substances and the minimization of accidental discharge of 
such substances,

Considering that this object may best be achieved by 
establishing rules not limited to oil pollution having a 
universal purport,

Have agreed as follows:


Article 1

General obligations under the convention

1. The Parties to the Convention undertake to give effect to 
the provisions of the present Convention and those Annexes 
thereto by which they are bound, in order to prevent the 
pollution of the marine environment by the discharge of 
harmful substances or effluents containing such substances 
in contravention of the Convention.

2. Unless expressly provided otherwise, a referrence to the 
present Convention constitutes at the same time a reference 
to its Protocol and to the Annexes.


Article 2

Definitions

For the purposes of the present Convention, unless expressly 
provided otherwise:

1.  "Regulations " means the Regulations contained in the 
Annexes to the present Convention

2.  "Harmful substance " means any substance which, if 
introduced into the sea, is liable to create hazards to 
human health, to harm living resources and marine life, to 
damage amenities or to interfere with other legitimate uses 
of the sea, and includes any substance subject to control by 
the present Convention.

3. a)  "Discharge ", in relation to harmful substances or 
effluents containing such substances, means any release 
howsoever caused from a ship and includes any escape, 
disposal, spilling, leaking, pumping, emitting or emptying;

b)  "Discharge " does not include:

(i) dumping within the meaning of the Convention on the 
Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and 
Other Matter, done at London on 13 November 1972; or

(ii) release of harmful substances directly arising from the 
exploration, exploitation and associated off-shore 
processing of sea-bed mineral resources; or

(iii) release of harmful substances for purpose of 
legitimate scientific research into pollution abatement or 
control.

4.  "Ship " means a vessel of any type whatsoever operating in 
the marine environment and includes hydrofoil boats, 
air-cushion vehicles, submersibles, floating craft and fixed 
or floating platforms.

5.  "Administration " means the Government of the State under 
whose authority the ship is operating. With respect to a 
ship entitled to fly a flag of any State, the Administration 
is the Government of that State. With respect to fixed or 
floating platforms engaged in exploration and exploitation 
of the sea-bed and subsoil thereof adjacent to the coast 
over which the coastal State exercises sovereign rights for 
the purposes of exploration and exploitation of their 
natural resources, the Administration is the Government of 
the coastal State concerned.

6.  "Incident " means an event involving the actual or 
probable discharge into the sea of a harmful substance, or 
effluents containing such a substance.

7.  "Organization " means the Inter-Governmental Maritime 
Consultative Organization.


Article 3

Application

1. The present Convention shall apply to:

a) ships entitled to fly the flag of a Party to the 
Convention; and

b) ships not entitled to fly the flag of a Party but which 
operate under the authority of a Party.

2. Nothing in the present Article shall be construed as 
derogating from or extending the sovereign rights of the 
Parties under international law over the sea-bed and subsoil 
thereof adjacent to their coasts for the purposes of 
exploration and exploitation of their natural resources.

3. The present Convention shall not apply to any warship, 
naval auxiliary or other ship owned or operated by a State 
and used, for the time being only on government 
non-commercial service. However, each Party shall ensure by 
the adoption of appropriate measures not impairing the 
operations or operational capabilities of such ships owned 
or operated by it, that such ships act in a manner 
consistent, so far as is reasonable and practiable, with the 
present Convention.


Article 4

Violation

1. Any violation of the requirements of the present 
Convention shall be prohibited and sanctions shall be 
established therefor under the law of the Administration of 
the ship concerned wherever the violation occurs. If the 
Adminsitration is informed of such a violation and is 
satisfied that sufficient evidence is available to enable 
proceedings to be brought in respect of the alleged 
violation, it shall cause such proceedings to be taken as 
soon as possible, in accordance with its law.

2. Any violation of the requirements of the present 
Convention within the jurisdiction of any Party to the 
Convention shall be prohibited and sanctions shall be 
established therefore under the law of that Party. Whenever 
and violation occurs, the Party shall either:

a) cause proceedings to be taken in accordance with its law; 
or

b) furnish to the Administration of the ship such 
information and evidence as may be in its possession that a 
violation has occurred.

3. Where information or evidence with respect to any 
violation of the present Convention by a ship is furnished 
to the Administration of that ship, the Administration shall 
promptly inform the Party which has furnished the 
information or evidence and the Organization, of the action 
taken.

4. The penalties specified under the law of a Party pursuant 
to the present Article shall be adequate in severity to 
discharge violations of the present Convention and shall be 
equally severe irrespective of where the violations occur.


Article 5

Certificates and special rules on inspection of ships

1. Subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) of the present 
Article a certificate issued under the authority of a Party 
to the Convention in accordance with the provisions of the 
Regulations shall be accepted by the other Parties and 
regarded for all purposes covered by the present Convention 
as having the same validity as a certificate issued by them.

2. A ship required to hold a certificate in accordance with 
the provisions of the Regulations is subject, while in the 
ports or off-shore terminals under the jurisdiction of a 
Party, to inspection by officers duly authorized by that 
Party. Any such inspection shall be limited to verfying that 
there is on board a valid certificate, unless there are 
clear grounds for believing that the condition of the ship 
or its equipment does not correspond substantially with the 
particulars of that certificate. In that case, or if the 
ship does not carry a valid certificate the Party carrying 
out the inspection shall take such steps as will ensure that 
the ship shall not sail until it can proceed to sea without 
presenting an unreasonable threat of harm to the marine 
environment. That Party may, however, grant such a ship 
permission to leave the port or off-shore terminal for the 
purpose of proceedings to the nearest appropriate repair 
yard available.

3. If a Party denies a foreign ship entry to the ports or 
off-shore terminals under its jurisdiction or takes any 
action against such a ship for the reason that the ship does 
not comply with the provisions of the present Convention, 
the Party shall immediately inform the consul or diplomatic 
representative of the Party whose flag the ship is entitled 
to fly, or if this is not possible, the Administration of 
the ship concerned. Before denying entry or taking such 
action the Party may request consultation with the 
Administration of the ship concerned. Information shall also 
be given to the Administration when a ship does not carry a 
valid certificate in accordance with the provisions of the 
Regulations.

4. With respect to the ships of non-Parties to the 
Convention, Parties shall apply the requirements of the 
present Convention as may be necessary to ensure that no 
more favourable treatment is given to such ships.


Article 6

Detection of violations and enforcement of the convention

1. Parties to the Convention shall co-operate in the 
detection of violations and the enforcement of the 
provisions of the present Convention, using all appropriate 
and practicable measures of detection and environmental 
monitoring, adequate procedures for reporting and 
accumulation of evidence.

2. A ship to which the present Convention applies may, in 
any port or off-shore terminal of a Party, be subject to 
inspection by officers appointed or authorized by that Party 
for the purpose of verifying whether the ship has discharged 
any harmful substances in violation of the provisions of the 
Regulations. If an inspection indicates a violation of the 
Convention, a report shall be forwarded to the 
Administration for any appropriate action.

3. Any Party shall furnish to the Administration evidence, 
if any, that the ship had discharged harmful substances in 
violation of the provisions of the Regulations. If it is 
practicable to do so, the competent authority of the former 
Party shall notify the Master of the ship of the alleged 
violation.

4. Upon receiving such evidence, the Administration so 
informed shall investigate the matter, and may request the 
other Party to furnish further or better evidence of the 
alleged contravention. If the Administration is satisfied 
that sufficient evidence is available to enable proceedings 
to be brought in respect of the alleged violation, it shall 
cause such proceedings to be taken in accordance with its 
law as soon as possible. The Administration shall promptly 
inform the Party which has reported the alleged violation, 
as well as the Organization, of the action taken.

5. A Party may also inspect a ship to which the present 
Convention applies when it enters the ports or off-shore 
terminals under its jurisdiction, if a request for an 
investigation is received from any Party together with 
sufficient evidence that the ship has discharged harmful 
substances or effluents containing such substances in any 
place. The report of such investigation shall be sent to the 
Party requesting it and to the Administration so that the 
appropriate action may be taken under the present 
Convention.


Article 7

Undue delay to ships

1. All possible efforts shall be made to avoid a ship being 
unduly detained or delayed under Article 4, 5, or 6 of the 
present Convention.

2. When a ship is unduly detained or delayed under Article 
4, 5, 6 of the present Convention, it shall be entitled to 
compensation for any loss or damage suffered.


Article 8 

Reports on incidents involving harmful substances

1. A report of an incident shall be made without delay to 
the fullest extent possible in accordance with the 
provisions of Protocol I to the present Convention.

2. Each Party to the Convention shall:

a) make all arrangements necessary for an appropriate 
officer or agency to receive and process all reports on 
incidents; and

b) notify the Organization with complete details of such 
arrangements for circulation to other Parties and Member 
States of the Organization.

3. Whenever a Party receives a report under the provisions 
of the present Article, the Party shall relay the report 
without delay to:

a) the Administration of the ship involved; and 

b) any other State which may be affected.

4. Each Party to the Convention undertakes to issue 
instructions to its maritime inspection vessels and aircraft 
and to other appropriate services to report to its 
authorities any incident referred to in Protocol I to the 
present Convention. That Party shall, if it considers it 
appropriate, report accordingly to the Organization and to 
any other party concerned.


Article 9

Other treaties and interpretation

1. Upon its entry into force, the present Convention 
supersedes the International Convention for the Prevention 
of Pollution of the Sea by Oil, 1954, as amended, as between 
Parties to that Convention.

2. Nothing in the present Convention shall prejudice the 
codification and development of the law of the sea by the 
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea convened 
pursuant to Resolution 2750 C (XXV) of the General Assembly 
of the United Nations nor the present or future claims and 
legal views of any State concerning the law of the sea and 
the nature and extent of coastal and flag State 
jurisdiction.
3. The term  "jurisdiction " in the present Convention shall 
be construed in the light of international law in force at 
the time of application or interpretation of the present 
Convention.


Article 10

Settlement of disputes

Any dispute between two or more Parties to the Convention 
concerning the interpretation or application of the present 
Convention shall, if settlement by negotiation between the 
Parties involved has not been possible, and if these Parties 
do not otherwise agree, be submitted upon request of any of 
them to arbitration as set out in Protocol II to the present 
Convention.


Article 11

Communication of information

1. The Parties to the Convention undertake to communicate to 
the Organization:

a) the text of laws, orders, decrees and regulations and 
other instruments which have been promulgated on the various 
matters within the scope of the present Convention;

b) a list of non-governmental agencies which are authorized 
to act on their behalf in matters relating to the design, 
construction and equipment of ships carrying harmful 
substances in accordance with the provisions of the 
Regulations;

c) a sufficient number of specimens of their certificates 
issued under the provisions of the Regulations;

d) a list of reception facilities including their location, 
capacity and available facilities and other characteristics;

e) official reports or summaries of official reports in so 
far as they show the results of the application of the 
present Convention; and

f) an annual statistical report, in a form standardized by 
the Organization, of penalties actually imposed for 
infringement of the present Convention.

2. The Organization shall notify Parties of the receipt of 
any communications under the present Article and circulate 
to all Parties any information communicated to it under 
sub-paragraphs (1) (b) to (f) of the present Article.


Article 12

Casualties to ships

1. Each Administration undertakes to conduct an 
investigation of any casualty occuring to any of its ships 
subject to the provisions of the Regulations if such 
casualty has produced a major deleterious effect upon the 
marine environment.

2. Each Party to the Convention undertakes to supply the 
Organization with information concerning the findings of 
such investigation, when it judges that such information may 
assist in determining what changes in the present Convention 
might be desirable.


Article 13

Signatures, ratification, acceptance, approval and accession

1. The present Convention shall remain open for signature at 
the Headquarters of the Organization from 15 January 1974 
until 31 December 1974 and shall thereafter remain open for 
accession. States may become Parties to the present 
Convention by:

a) signature without reservation as to ratification, 
acceptance or approval; or

b) signature subject to ratification, acceptance or 
approval, followed by ratification, acceptance or approval; 
or

c) accession.

2. Ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be 
effected by the deposit of an instrument to that effect with 
the Secretary-General of the Organization.

3. The Secretary-General of the Organization shall inform 
all States which have signed the present Convention or 
acceded to it of any signature or of the deposit of any new 
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or 
accession and the date of its deposit.


Article 14

Optional annexes

1. A State may at the time of signing, ratifying, accepting, 
approving or acceding to the present Convention declare that 
it does not accept any one or all of Annexes III, IV, and V 
(hereinafter referred to as  "Optional Annexes ") of the 
present Convention. Subject to the above, Parties to the 
Convention shall be bound by any Annex in its entirety.

2. A State which has declared that it is not bound by an 
Optional Annex may at any time accept such Annex by 
depositing with the Organization an instrument of the kind 
referred to in Article 13 (2).

3. A State which makes a declaration under paragraph (1) of 
the present Article in respect of an Optional Annex and 
which has not subsequently accepted that Annex in accordance 
with paragraph (2) of the present Article shall not be under 
any obligation nor entitled to claim any privileges under 
the present Convention in respect of matters related to such 
Annex and all reference to Parties in the present Convention 
shall include that State in so far as matters related to 
such Annex are concerned.

4. The Organization shall inform the States which have 
signed or acceded to the present Convention of any 
declaration under the present Article as well as the receipt 
of any instrument deposited in accordance with the 
provisions of paragraph (2) of the present Article.


Article 15

Entry into force

1. The Convention shall enter into force twelve months after 
the date on which not less than 15 States, the combined 
merchant fleets of which constitute not less than fifty per 
cent of the gross tonnage of the world's merchant shipping, 
have become parties to it in accordance with Article 13.

2. An Optional Annex shall enter into force twelve months 
after the date on which the conditions stipulated in 
paragraph (1) of the present Article have been satisfied in 
relation to that Annex.

3. The Organization shall inform the States which have 
signed the present Convention or acceded to it of the date 
on which it enters into force and of the date on which the 
Optional Annex enters into force in accordance with 
paragraph (2) of the present Article.

4. For States which have deposited an instrument of 
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession in respect 
of the present Convention or any Optional Annex after the 
requirements for entry into force thereof have been met but 
prior to the date of entry into force, the ratification, 
accepance, approval or accession shall take effect on the 
date of entry into force of the Convention or such Annex or 
three months after the date of deposit of the instrument 
whichever is the later date.

5. For States which have deposited an instrument of 
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession after the 
date on which the Convention or an Optional Annex entered 
into force, the Convention or the Optional Annex shall 
become effective three months after the date of deposit of 
the instrument.

6. After the date on which all the conditions required under 
Article 16 to bring an amendment to the present Convention 
or an Optional Annex into force have been fulfilled, any 
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or 
accession deposited shall apply to the Convention or Annex 
as amended.


Article 16

Amendments

1. The present Convention may be amended by any of the 
procedures specified in the following paragraphs.

2. Amendments after consideration by the Organization:

a) any amendment proposed by a Party to the Convention shall 
be submitted to the Organization and circulated by its 
Secretary-General to all Members of the Organization and all 
Parties at least six months prior to its consideration;

b) any amendment proposed and circulated as above shall be 
submitted to an appropriate body by the Organization for 
consideration;

c) Parties to the Convention, whether or not Members of the 
Organization, shall be entitled to participate in the 
proceedings of the appropriate body;

d) amendments shall be adopted by a two-thirds majority of 
only the Parties to the Convention present and voting;

e) if adopted in accordance with sub-paragraph c) above, 
amendments shall be communicated by the Secretary-General of 
the Organization to all the Parties to the Convention for 
acceptance;

f) an amendment shall be deemed to have been accepted in the 
following circumstances:

(i) an amendment to an Article of the Convention shall be 
deemed to have been accepted on the date on which it is 
accepted by two-thirds of the Parties, the combined merchant 
fleets of which constitute not less than fifty per cent of 
the gross tonnage of the world's merchant fleet;

(ii) an amendment to an Annex to the Convention shall be 
deemed to have been accepted in accordance with the 
procedure specified in subparagraph (f) (iii) unless the 
appropriate body, at the time of its adoption, determines 
that the amendment shall be deemed to have been accepted on 
the date on which it is accepted by two-thirds of the 
Parties, the combined merchant fleets of which constitute 
not less than fifty per cent of the gross tonnage of the 
world's merchant fleet. Nevertheless, at any time before the 
entry into force of an amendment to an Annex to the 
Convention, a Party may notify the Secretary-General of the 
Organization that its express approval will be necessary 
before the amendment enters into force for it. The latter 
shall bring such notification and the date of its receipt to 
the notice of Parties.

(iii) an amendment to an Appendix to an Annex to the 
Convention shall be deemed to have been accepted at the end 
of a period to be determined by the appropriate body at the 
time of its adoption, which period shall be not less than 
ten months, unless within that period an objection is 
communicated to the Organization by not less than one-third 
of the Parties or by the Parties the combined merchant 
fleets of which constitute not less than fifty per cent of 
the gross tonnage of the world's merchant fleet whichever 
condition is fulfilled;

 (iv) an amendment to Protocol I to the Convention shall be 
subject to the same procedures as for the amendments to the 
Annexes to the Convention, as provided for in sub-paragraphs 
(f) (ii) or (f) (iii), above;

(v) an amendment to Protocol II to the Convention shall be 
subject to the same procedures as for the amendments to an 
Article of the Convention, as provided for in sub-paragraph 
(f) (i) above;

g) the amendment shall enter into force under the following 
conditions:

(i) in the case of an amendment to an Article of the 
Convention, to Protocol II, or to Protocol I or to an Annex 
to the Convention not under the procedure specified in 
sub-paragraph (f) (iii), the amendment accepted in 
conformity with the foregoing provisions shall enter into 
force six months after the date of its acceptance with 
respect to the Parties which have declared that they have 
accepted it;

 (ii) in the case of an amendment to Protocol I, to an 
Appendix to an Annex or to an Annex to the Convention under 
the procedure specified in subparagraph (f) (iii), the 
amendment deemed to have been accepted in accordance with 
the foregoing conditions shall enter into force six months 
after its acceptance for all the Parties with the exception 
of those which, before that date, have made a declaration 
that they do not accept it or a declaration under 
sub-paragraph (f) (ii), that their express approval is 
necessary.

3. Amendment by a Conference.

a) Upon the request of a Party, concurred in by at least 
one-third of the Parties, the Organization shall convene a 
Conference of Parties to the Convention to consider 
amendments to the present Convention.

b) Every amendment by such a Conference by a two-thirds 
majority of those present and voting of the Parties shall be 
communicated by the Secretary-General of the Organization to 
all Contracting Parties for their acceptance.

c) Unless the Conference decides otherwise, the amendment 
shall be deemed to have been accepted and to have entered 
into force in accordance with the procedures specified for 
that purpose in paragraph (2) (f) and (g) above.

4. a) In the case of an amendment to an Optional Annex, a 
reference in the present Article to a  "Party to the 
Convention " shall be deemed to mean a reference to a Party 
bound by that Annex.

b) Any Party which has declined to accept an amendment to an 
Annex shall be treated as a non-Party only for the purpose 
of application of that Amendment.

5. The adoption and entry into force of a new Annex shall be 
subject to the same procedures as for the adoption and entry 
into force of an Article of the Convention.

6. Unless expressly provided otherwise, any amendment to the 
present Convention made under this Article, which relates to 
the structure of a ship, shall apply only to ships for which 
the building contract is placed, or in the absence of a 
building contract, the keel of which is laid, on or after 
the date on which the amendment comes into force.

7. Any amendment to a Protocol or to an Annex shall relate 
to the substance of that Protocol or Annex and shall be 
consistent with the Articles of the present Convention.

8. The Secretary-General of the Organization shall inform 
all Parties of any amendments which enter into force under 
the present Article, together with the date on which each 
such amendment enters into force.

9. Any declaration of acceptance or of objection to an 
amendment under the present Article shall be notified in 
writing to the Secretary-General of the Organization. The 
latter shall bring such notification and the date of its 
receipt to the notice of the Parties to the Convention.


Article 17

Promotion of technical co-operation

The Parties to the Convention shall promote in consultation 
with the Organization and other international bodies, with 
assistance and coordination by the Executive Director of the 
United Nations Environment Programme, support for those 
Parties which request technical assistance for:

a) the training of scientific and technical personnel;
b) the supply of necessary equipment and facilities for 
reception and monitoring;

c) the facilitation of other measures and arrangements to 
prevent or mitigate pollution of the marine environment by 
ships; and

d) the encouragement of research;

preferably within the countries concerned, so furthering the 
aims and purposes of the present Convention.


Article 18

Denunciation

1. The present Convention or any Optional Annex may be 
denounced by any Party to the Convention at any time after 
the expiry of five years from the date on which the 
Convention or such Annex enters into force for that Party.

2. Denunciation shall be effected by notification in writing 
to the Secretary-General of the Organization who shall 
inform all the other Parties of any such notification 
received and of the date of its receipt as well as the date 
on which such denunciation takes effect.

3. A denunciation shall take effect twelve months after 
receipt of the notification of denunciation by the 
Secretary-General of the Organization or after the expiry of 
any other longer period which may be indicated in the 
notification.


Article 19

Deposit and registration

1. The present Convention shall be deposited with the 
Secretary-General of the Organization who shall transmit 
certified true copies thereof to all States which have 
signed the present Convention or acceded to it.

2. As soon as the present Convention enters into force, the 
text shall be transmitted by the Secretary-General of the 
Organization to the Secretary-General of the United Nations 
for registration and publication, in accordance with Article 
102 of the Charter of the United Nations.


Article 20

Languages

The present Convention is established in a single copy in 
the English, French, Russian and Spanish languages, each 
text being equally authentic. Official translations in the 
Arabic, German, Italian and Japanese languages shall be 
prepared and deposited with the signed original.

In Witness Whereof the undersigned being duly authorized 
by their respective Governments for that purpose have signed 
the present Convention.

[ Signatures omitted. ]

Done at London this second day of November, one thousand 
nine hundred and seventy-three.


PROTOCOL I

Provisions Concerning Reports on Incidents Involving Harmful 
Substances  (in accordance with Article 8 of the Convention)


Article I 

Duty to report

1. The Master of a ship involved in an incident referred to 
in Article III of this Protocol, or other person having 
charge of the ship, shall report the particulars of such 
incident without delay and to the fullest extent possible in 
accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.

2. In the event of the ship referred to in paragraph (1) of 
the present Article being abandoned, or in the event of a 
report from such ship being incomplete or unobtainable, the 
owner, charterer, manager or operator of the ship, or their 
agents shall, to the fullest extent possible assume the 
obligations placed upon the Master under the provisions of 
this Protocol.


Article II

Methods of reporting

1. Each report shall be made by radio whenever possible, but 
in any case by the fastest channels available at the time 
the report is made. Reports made by radio shall be given the 
highest possible priority.

2. Reports shall be directed to the appropriate officer or 
agency specified in paragraph (2)(a) of Article 8 of the 
Convention.


Article III 

When to make reports

The report shall be made whenever an incident involves:

a) a discharge other than as permitted under the present 
Convention; or

b) a discharge permitted under the present Convention by 
virtue of the fact that:

(i) it is for the purpose of securing the safety of a ship 
or saving life at sea; or

(ii) it results from damage to the ship or its equipment; or

c) a discharge of a harmful substance for the purpose of 
combating a specific pollution incident or for purposes of 
legitimate scientific research into pollution abatement or 
control; or

d) the probability of a discharge referred to in 
sub-paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of this Article.


Article IV

Contents of report 

1. Each report shall contain in general: 

a) the identity of the ship;

b) the time and date of the occurence of the incident;

c) the geographic position of the ship when the incident 
occurred;

d) the wind and sea conditions prevailing at the time of the 
incident; and 

2. Each report shall contain, in particular:

a) a clear indication or description of the harmful 
substances involved, including, if possible, the correct 
technical names of such substances (trade names should not 
be used in place of the correct technical names);

b) a statement or estimate of quantities, concentrations and 
likely conditions of harmful substances discharged or likely 
to be discharged into the sea; 

c) where relevant, a description of the packaging and 
identifying marks; and

d) if possible the name of the consignor, consignee or 
manufacturer.

3. Each report shall clearly indicate whether the harmful 
substance discharged, or likely to be discharged is oil, a 
noxious liquid substance, a noxious solid substance or a 
noxious gaseous substance and whether such substance was or 
is carried in bulk or contained in packaged form, freight 
containers, portable tanks, or road and rail tank wagons.

4. Each report shall be supplemented as necessary by any 
other relevant information requested by a recipient of the 
report or which the person sending the report deems 
appropriate.


Article V

Supplementary report 

Any person who is obliged under the provisions of this 
Protocol to send a report shall. when possible: 

a) supplement the initial report, as necessary, with 
information concerning further developments; and 

b) comply as fully as possible with requests from affected 
States for additional information concerning the incident.



PROTOCOL II

Arbitration 
(in accordance with Article 10 of the Convention)


Article I

Arbitration procedure, unless the Parties to the dispute 
decide otherwise, shall be in accordance with the rules set 
out in this Protocol.


Article II

1. An Arbitration Tribunal shall be established upon the 
request of one Party to the Convention addressed to another 
in application of Article 10 of the present Convention. The 
request for arbitration shall consist of a statement of the 
case together with any supporting documents.

 2. The requesting Party shall inform the Secretary-General 
of the Organization of the fact that it has applied for the 
establishment of a Tribunal, of the names of the Parties to 
the dispute and of the Articles of the Convention or 
Regulations over which there is in its opinion disagreement 
concerning their interpretation or application. The 
Secretary-General shall transmit this information to all 
Parties.


Article III

The Tribunal shall consist of three members: one Arbitrator 
nominated by each Party to the dispute and a third 
Arbitrator who shall be nominated by agreement between the 
two first named, and shall act as its Chairman.


Article IV

1. If, at the end of a period of sixty days from the 
nomination of the second Arbitrator, the Chairman of the 
Tribunal shall not have been nominated, the 
Secretary-General of the Organization upon request of either 
Party shall within a furhter period of sixty days proceed to 
such nomination, selecting him from a list of qualified 
persons previously drawn up by the Council of the 
Organization.

2. If, within a period of sixty days from the date of the 
receipt of the request, one of the Parties shall not have 
nominated the member of the Tribunal for whose designation 
it is responsible, the other Party may directly inform the 
Secretary-General of the Organization who shall nominate the 
Chairman of the Tribunal within a period of sixty days, 
selecting him from the list prescribed in paragraph (1) of 
the present Article.

3. The Chairman of the Tribunal shall, upon nomination, 
request the Party which has not provided an Arbitrator, to 
do so in the same manner and under the same conditions. If 
the Party does not make the required nomination, the 
Chairman of the Tribunal shall request the Secretary-General 
of the Organization to make the nomination in the form and 
conditions prescribed in the preceding paragraph.

4. The Chairman of the Tribunal, if nominated under the 
provisions of the present Article, shall not be or have been 
a national of one of the Parties concerned, except with the 
consent of the other Party.

5. In the case of the decease or default of an Arbitrator 
for whose nomination one of the Parties is responsible, the 
said Party shall nominate a replacement within a period of 
sixty days from the date of decease or default. Should the 
said Party not make the nomination, the arbitration shall 
proceed under the remaining Arbitrators. In case of the 
decease or default of the Chairman of the Tribunal, a 
replacement shall be nominated in accordance with the 
provisions of Article III above, or in the absence of 
agreement between the members of the Tribunal within a 
period of sixty days of the decease or default, according to 
the provisions of the present Article.


Article V

The Tribunal may hear and determine counter-claims arising 
directly out of the subject matter of this dispute.


Article VI

Each Party shall be responsible for the remuneration of its 
Arbitrator and connected costs and for the costs entailed by 
the preparation of its own case. The remuneration of the 
Chairman of the Tribunal and of all general expenses 
incurred by the Arbitration shall be borne equally by the 
Parties. The Tribunal shall keep a record of all its 
expenses and shall furnish a final statement thereof.


Article VII

Any Party to the Convention which has an interest of a legal 
nature and which may be affected by the decision in the case 
may, after giving written notice to the Parties which have 
originally initiated the procedure, join in the arbitration 
procedure with the consent of the Tribunal.


Article VIII

Any Arbitration Tribunal established under the provision of 
the present Protocol shall decide its own rules of 
procedure.


Article IX

1. Decisions of the Tribunal both as to its procedure and 
its place of meeting and as to any question laid before it, 
shall be taken by majority votes of its members; the absence 
or abstention of one of the members of the Tribunal for 
whose nomination the Parties were responsible shall not 
constitute an impediment to the Tribunal reaching a 
decision. In cases of equal voting, the vote of the Chairman 
shall be decisive.

2. The Parties shall facilitate the work of the Tribunal and 
in particular, in accordance with their legislation, and 
using all means at their disposal:

a) provide the Tribunal with the necessary documents and 
information;

b) enable the Tribunal to enter their territory, to hear 
witnesses or experts, and to visit the scene.

3. Absence or default of one Party shall not constitute an 
impediment to the procedure.


Article X

1. The Tribunal shall render its award within a period of 
five months from the time it is established unless it 
decides, in the case of necessity, to extend the time limit 
for a further period but not exceeding three months. The 
award of the Tribunal shall be accompanied by a statement of 
reasons. It shall be final and without appeal and shall be 
communicated to the Secretary-General of the Organization. 
The Parties shall immediately comply with the award.

2. Any controversy which may arise between the Parties as 
regards interpretation or execution of the award may be 
submitted by either Party for judgement to the Tribunal 
which made the award or, if it is not available to another 
Tribunal constituted for this purpose, in the same manner as 
the original Tribunal.



ANNEX I

Regulations for the prevention of pollution by oil

Chapter I _ General


Regulation 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Annex:

1.  "Oil " means petroleum in any form including crude oil, 
fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse and refined products (other 
than petrochemicals which are subject to the provisions of 
Annex II of the present Convention) and, without limiting 
the generality of the foregoing, includes the substances 
listed in Appendix I to this Annex.

2.  "Oily mixture " means a mixture with any oil content.

3.  "Oil fuel " means any oil used as fuel in connexion with 
the propulsion and auxiliary machinery of the ship in which 
such oil is carried.

4.  "Oil tanker " means a ship constructed or adapted 
primarily to carry oil in bulk in its cargo spaces and 
includes combination carriers and any  "chemical tanker " as 
defined in Annex II of the present Convention when it is 
carrying a cargo or part cargo of oil in bulk.

5.  "Combination carrier " means a ship designed to carry 
either oil or solid cargoes in bulk. 

6.  "New ship " means a ship:

a) for which the building contract is placed after 31 
December 1975; or

b) in the absence of a building contract, the keel of which 
is laid or which is at a similar stage of construction after 
30 June 1976; or

c) the delivery of which is after 31 December 1979; or 

d) which has undergone a major conversion:

(i) for which the contract is placed after 31 December 1975; 
or

(ii) in the absence of a contract, the construction work of 
which is begun after 30 June 1976; or 
(iii) which is completed after 31 December 1979. 

7.  "Existing ship " means a ship which is not a new ship.

8.  "Major conversion " means a conversion of an existing 
ship:

a) which substantially alters the dimensions or carrying 
capacity of the ship; or 

b) which changes the type of the ship; or

c) the intent of which in the opinion of the Administration 
is substantially to prolong its life; or 

d) which otherwise so alters the ship that if it were a new 
ship, it would become subject to relevant provisions of the 
present Convention not applicable to it as an existing ship.

9.  "Nearest land ". The term  "from the nearest land " means 
from the baseline from which the territorial sea of the 
territory in question is established in accordance with 
international law, except that for the purposes of the 
present Convention  "from the nearest land " off the north 
eastern coast of Australia shall mean from a line drawn from 
a point on the coast of Australia in latitude 11 deg 00 deg 
South, longitude 142 deg 08 min East to a point in latitude 
10 deg 35 min South,

longitude 141 deg 55 min East _ thence to a point latitude 
10 deg 00 min South,

longitude 142 deg 00 min East, thence to a point latitude 9 
deg 10 min South,

longitude 143 deg 52 min East, thence to a point latitude 9 
deg 00 min South,

longitude 144 deg 00 min East, thence to a point latitude 15 
deg min South,

longitude 147 deg 00 min East, thence to a point latitude 21 
deg 00 min South,

longitude 153 deg 00 min East, thence to a point on the 
coast of Australia in latitude 24 deg 42 deg South, 
longitude 153 deg 15 min East.

10.  "Special area " means a sea where for recognized 
technical reasons in relation to its oceanographical and 
ecological condition and to the particular character of its 
traffic the adoption of special mandatory methods for the 
prevention of sea pollution by oil is required. Special 
areas shall include those listed in Regulation 10 of this 
Annex.

11.  "Instantaneous rate of discharge of oil content " means 
the rate of discharge of oil litres per hour at any instant 
divided by the speed of the ship in knots at the same 
instant.

12.  "Tank " means an enclosed space which is formed by the 
permanent structure of a ship and which is designed for the 
carriage of liquid in bulk.

13.  "Wing tank " means any tank adjacent to the side shell 
plating.
14.  "Centre tank " means any tank inboard of a longitudinal 
bulkhead.
15.  "Slop tank " means a tank specifically designated for the 
collection of tank drainings, tank washings and other oily 
mixtures.

16.  "Clean ballast " means the ballast in a tank which since 
oil was last carried therein, has been so cleaned that 
effluent therefrom if it were discharged from a ship which 
is stationary into clean calm water on a clear day would not 
produce visible traces of oil on the surface of the water or 
upon adjoining shorelines or cause a sludge or emulsion to 
be deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon 
adjoining shorelines. If the ballast is discharged through 
an oil discharge monitoring and control system approved by 
the Administration, evidence based on such a system to the 
effect that the oil content of the effluent did not exceed 
15 parts per million shall be determinative that the ballast 
was clean, notwithstanding the presence of visible traces.

17.  "Segregated ballast " means the ballast water introduced 
into a tank which is completely separated from the cargo oil 
and oil fuel system and which is permanently allocated to 
the carriage of ballast or to the carriage of ballast or 
cargoes other than oil or noxious substances as variously 
defined in the Annexes of the present Convention.

18.  "Length " (L) means 96 per cent of the total length on a 
waterline at 85 per cent of the least moulded depth measured 
from the top of the keel, or the length from the foreside of 
the stem to the axis of the rudder stock on that waterline, 
if that be greater. In ships designed with a rake of keel 
the waterline on which this length is measured shall be 
parallel to the designed waterline. The length (L) shall be 
measured in meters.

19.  "Forward and after perpendiculars " shall be taken at the 
forward and after ends of the length (L). The forward 
perpendicular shall coincide with the foreside of the stem 
on the waterline on which the length is measured.

20.  "Amidships " is at the middle of the length (L).

21.  "Breadth " (B) means the maximum breadth of the ship, 
measured amidships to the moulded line of the frame in a 
ship with a metal shell and to the outer surface of the hull 
in a ship with a shell of any other material. The breadth 
(B) shall be measured in meters.

22.  "Deadweight " (DW) means the difference in metric tons 
between the displacement of a ship in water of specific 
gravity of 1.025 at the load waterline corresponding to the 
assigned number freeboard and the lightweight of the ship.

23.  "Lightweight " means the displacement of a ship in metric 
tons without cargo, oil fuel, lubricating oil, ballast 
water, fresh water and feedwater in tanks, consumable 
stores, passengers and their effects.

24.  "Permeability " of a space means the ratio of the volume 
within that space which is assumed to be occupied by water 
to the total volume of that space.

25.  "Volumes " and  "areas " in a ship shall be calculated in 
all cases to moulded lines.


Regulation 2 
Application

1. Unless expressly provided otherwise, the provisions of 
this Annex shall apply to all ships.

2. In ships other than oil tankers fitted with cargo spaces 
which are constructed and utilized to carry oil in bulk of 
an aggregate capacity of 200 cubic meters or more, the 
requirements of Regulations 9, 10, 14, 15 (1), (2) and (3), 
18, 20 and 24 (4) of this Annex for oil tankers shall apply 
to the construction and operation of those spaces, except 
that where such aggregate capacity is less than 1,000 cubic 
metres the requirements of Regulation 15(4) of this Annex 
may apply in lieu of Regulation 15(1), (2) and (3).

3. Where a cargo subject to the provisions of Annex II of 
the present Convention is carried in a cargo space of an oil 
tanker, the appropriate requirements of Annex II of the 
present Convention shall also apply.

4. a) Any hydrofoil, air-cushion vehicle and other new type 
of vessel (near-surface craft, submarine craft, etc) whose 
constructional features are such as to render the 
application of any of the provisions of Chapters II and III 
of this Annex relating to construction and equipment 
unreasonable or impracticable may be exempted by the 
Administration from such provisions, provided that the 
construction and equipment of that ship provides equivalent 
protection against pollution by oil, having regard to the 
service for which it is intended.

b) Particulars of any such exemption granted by the 
Administration shall be indicated in the Certificate 
referred to in Regulation 5 of this Annex.

c) The Administration which allows any such exemption shall, 
as soon as possible, but not more than ninety days 
thereafter, communicate to the Organization particulars of 
same and the reasons therefor, which the Organization shall 
circulate to the Parties to the Convention for their 
information and appropriate action, if any.


Regulation 3

Equivalents

1. The Administration may allow any fitting, material, 
appliance or apparatus to be fitted in a ship as an 
alternative to that required by this Annex if such fitting, 
material, appliance or apparatus is at least as effective as 
that required by this Annex. This authority of the 
Administration shall not extend to subsitution of 
operational methods to effect the control of discharge of 
oil as equivalent to those design and construction features 
which are prescribed by Regulations in this Annex.

2. The Administration which allows a fitting, material, 
appliance or apparatus, as an alternative to that required 
by this Annex shall communicate to the Organization for 
circulation to the Parties to the Convention particulars 
thereof, for their information and appropriate action, if 
any.


Article 4

Surveys

1. Every oil tanker of 150 tons gross tonnage and above, and 
every other ship of 400 tons gross tonnage and above shall 
be subject to the surveys specified below:
a) An initial survey before the ship is put in service or 
before the Certificate required under Regulation 5 of this 
Annex is issued for the first time, which shall include a 
complete survey of its structure, equipment, fittings, 
arrangements and material in so far as the ship is covered 
by this Annex. This survey shall be such as to ensure that 
the structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements and 
material fully comply with the applicable requirements of 
this Annex.

b) Periodical surveys at intervals specified by the 
Administration, but not exceeding five years, which shall be 
such as to ensure that the structure, equipment, fittings, 
arrangements and material fully comply with the applicable 
requirements of this Annex. However, where the duration of 
the International Oil Pollution Certificate (1973) is 
extended as specified in Regulation 8 (3) or (4) of this 
Annex, the interval of the periodical survey may be extended 
correspondingly.

c) Intermediate surveys at intervals specified by the 
Administration but not exceeding thirty months, which shall 
be such as to ensure that the equipment and associated pump 
and piping systems, including oil discharge monitoring and 
control systems, oily-water separating equipment and oil 
filtering systems, fully comply with the applicable 
requirements of this Annex and are in good working order. 
Such intermediate surveys shall be endorsed on the 
International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate (1973) 
issued under Regulation 5 of this Annex.

2. The Administration shall establish appropriate measures 
for ships which are not subject to the provisions of 
paragraph (1) of this Regulation in order to ensure that the 
applicable provisions of this Annex are complied with.

3. Surveys of the ship as regards enforcement of the 
provisions of this Annex shall be carried out by officers of 
the Administration. The Administration may, however, entrust 
the surveys either to surveyors nominated for the purpose or 
to organizations recognized by it. In every case the 
Administration concerned fully guarantees the completeness 
and efficiency of the surveys.

4. After any survey of the ship under this Regulation has 
been completed, no significant change shall be made in the 
structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements or material 
covered by the survey without the sanction of the 
Administration, except the direct replacement of such 
equipment or fittings.


Regulation 5

Issue of certificate

1. An International Oil Pollution Certificate (1973) shall 
be issued, after survey in accordance with the provisions of 
Regulation 4 of this Annex, to any oil tanker of 150 tons 
gross tonnage and above and any other ships of 400 tons 
gross tonnage and above which are engaged in voyages to 
ports or off-shore terminals under the jurisdiction of other 
Parties to the Convention. In the case of existing ships 
this requirement shall apply twelve months after the date of 
entry into force of the present Convention.
2. Such Certificate shall be issued either by the 
Administration or by any persons or organization duly 
authorized by it. In every case the Administration assumes 
full responsibility for the Certificate.

Regulation 6

Issue of a certificate by another government

1. The Government of a Party to the Convention may, at the 
request of the Administration, cause a ship to be surveyed 
and, if satisfied that the provisions of this Annex are 
complied with, shall issue or authorize the issue of an 
International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate (1973) to 
the ship in accordance with this Annex.

2. A copy of the Certificate and a copy of the survey report 
shall be transmitted as soon as possible to the requesting 
Administration.

3. A Certificate so issued shall contain a statement to the 
effect that it has been issued at the request of the 
Administration and it shall have the same force and receive 
the same force and receive the same recogimition as the 
Certificate issued under Regulation 5 of this Annex.

4. No International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate 
(1973) shall be issued to a ship which is entitled to fly 
the flag of a State which is not a Party.


Regulation 7

Form of certificate

The International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate 
(1973) shall be drawn up in an official language of the 
issuing country in the form corresponding to the model given 
in Appendix II to this Annex. If the language used is 
neither English nor French, the text shall include a 
translation into one of these languages.


Regulation 8

Duration of certificate

1. An International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate 
(1973) shall be issued for a period specified by the 
Administration, which shall not exceed five years from the 
date of issue, except as provided in paragraphs (2), (3) and 
(4) of this Regulation.

2. If a ship at the time when the Certificate expires is not 
in a port or off-shore terminal under the jurisdiction of 
the Party to the Convention whose flag the ship is entitled 
to fly, the Certificate may be extended by the 
Administration, but such extension shall be granted only for 
the purpose of allowing the ship to complete its voyage to 
the State whose flag the ship is entitled to fly or in which 
it is to be surveyed and then only in cases where it appears 
proper and reasonable to do so.

3. No Certificate shall be thus extended for a period longer 
than five months and a ship to which such extension is 
granted shall not on its arrival in the State whose flag it 
is entitled to fly or the port in which it is to be 
surveyed, be entitled by virtue of such extension to leave 
that port or State without having obtained a new 
Certificate.

4. A Certificate which has not been extended under the 
provisions of paragraph (2) of this Regulation may be 
extended by the Administration for a period of grace of up 
to one month from the date of expiry stated on it.

5. A Certificate shall cease to be valid if significant 
alterations have taken place in the construction, equipment, 
fittings, arrangements, or material required without the 
sanction of the Administration, except the direct 
replacement of such equipment or fittings, or if 
intermediate surveys as specified by the Administration 
under Regulation 4(1)(c) of this Annex are not carried out.

6. A Certificate issued to a ship shall cease to be valid 
upon transfer of such a ship to the flag of another State, 
except as provided in paragraph (7) of this Regulation.

7. Upon transfer of a ship to the flag of another Party, the 
Certificate shall remain in force for a period not exceeding 
five months provided that it would not have expired before 
the end of that period, or until the Administration issues a 
replacement Certificate, whichever is earlier. As soon as 
possible after the transfer has taken place the Government 
of the Party whose flag the ship was formerly entitled to 
fly shall transmit to the Administration a copy of the 
Certificate carried by the ship before the transfer and, if 
availbale, a copy of the relevant survey report.


Chapter II

REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTROL OF OPERATIONAL POLLUTION


Regulation 9

Control of discharge of oil

1. Subject to the provisions of Regulations 10 and 11 of 
this Annex and paragraph (2) of this Regulation, any 
discharge into the sea of oil or oily mixtures from ships to 
which this Annex applies shall be prohibited except when all 
the following conditions are satisfied:

a) for an oil tanker, except as provided for in subparagraph 
(b) of this paragraph:

(i) the tanker is not within a special area;

(ii) the tanker is more than 50 nautical miles from the 
nearest land;

(iii) the tanker is proceeding en route;

(iv) the instantaneous rate of discharge of oil content does 
not exceed 60 litres per nautical mile;

(v) the total quantity of oil discharged into the sea does 
not exceed for existing tankers 1/15,000 of the total 
quantity of the particular cargo of which the residue formed 
a part, and for new tankers 1/30,000 of the total quantity 
of the particular cargo of which the residue formed a part; 
and

(vi) the tanker has in operation, except as provided for in 
Regulation 15(3) of this Annex, an oil discharge monitoring 
and control system and a slop tank arrangements as required 
by Regulation 15 of this Annex;

b) from a ship of 400 tons gross tonnage and above other 
than an oil tanker and from machinery space bilges excluding 
cargo pump room bilges of an oil tanker unless mixed with 
oil cargo residue:

 (i) the ship is not within a special area;
(ii) the ship is more than 12 nautical miles from the 
nearest land;
(iii) the ship is proceeding en route;
(iv) the oil content of the effluent is less than 100 parts 
per million; and
(v) the ship has in operation an oil discharge monitoring 
and control system, oily-water separating equipment, oil 
filtering system or other installation as required by 
Regulation 16 of this Annex.

2. In the case of a ship of less than 400 tons gross tonnage 
other than oil tanker whilst outside the special area, the 
Administration shall ensure that it is equipped as far as 
practicable and reasonable with installations to ensure the 
storage of oil residues on board and their discharge to 
reception facilities or into the sea in compliance with the 
requirements of paragraph (1) (b) of this Regulation.

3. Whenever visible traces of oil are observed on or below 
the surface of the water in the immediate vicinity of a ship 
or its wake, Governments of Parties to the Convention 
should, to the extent they are reasonably able to do so, 
promptly investigate the facts bearing on the issue of 
whether there has been a violation of the provisions of this 
Regulation or Regulation 10 of this Annex. The investigation 
should include, in particular, the wind and sea conditions, 
the track and speed of the ship, other possible sources of 
visible traces in the vicinity, and any relevant oil 
discharge records.

4. The provisions of paragraph (1) of this Regulation shall 
not apply to the discharge of clean or segregated ballast. 
The provisions of subparagraph (1)(b) of this Regulation 
shall not apply to the discharge of oily mixture which 
without dilution has an oil content not exceeding 15 parts 
per million.

5. No discharge into the sea shall contain chemicals or 
other substances in quantities or concentrations which are 
hazardous to the marine environment or chemicals or other 
substances introduced for the purpose of circumventing the 
conditions of discharge specified in this Regulation.

6. The oil residues which cannot be discharged into the sea 
in compliance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (4) of this 
Regulation shall be retained on board or discharged to 
reception facilities.


Regulation 10

Methods for the prevention of oil pollution from ships while 
operating in special areas

1. For the purposes of this Annex the special areas are the 
Mediterranean Sea area, the Baltic Sea area, the Black Sea 
area and the  "Gulfs area " which are defined as follows:

a) The Mediterranean Sea area means the Mediterranean Sea 
proper including the gulfs and seas therein with the 
boundary between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea 
constituted by the 41 deg N parallel and bounded to the west 
by the Straits of Gibraltar at the meridian of 5 deg 36 min 
W.

b) The Baltic Sea area means the Baltic Sea proper with the 
Gulf of Bothnia, the Gulf of Finland and the entrance to the 
Baltic Sea bounded by the parallel of the Skaw in the 
Skagerrak at 57 deg 44.8 min N.

c) The Black Sea area means the Black Sea proper with the 
boundary between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea 
constituted by the parallel 41 deg N.

d) The Red Sea area means the Red Sea proper including the 
Gulfs of Suez and Aqaba bounded at the South by the rhumb 
line between Ras si Ane (12 deg 8.5 min N, 43 deg 19.6 min 
E) and Husn Murad (12 deg 40.4 min N, 43 deg 30.2 min E).

e) The Gulfs area means the sea area located north west of 
the rhumb line between Ras al Hadd (22 deg 30 min N, 59 deg 
48 min E) and RAs Al Fasteh (25 deg 04 min N, 61 deg 25 min 
E).

2. a) Subject to the provisions of Regulation 11 of this 
Annex, any discharge into the sea of oil or oily mixture 
from any oil tanker and any ship or 400 tons gross tonnage 
and above other than an oil tanker shall be prohibited, 
while in a special area.

b) Such ships while in a special area shall retain on board 
all oil drainage and sludge, dirty ballast and tank washing 
waters and discharge them only to reception facilities.

3. a) Subject to the provisions of Regulation 11 of this 
Annex, any discharge into the sea of oil or mixture from a 
ship of less than 400 tons gross tonnage, other than oil 
tanker, shall be prohibited while in a special area, except 
when the oil content of the effluent without dilution does 
not exceed 15 parts per million or alternatively when all of 
the following conditions are satisfied:

 (i) the ship is proceeding en route;

(ii) the oil content of the effluent is less than 100 parts 
per million; and

(iii) the discharge is made as far as practicable from the 
land, but in no case less than 12 nautical miles from the 
nearest land.

b) No discharge into the sea shall contain chemicals or 
other substances in quantities or concentrations which are 
hazardous to the marine environment or chemicals or other 
substances introduced for the purpose of circumventing the 
conditions of discharge specified in this Regulation.

c) The oil residues which cannot be discharged into the sea 
in compliance with sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph shall 
be retained on board or discharged to reception facilities.

4. The provisions of this Regulation shall not apply to the 
discharge of clean or segregated ballast.

5. Nothing in this Regulation shall prohibit a ship on a 
voyage only part of which is in a special area from 
discharging outside the special area in accordance with 
Regulation 9 of this Annex.

6. Whenever visible traces of oil are observed on or below 
the surface of the water in the immediate vicinity of a ship 
or its wake, the Governments of Parties to the Convention 
should, to the extent they are reasonably able to do so, 
promptly investigate the facts bearing on the issue of 
whether there has been a violation of the provisions of this 
Regulation or Regulation 9 of this Annex. The investigation 
should include, in particular, the wind and sea conditions, 
the track and speed of the ship, other possible sources of 
the visible traces in the vicinity,and any relevant oil 
discharge records. 

7. Reception facilities within special areas:

a) Mediterranean Sea, Black Sea and Baltic Sea areas:

(i) The Government of each Party to the Convention, the 
coastline of which borders on any given special area 
undertakes to ensure that not later than 1 January 1977 all 
oil loading terminals and repair ports within the special 
area are provided with facilities adequate for the reception 
and treatment of all the dirty ballast and tank washing 
water from oil tankers. In addition all ports within the 
special area shall be provided with adequate reception 
facilities for other residues and oily mixtures from all 
ships. Such facilities shall have adequate capacity to meet 
the needs of the ships using them without causing undue 
delay.

(ii) The Government of each Party having under its 
jurisdiction entrances to seawater courses with low depth 
contour which might require a reduction of draught by the 
discharge of ballast undertakes to ensure the provision of 
the facilities referred to in sub-paragraph (a)(i) of this 
paragraph but with the proviso that ships required to 
discharge slops or dirty ballast could be subject to some 
delay.

(iii) During the period between the entry into force of the 
present Convention (if earlier than 1 January 1977) and, 1 
January 1977 ships while navigating in the special areas 
shall comply with the requirements of Regulation 9 of this 
Annex. However, the Governments of Parties the coastlines of 
which border any of the special areas under this 
sub-paragraph may establish a date earlier than 1 January 
1977, but after the date of entry into force of the present 
Convention, from which the requirements of this Regulation 
in respect of the special areas in question shall take 
effect:

(1) if all the reception facilities required have been 
provided by the date so established, and

(2) provided that the Parties concerned notify the
Organization of the date so established at least six months 
in advance, for circulation to other Parties.

(iv) After 1 January 1977, or the date established in 
accordance with sub-paragraph (a)(iii) of this paragraph if 
earlier, each Party shall notify the Organization for 
transmission to the Contracting Governments concerned of all 
cases where the facilities
