FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN MOLDOVA AND
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
_______________
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
MOLDOVA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
PREAMBLE
The Government of the Republic of Moldova and the Government of the Republic of
Macedonia, hereinafter referred to as Contracting Parties,
Confirming their intention to participate actively in the process of regional economic
integration in South Eastern Europe and in the process of European integration, expressing their
preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways and means to strengthen this process;

 Admitting that Contracting Parties are willing to consolidate these relations and to establish
strong and durable relationships of cooperation and economic integration;

 Reaffirming their commitment to pluralist democracy based on observance of the rules, rights
and basic human liberties of the state governed by the rule of law;

 Firmly convinced that this Agreement will promote intensification of mutually beneficial
trade relations between them;

 Resolved for this purpose to progressively eliminate the barriers in mutual trade in general, in
conformity with the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (hereinafter “WTO
Agreements”).

 Have agreed as follows:
 
Article 1

Objectives

1. The Contracting Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area in a transitional period
ending on 31 December 2008 in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in
conformity
with the definition, set out in Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreements.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to promote cooperation through the expansion of mutual trade, of harmonious
development of economic relations between the Contracting Parties, improvement of
living standards and conditions of work, raising productivity and enhancing financial
stability;
(b) to provide fair conditions for carrying out loyal competition for trade between the
Contracting Parties;
(c) to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods;
(d) to create conditions for further encouragement of investments, particularly for the
development of joint investments in both countries;
(e) to contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade;
(f) to promote trade and co-operation of the Contracting Parties on third countries’
market.

CHAPTER I: INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS

Article 2

Scope

1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products originating in the Contracting
Parties.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement, the term “industrial products” means products, falling
within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the
exception of the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.
Article 3
 
Basic Duties

1. For the commercial exchange covered by this Agreement, the Customs Tariffs of the
Contracting Parties shall be applied to the classification of goods for imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty, to which the successive reductions, set out in this Agreement,
are to be applied, shall be the Most-Favoured-Nation duty, in force on the date of entry into force
of
this Agreement. 
3. If after the date of application of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga
omnes basis, in particular, reductions, resulting from the tariff agreement concluded as a result of
the
Uruguay Round of the GATT 1994, and the Agreement establishing the WTO, such reduced
duties
shall replace the basic duties referred to in Paragraph 2 of this Article as from that date when
such
reductions are applied.
4. The reduced duties, calculated in accordance with Paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be
rounded off to the second decimal place.
5. The Contracting Parties shall mutually exchange information on their basic duties.
Article 4

Customs Duties On Imports

1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no new customs duties on imports shall
be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased in trade between the Contracting
Parties.
2. Customs duties on imports applied by Contracting Parties shall be abolished on the date of
entry into force of this Agreement, except for the products specified in Protocol I of this
Agreement.
Article 5

Custom Duties On Export

1. No new custom duties on exports shall be introduced in the trade between the Contracting
Parties, as from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall abolish all
custom duties on exports.
Article 6

Charges Equivalent To Duties

1. No new charges, having equivalent effect to custom duties, on imports or exports shall be
introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties as from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
Republic of Macedonia will continue to implement the charge of 0,1% ad valorem for trade 
promotion fees ending to 31.12.2005.
2. The Contracting Parties shall abolish all charges, having equivalent effect to custom duties on
imports or export on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 7

Fiscal Duties

 The provision of Article 6 shall also apply to custom duties of a fiscal nature.
 
Article 8

Quantitative Restrictions On Imports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect

1. No new quantitative restrictions on imports or measures having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties, on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 9

Quantitative Restrictions On Exports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect

1. No new quantitative restrictions on exports or measures having equivalent effect shall be
introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect shall be
abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 10

Technical Barriers To Trade

1. The rights and obligations of the Contracting Parties relating to standards or technical
regulations and related measures shall be governed in accordance with the WTO Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade.
2. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate and exchange information in the field of
standardization, metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation, with the aim of eliminating
technical barriers to trade.
3. Each Contracting Party, upon a request of the other Contracting Party, shall provide
information on particular individual cases of standards, technical norms or related measures.
4. Contracting Parties will enter, where appropriate, into negotiations for the conclusion of the
Agreements on mutual recognition in the field of conformity assessment, in the spirit of the
recommendations of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.

CHAPTER II: AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS 

Article 11

Scope

1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products originating in the
Contracting Parties.
2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "agricultural products" means the products falling
within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and the
products listed in Annex I to this Agreement. 
Article 12

Basic Duties

1. For commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Customs Tariffs of the
Contracting Parties shall be based on classification of goods for imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty shall be the MFN duty in force on the date of entry into force
of this Agreement.
3. If after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an
erga omnes basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff agreement concluded as a
result of
the GATT Uruguay Round, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in
paragraph
2 of this Article as from that date when such reductions are applied.
4. The Contracting Parties shall mutually exchange information for their basic duties.
Article 13

Customs Duties On Imports And Charges Having Equivalent Effect

 No new customs duties on imports, charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties and
other import duties of a fiscal nature shall be introduced in trade with agricultural products
between
the Contracting Parties.

Article 14

Exchange Of Concessions

1. The Contracting Parties shall grant each other the concessions specified in Protocol II, in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and those laid down in that Protocol.
2. Taking into account:
 - the role of agriculture in their economies,

 - the development of trade in agricultural products between the Contracting Parties, 

 - the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products,

 - the rules of their agricultural policies,

 - the results of the multilateral trade negotiations under WTO,

the Contracting Parties shall examine the possibilities of granting each other further concessions.

Article 15

Concessions And Agricultural Policies

1. Without prejudice to the concessions under Article 14 of this Agreement, the provisions of
this Chapter shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective agricultural policies of
the
Contracting Parties or the application of any measures under such policies, including the
implementation of the provisions of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. 
2. The Contracting Parties shall notify to the Joint Committee changes in their respective
agricultural policies pursued or measures applied which may affect the conditions of trade in
agricultural products between them. On the request of either Contracting Party, prompt
consultations
within the Joint Committee shall be held to examine the situation.
Article 16

Specific Safeguards

 Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, in particular Article 30 of this
Agreement, given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, if imports of products
originating in one Contracting Party, which are subject of concessions, granted under this
Agreement,
cause serious disturbances to the market of the other Contracting Party, the Contracting Party
concerned shall enter into prompt consultations to find an appropriate solution. Pending such
solution,
the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures it deems necessary.

Article 17

Sanitary And Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Contracting Parties shall apply their national regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and
sanitary matters, in particular in the exchange of information on infectious and contagious
diseases of
domestic animals, quarantine diseases, plague diseases, and plant pests, in a way that complies
to the
WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
2. The Contracting Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and sanitary
matters in a non-discriminatory way and shall not introduce new measures that may have the
effect of
unduly obstructing trade.
3. The Contracting Parties undertake the obligations to exchange information on the level of the
sanitary and phytosanitary protection of animals, plants and products.
4. The sanitary and phytosanitary measures and functioning of veterinary services shall comply
with the Code of the International Epizootic Office and other international conventions in this area
to
which the Contracting Parties are part of.

CHAPTER III: GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Article 18

Internal Taxation

1. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature
establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination against the products originating in the
Contracting Parties.
2. Republic of Macedonia will apply national treatment on internal taxation on tobacco after
31.12.2005 and tobacco products after 31.12.2007.
3. Products exported to the territory of one of the Contracting Party may not benefit from
repayment of internal taxation in excess of the amount of indirect taxation imposed on them. 
Article 19

Rules Of Origin And Co-Operation In Customs Administration

1. Protocol A to this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “Protocol A”) lays down the rules of
origin and related methods of administrative co-operation.
2. The Contracting Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews by the
Joint Committee and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the provisions
of
Protocol A and Articles 3 to 9, 14, 18 and 31 of this Agreement are effectively and harmoniously
applied, and to reduce, as far as possible, the formalities imposed on trade, and to achieve
mutually
satisfactory solutions to any difficulties arising from the operation of those provisions.
3. The Contracting Parties shall conclude separate Agreement for co-operation between their
Customs Administration, as soon as possible.
Article 20

General Exceptions

1. The provisions of this Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on import,
export, or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security;
the
protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants as well as environment protection;
protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historical or archaeological value; the
protection of
intellectual property or rules, relating to gold or silver or the conservation of exhaustible natural
resources, if such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic
consumption or production.
2. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
discrimination or disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting Parties.
Article 21

Security Exceptions

 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking any appropriate
measures which it considers necessary:
 
(a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies:
(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided
that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of
products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in
other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
(ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
(iii) in time of war or other serious international tension. 
Article 22

State Monopoly

1. The Contracting Parties shall adjust progressively any State monopoly of a commercial
character so as to ensure that by the end of the transitional period laid down in Article 1 of this
Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and
marketed
exists between natural and legal persons of the Contracting Parties. The Contracting Parties shall
inform each other about the measures adopted to implement this objective.
2. The provisions of this Article shall apply to anybody through which the competent authorities
of the Contracting Parties, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly supervise, determine or
appreciably influence imports or exports between the Contracting Parties. These provisions shall
likewise apply to monopolies delegated by the State to other bodies.
Article 23

Payments

1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to trade in goods between the Contracting
Parties and the transfer of such payments to the territory of the Contracting Party where the
creditor
resides shall be free from any restrictions.
2. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the
grant, repayment or acceptance of short and medium term credits to trade in goods, or in finance
in
which person residing in one of the Contracting Parties participates.
Article 24

Rules Of Competition Concerning Undertakings

1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement insofar as they
may affect trade between the Contracting Parties:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the
Contracting Parties, as a whole or in substantial part thereof. 
2. The provisions of the paragraph 1 (a) and (b) of this Article shall apply to the activities of all
undertakings including public undertakings and undertakings to which the Contracting Parties
grant
special or exclusive rights. Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general
economic
interest or having the character of a revenue producing monopoly, shall be subject to provision of
paragraph 1 a) and (b) of this Article insofar as the application of these provisions does not
obstruct
the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular public tasks assigned to them.
3. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II the provisions stipulated in paragraph 1 (a)
of this Article shall not apply to such agreements, decisions and practices which form an integral
part
of a national market organization.
4. If a Contracting Party considers that a certain practice is incompatible with paragraph 1, 2 and
3 of this Article, and if such a practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the
interests of 
that Contracting Party or material injury to its domestic industry, it may take appropriate measures
under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid dawn in Article 27 of this
Agreement.
Article 25

State Aid

1. Any aid granted by State being Contracting Party to this Agreement or through State
resources in any form whatsoever, which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring
certain undertakings or the production of certain goods shall, insofar as it may affect trade
between
the Contracting Parties, be incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement.
2. For agricultural products the provision of paragraph 1 of this Article shall comply with the
relevant WTO Agreements.
3. The Joint Committee shall, within three years from the entry into force of this Agreement,
adopt the criteria on the basis of which the practices contrary to paragraph 1 of this Article shall
be
assessed, as well as the rules for their implementation.
4. The Contracting Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid, inter alia by
reporting annually to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given
and
by providing to the other Contracting Party, upon request, information on aid schemes and on
particular individual cases of state aid.
5. If Contracting Party considers that a particular practice:
- is incompatible with the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article, and is not adequately
dealt with under the implementing rules referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, or

- in the absence of rules, referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, causes or threatens to
cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Contracting Party or material injury to its
domestic industry,

it may take appropriate measures against this practice, under the conditions and in accordance
with
the procedures laid down in Article 27 of this Agreement.

6. Such appropriate measures may be only taken in conformity with the procedures and under
conditions laid dawn by the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreements, and any other relevant
instruments negotiated under their auspices, which are applicable between the Contracting
Parties. 
Article 26

Public Procurement

1. The Contracting Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement
markets as an objective of this Agreement.
2. The Contracting Parties shall progressively adjust their rules, conditions and practices with a
view to grant suppliers of the other Contracting Party, mutual access to contract award
procedures on
their public procurement markets.
3. The Joint Committee shall examine developments related to the achievement of the objectives
of this Article, and may recommend practical modalities of implementing the provisions of
paragraph
2 of this Article so as to ensure free access, transparency and mutual opening of their respective
public procurement markets in the Contracting Parties. 
4. The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to accede to the relevant Agreements on public
procurements negotiated under the auspices of the GATT 1994 and WTO Agreements.
Article 27

Procedure For The Application Of Safeguard Measures

1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in the
following paragraphs of this Article, the Contracting Parties shall endeavour to solve any
differences
between them through direct consultations.
2. In the event of either Contracting Party subjecting imports of products liable to give rise to
the situation referred to in Article 30 of this Agreement to an administrative procedure having as
its
purpose the rapid provision of information on trade flows, it shall inform the other Contracting
Party.
3. (a) With regard to Articles 29, 30 and 32 of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall
examine the case or the situation and may take any decision needed to put end to the
difficulties notified by the Contracting Party concerned. In the case of absence of such
decision within 30 days from the date of the matter being referred to the Joint
Committee, the Contracting Party concerned may adopt the necessary measures in
order to remedy the situation.
(b) As regards Article 20 of this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned may take
appropriate measures after the consultations have been concluded or a period of three
months has elapsed from the date of first written notifications to the other Contracting
Party.
(c) With regard to Articles 24 and 25 of this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned
shall give the Joint Committee all the assistance required in order to examine the case
and, where appropriate, eliminate the practice objected to. If the Contracting Party in
question fails to put an end to the practice objected to within the period fixed by the
Joint Committee, or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an agreement within thirty
working days of the matter being referred to it, the Contracting Party concerned may
adopt the appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the practice
in question.
4. The safeguard measures taken shall be immediately notified to the other Contracting Party.
They will be restricted with regard to their extent and to their duration to what is strictly necessary
in
order to rectify the situation-giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury
caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to measures which will
least
disturb the functioning of this Agreement.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be the object of periodic consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view of their relaxation as soon as possible, or abolition when conditions no
longer
justify their maintenance.
6. When exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 29, 30 and 32 of this
Agreement, apply forthwith the provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the respective 
situation. The measures taken shall be notified to the other Contracting Party, without delay and
consultations between the Contracting Parties shall take place as soon as possible within the
Joint
Committee.
7. Without prejudice to paragraph 6 of this Article, a Contracting Party, which considers
resorting to safeguard measures, shall promptly notify in writing the other Contracting Party
thereof 
and supply all relevant information. Consultations between the Contracting Parties shall take
place
without delay within the Joint Committee with a view to finding a solution acceptable to both
Contracting Parties.
Article 28

Intellectual Property Rights

1. The Contracting Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, including effective measures for enforcing such rights
against infringement, and particularly against counterfeiting and piracy. The protection of
intellectual
property rights shall be improved to a level corresponding to the substantive standards of the
multilateral agreements which are specified in the Annex II to this Agreement.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement, the term, intellectual property rights,, refers to all
categories of intellectual property such as; copyrights and neighbouring rights, computer
programs,
data bases, trademarks for good and services, geographical indications, industrial designs,
patents,
new varieties of plants, topographies of integrated circuits, as well as undisclosed information
including know-how.
3. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate in intellectual property rights protection matters, and
at the request of any Contracting Party, they shall hold consultations on expert level, in particular,
with respect to activities relating the existing or to futures international convention on the
harmonisation, administration and vindication of intellectual property rights and on activities in
international organisation, such as to WTO, World Intellectual Property Organisation, as well as
concerning the relations of the Contracting Parties with third countries on matter concerning the
intellectual property rights.
Article 29

Dumping

 If one of the Contracting Parties finds that dumping, in within the meaning of Article VI of
GATT 1994, is taking place in the trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take
appropriate
measures against those practices under the conditions and in accordance with the WTO
Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and under the conditions and procedure laid down
in
Article 27 of this Agreement.
 
Article 30

General Safeguards

 Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under conditions as to
cause, or threaten to cause:

(a) serious injuries to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the
territory of the importing Contracting Party, or
(b) serious disturbances in any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could
bring serious deterioration in the economic situation of a certain region,
the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 27 of this Agreement.
 
Article 31

Structural Adjustment

1. Exceptional measures of limited duration, derogating from the provisions of Article 4 of this
Agreement, may be taken by any of the Contracting Party in the form of increased customs
duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important
social problems.
3. Customs duties on imports applicable in one of the Contracting Party concerned to products
originating in the other Contracting Party introduced in accordance with the paragraphs 1 and 2 of
this
Article may not exceed 25% ad valorem and shall maintain an element of preference in custom
duties
originating in the other Contracting Party. The total value of imports of the products which are
subject
to these measures may not exceed 15% of the total imports of industrial products from the other
Contracting Party during the last year for which statistic data are available.
4. These measures shall be applied for a period that will not exceeding five successive years,
unless a longer duration is authorized by the Joint Committee.
5. No such measures can be in introduced in respect to a product, if more than three years have
elapsed since the removal of all customs duties and quantitative restrictions or measures having
equivalent effect concerning that product.
6. The Contracting Party concerned shall inform the other Contracting Party of any exceptional
measure it intends to take and, at the request of the other Contracting Party, consultations shall
be held
within the Joint Committee regarding such measures and sectors to which they apply, even
before
they are put into force. When taking such measures, the Contracting Party concerned shall
provide the
Joint Committee a schedule for the elimination of customs duties introduced under this Article.
This
schedule shall provide for a phasing out of these duties starting at the latest two years after their
introduction, at equal annual rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a different schedule.
Article 32

Re-Export And Serious Shortage

 Where the compliance with the provisions of Article 5 and 9 of this Agreements related to:

(a) re-export towards a third country, against which the exporting Contracting Party
maintains for the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties, or 
measures or charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or a threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting
Contracting Party,
and where the situation referred to above gives rise or is likely to give rise to major difficulties for
the
exporting Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may take appropriate measures under the
conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 27 of this Agreement. The
measures shall be non-discriminatory and be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their
maintenance.
 
Article 33

Balance-Of-Payments Difficulties

1. The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures
including measures relating to imports for balance-of-payments difficulties.
2. Where a Contracting Party is in serious balance-of-payments difficulties, or under imminent
threat thereof, the Contracting Party concerned may adopt, in accordance with the conditions
established by GATT 1994 and WTO Agreements, may adopt trade restrictive measures, which
shall
be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance-ofpayments
situation. The measures shall be progressively attenuated, as the balance-of-payments
conditions
improve, and they shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The
Contracting Party concerned shall inform other Contracting Party and the Joint Committee
forthwith
their introduction and, whenever practicable, of a time schedule for their removal.
Article 34

The Joint Committee

1. The Contracting Parties agree to establish a Joint Committee composed of their
representatives.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administrated by the Joint
Committee.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall
exchange information and, at the request of any Contracting Party shall hold consultations within
the
Joint Committee.
4. The Joint Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the
obstacles to trade between the Contracting Parties.
5. The Joint Committee may take decisions in the cases provide for in this Agreement. On other
matters the Joint Committee may take recommendations.
Article 35

Procedures Of The Joint Committee

1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet whenever 
necessary but at least once a year. Either Contracting Party may request a meeting to be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall take decisions and recommendations by consensus.
3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of Contracting Party to this Agreement has
accepted a decision subject to the fulfilment of internal legal requirements, the decision shall
enter
into force, if no later date is contained therein, on the day of the receipt of the written notification
about the fulfilment of such requirements.
4. For the purpose of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure.
5. The Joint Committee may decide to set-up such sub-committee and working groups as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. 
Article 36

Custom Unions, Free Trade Areas And Frontier Trade

1. The provisions of this Agreement apply to all trade relationships between the Contracting
Parties.
2. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, freetrade zones, economic unions or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that these do not
negatively affect the trade regime between the Contracting Parties and in particular the provisions
concerning rules of origin provided for by this Agreement.
3. Upon request the Contracting Parties shall inform each other of any agreements establishing
custom unions or free trade areas concluded with other countries.
Article 37

Fulfilment Of Obligations

1. The Contracting Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the
objective of this Agreement and the fulfilment of their obligations under this Agreement.
2. If either Contracting Party considers that the other Contracting Party has failed to fulfil an
obligation under this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned may take the appropriate
measures
under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 27 of this
Agreement.
Article 38

Evolutionary Clause

1. Where either Contracting Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the
economies of the Contracting Parties to develop the relations established by this Agreement by
extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other
Contracting Party. The Contracting Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine this
request
and, where appropriate, to make recommendations to them, particularly with a view to opening
negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article will be
subject to ratification of approval by the Contracting Parties to this Agreement in accordance with
their internal legal procedures. 
Article 39

Annexes And Protocols

 Annexes and Protocols of this Agreement are an integral part of it.

 
Article 40

Amendments

 Amendments to this Agreement, including Annexes and Protocol, may be proposed by either
Contracting Party and shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the last notification, through
diplomatic channels, confirming that all internal legal procedures required by either Contracting
Party
for their entry into force have been fulfilled.

Article 41

Validity And Termination

1. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Each Contracting Party may denounce this Agreement through diplomatic channels by a
written notification to the other Contracting Party. In such case the Agreement shall be
denounced on
the first day of the six month after the date when the other Contracting Party has received the
written
notification.
3. The Contracting Parties agreed that in case of accession of one of the Contracting Parties to
the European Union, the Agreement will be terminated without successive compensation for the
other
Contracting Party, on the day before the date of accession to the EU, and in accordance with the
procedure laid down in paragraph 2 of this Article.
Article 42

Entry Into Force

 This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the date when
the Contracting Parties have notified each other through diplomatic channels that their respective
internal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.


 IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorised thereto, 
have signed the present Agreement.

 DONE in Scopje, on 28 of January 2004 in two original copies, each in Moldavian,
Macedonian and English language each being equally authentic. In case of different interpretation
of
the provisions of this Agreement, the English text shall prevail.


FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA

__________ 