TRADE INTEGRATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF PERU AND THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

PREAMBLE

The Republic of Peru (Peru) and the United Mexican States (Mexico) resolved to:

REAFFIRM the special bonds of friendship and cooperation between their nations;

STRENGTHEN regional economic integration, which constitutes one of the essential instruments for Latin American countries to advance in their economic and social development, promoting a better quality of life for their peoples;

DEVELOP their respective rights and obligations derived from the agreements of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the Montevideo Treaty of 1980;

ESTABLISH clear and mutually beneficial rules in their commercial exchange that propitiate the necessary conditions for growth and diversification of trade flows, in a manner compatible with existing potentialities;

OFFER economic agents a predictable legal and commercial framework for the development of trade and investment, in order to promote their active participation in economic and commercial relations between the two countries;

AVOID distortions in their reciprocal trade;

PROMOTE trade in innovative sectors of our economies; and

CREATE a more extensive and secure market for trade in goods and services between the Parties;

HAVE AGREED as follows:

CHAPTER I

INITIAL PROVISIONS

Article 1.1 : Establishment of the free trade area

The Parties establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the GATS.

Article 1.2 : Objectives

1. The objectives of this Agreement, developed specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:

a) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;

b) eliminate trade barriers and facilitate the movement of goods and services between the Parties;

c) promote conditions of fair competition in trade between the Parties;

d) improve investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

e) establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement; and

f) create effective procedures for the application and fulfillment of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the resolution of controversies.

2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.

Article 1.3 : Relationship with other international treaties and agreements

1. The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them under the WTO Agreement and other treaties or agreements to which they are party.

2. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 1.4: Observance of the Agreement

Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its internal regulations, compliance with the provisions of this Agreement throughout its territory at the federal or national, state or regional, and municipal or local levels, respectively, except in cases where this Agreement provides something different. 1

Article 1.5: succession of treaties

Any reference made to other international treaties or agreements to which the Parties to this Agreement are parties shall be understood to be made to the treaties or agreements that succeed them.

A federal or national, state or regional, municipal or local government includes any non-governmental body in the exercise of any regulatory, administrative or other power delegated to it by the federal or national, state or regional, municipal or local government.

 

CHAPTER II

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

 

Article 2.1: General definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise provided, it shall be understood as:

WTO Agreement: the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, dated April 15, 1994;

GATS: the General Agreement on Trade in Services of the World Trade Organization;

ALADI: Latin American Integration Association;

customs duty: any import tax, duty or tribute and any charge of any kind applied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except:

a) any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article III of the GATT 1994, with respect to like, direct competitive or substitute goods of the Party, or with respect to goods from which it has been manufactured or wholly or partially produced the imported merchandise;

b) antidumping or countervailing duty that is applied in accordance with the internal legislation of a Party;

c) any duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of the services rendered; and

d) any premium offered, paid or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariffs-quota or tariff preference quotas;

Commission: the Administrative Commission established in accordance with Article 17.1 (Administrative Commission);

days: calendar or calendar days;

company: any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and privately or government owned, including corporations, trusts, associations (partnerships), sole proprietorships, joint ventures or other associations;

enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party;

state enterprise: an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through ownership rights;

Existing: current as of the effective date of this Agreement;

GATT 1994: the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of the World Trade Organization;

measure: any law, regulation, procedure, provision, requirement or practice;

merchandise of a Party: a national product as understood in the GATT of 1994 of the World Trade Organization, or that merchandise that the Parties agree upon, and includes an originating merchandise of that Party. A good from a Party may incorporate materials from other countries;

originating good or originating material: a good or material that complies with the standards established in Chapter IV (Rules of origin and procedures related to origin);

national: a physical or natural person who has the nationality of a Party under its applicable law;

Party: the United Mexican States, the Republic of Peru and any State with respect to which this Agreement has entered into force;

heading: the first 4 digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification code;

person: a physical or natural person or a company;

person of a Party: a national or company of a Party;

Harmonized System: the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, as defined in the International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (done in Brussels on June 14, 1938), including chapters, headings , subheadings and the corresponding numerical codes, as well as the legal notes that are in force and including the modifications, in the manner in which the Parties have adopted and applied them in their respective internal legislation;

subheading: the first 6 digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification code;

territory: the territory of each Party as defined in the Annex to Article 2.1; and

Treaty of Montevideo 1980: the Treaty establishing the Latin American Integration Association.

 

Annex to Article 2.1

Country-specific definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, it shall be understood as:

territory:

a) with respect to Mexico:

i) the states of the Federation and the Federal District;

ii) islands, including reefs and cays in adjacent seas;

iii) the islands of Guadalupe and Revillagigedo, located in the Pacific Ocean;

iv) the continental platform and the submarine bases of the islands, cays and reefs;

v) the waters of the territorial seas, to the extent and terms established by international law, and internal maritime waters;

vi) the space located on the national territory, with the extension and modalities established by international law itself; and

vii) any area beyond the territorial seas of Mexico within which Mexico may exercise rights over the seabed and subsoil and over the natural resources they contain, in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea, as well as with its internal legislation; and

b) with respect to Peru:

The continental territory, the islands, the maritime spaces and the airspace that covers them, under the sovereignty or rights of sovereignty and jurisdiction of Peru in accordance with its national legislation and international law.

 

CHAPTER III

MARKET ACCESS

 

Article 3.1: Area of ​​application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties.

 

Section A: Definitions

Article 3.2: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

Customs Valuation Agreement: Agreement regarding the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994;

import license or permit: is the document granted by the relevant administrative body, as a condition prior to importation into the territory of the importing Party, issued within the framework of an administrative procedure used for import license regimes, which requires submitting an application or other documents (other than those generally required for customs clearance purposes);

printed advertising materials: those goods classified in chapter 49 of the Harmonized System including brochures, printed matter, loose sheets, commercial catalogues, trade association directories, tourism promotional materials and posters, used to promote, publish or advertise a good or service, with the intent to advertise a merchandise or service, and to be distributed without charge;

goods temporarily admitted for sports purposes: sports equipment for use in sports competitions, events or training in the territory of the Party to which they are admitted;

remanufactured goods: industrial goods, assembled in the territory of a Party that:

a) consist wholly or partly of recovered goods; and

b) have a similar life expectancy and enjoy a factory warranty similar to that of a new merchandise;

commercial samples of insignificant value: commercial samples valued, individually or in the set sent, in not more than one dollar of the United States of America or in the equivalent amount in the currency of another Party, or that are marked, broken, perforated or treated so as to make them unfit for sale or for any use other than sample purposes;

advertising films and recordings: visual communication media or recorded audio materials, consisting essentially of images and/or sound that show the nature or operation of goods or services offered for sale or rent by a person established or residing in the territory of a Party, provided that such materials are suitable for display to potential customers, but not for release to the general public, and are imported in packages each containing no more than one copy of each film or recording and not are part of a larger consignment;

performance requirement: the requirement of:

a) export a certain volume or percentage of goods or services;

b) replace imported goods or services with goods or services of the Party that grants the exemption from customs duties or import license;

c) that a person benefiting from an exemption from customs duties or an import license purchases other goods or services in the territory of the Party that grants the exemption from customs duties or the import license, or grants a preference to goods produced in the territory of that Party;

d) that a person who benefits from an exemption from customs duties or an import license produces goods or services in the territory of the Party that grants the exemption from customs duties or an import license, with a certain level or percentage of local content ; either

e) relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports or with the amount of foreign currency input;

but does not include a requirement that an imported good be:

a) subsequently exported;

b) used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently exported;

c) substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently exported; either

d) replaced by an identical or similar merchandise that is subsequently exported.

consular requirements or transactions: requirements that goods of one Party intended for export to the territory of another Party must first be presented to the supervision of the importing Party's consul in the territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of obtaining consular invoices or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shipper's export declarations, or any other customs document required for or in connection with importation.

 

Section B: National Treatment

Article 3.3: National treatment

1. Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 relating to national treatment mean, with respect to a state, region or any other level of government, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that such state, region or any other level of government accords to any goods similar, direct competitors or substitutes, as the case may be, of the Party of which said state, region or any other level of government is a member.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the measures set out in the Annex to Articles 3.3 and 3.6.

 

Section C: Tariff Elimination

Article 3.4: Elimination of customs duties

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on originating goods, subject to the Tariff Elimination Program.

2. Regarding the goods excluded from the Tariff Elimination Program, any Party may maintain or adopt measures in accordance with its rights and obligations derived from the WTO Agreement and this Agreement.

3. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in accordance with the provisions of the Tariff Elimination Program contained in the Annex to Article 3.4-A.

4. The Parties shall hold consultations, at the request of any of them, to examine the possibility of improving the tariff conditions for market access for originating goods included in the Annex to Article 3.4-A. When the Parties approve an agreement in this sense, it will prevail over any customs duty or category of relief established in its Annex to Article 3.4-A. These agreements will be adopted by means of Commission decisions.

5. Except as provided in the Annex to Article 3.4-B, the Parties may deny preferential tariff treatment under this Agreement to used goods. For the purposes of this paragraph, used goods include those identified as such in headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System and those reconstructed, repaired, recovered, remanufactured, or any other similar goods that, after having been used, have been subject to a process for restore their original features or specifications, or to restore the functionality they had when new.

6. A Party may:

a) increase a customs duty on an originating good to a level not higher than that established in its Schedule in the Annex to Article 3.4-A, after a unilateral reduction of said customs duty; either

b) Maintain or increase a customs duty on an originating good, when authorized by any provision on dispute settlement in the WTO Agreement.

Article 3.5: Customs valuation

In the application of customs valuation, the Parties shall be governed by the provisions of the Customs Valuation Agreement. To this end, said Agreement is incorporated into this Agreement and is an integral part thereof.

 

Section D: Non-tariff measures

Article 3.6: Import and export restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain a non-tariff measure that prohibits or restricts the import of any good of the other Party or the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except as provided for in Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.

2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit a Party from adopting or maintaining:

a) export and import price requirements, except as permitted for the execution of the provisions and commitments regarding antidumping and countervailing duties;

b) granting of import licenses conditional on the fulfillment of a performance requirement; either

c) voluntary export restrictions except as permitted in Article VI of the GATT 1994, as implemented by Article 18 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and Article 8.1 of the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VI of the Agreement General on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the measures set out in the Annex to Articles 3.3 and 3.6.

Article 3.7: Import licenses or permits

1. The Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures is incorporated into this Agreement and forms an integral part thereof. Neither Party will maintain or adopt a measure that is inconsistent with said Agreement.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, import licenses or permits will be granted and issued within a maximum period of 20 business days, counted from the moment the importing Party receives the request in accordance with the national legislation that regulates them.

Article 3.8: Charges and administrative formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII, paragraph 1, of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, that all fees and charges of whatever nature (other than customs duties, charges equivalent to excise duties, or other charges imposed in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, and anti-dumping and countervailing duties), taxes on or in connection with imports or exports, are limited to the approximate cost of services rendered and do not represent a indirect protection to national merchandise nor a tax on imports or exports for fiscal purposes.

2. No Party shall require consular transactions or requirements, including related fees and charges, in connection with the importation of any good of another Party.

3. Each Party shall make available and maintain, through the Internet, the taxes or charges imposed in connection with the import or export.

Article 3.9: Export taxes

1. Except as provided in the Annex to Article 3.9, neither Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, levy or charge on the export of goods destined for the territory of the other Party, unless they are adopted or maintained on said good, when is intended for domestic consumption.

2. The Parties may hold consultations in relation to the application of the provisions of this Article, aimed at the application of measures that seek to avoid unwanted effects in the application of a domestic food aid program.

 

Section E: Special customs regimes

Article 3.10: Exemption of customs duties

1. No Party shall adopt a new exemption from customs duties, or extend the application of an exemption from existing customs duties in respect of current beneficiaries, or extend it to new beneficiaries, when the exemption is conditioned, explicitly or implicitly, on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.

2. No Party shall condition, explicitly or implicitly, the continuation of any exemption from existing customs duties on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.

Article 3.11: Admission or temporary importation of merchandise

1. Each Party shall authorize the importation or temporary admission free of customs duties for the following goods, which are admitted to the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin:

a) professional equipment, including press or television equipment, computer programs and broadcasting and cinematographic equipment, necessary for the exercise of the business activity, trade or profession of the person who qualifies for temporary entry in accordance with the legislation of the importing Party;

b) goods intended for exhibition or demonstration that include their component parts, auxiliary devices and accessories;

c) commercial samples, advertising films and recordings; and

d) merchandise imported or admitted for sports purposes.

2. No Party shall condition the importation or temporary admission free of customs duties of a good indicated in paragraph 1, to conditions other than that the good:

a) is imported or admitted by the customs authority at the request of a national or resident of the other Party;

b) is used solely by or under the personal supervision of a national or resident of the other Party in the exercise of that person's business, trade, professional or sporting activity;

c) is not subject to sale or lease while remaining in its territory;

d) be accompanied by a bond, if the importing Party requires it, in an amount that does not exceed the charges that would be owed in its case for the final entry or importation, refundable at the time of departure of the merchandise;

e) is capable of identification when exported;

f) is exported within the period established by the Party in its legislation;

g) is imported or admitted in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use; and

h) is imported or otherwise admissible into the territory of the Party in accordance with its legislation.

3. In the case of the goods indicated in paragraph 1 (c) and in addition to the conditions established in paragraph 2, the goods must only be imported for the purpose of raising future orders or for the supply of services.

4. If any of the conditions imposed by a Party under paragraphs 2 and 3 have not been met, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charges that would normally be due on importation or final admission of the good plus any other charge or sanction established in accordance with its legislation.

5. Each Party, through its customs authority, shall adopt procedures that facilitate the expeditious clearance of imported merchandise pursuant to this Article. To the extent possible, when such merchandise accompanies a national or resident of the other Party who is requesting temporary entry, those procedures shall allow the merchandise to be cleared simultaneously with the entry of that national or resident.

6. Each Party shall allow a good imported or temporarily admitted under this Article to be exported through a customs port other than the port through which it was imported or admitted.

7. Exceptionally, the importation or temporary admission may conclude with the total or partial destruction of the merchandise in fortuitous event, force majeure or the request of the beneficiary, according to the provisions of the national legislation of each Party.

8. No Party:

a) prohibit a vehicle or container used in international transportation that has entered its territory from another Party from leaving its territory by any route that is reasonably related to the prompt and economic departure of such vehicle or container;

b) will require a bond or impose any sanction or charge solely because the port of entry of the vehicle or container is different from the port of exit;

c) condition the release of any obligation, including any bond, that it has applied to the entry of a vehicle or container into its territory, on its departure through a particular port; and

d) require that the vehicle or carrier that brings a container from the territory of the other Party to its territory be the same vehicle or carrier that takes it to the territory of the other Party.

 

9. For purposes of paragraph 8, vehicle means a truck, truck tractor, tractor, trailer or trailer unit, locomotive or wagon, or other railroad equipment.

Article 3.12: Goods reimported after repair or alteration

1. Neither Party will apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that has been re-entered into its territory, after having been temporarily exported from its territory to the territory of the other Party to be repaired or altered, regardless of whether said repairs or alterations could be made in the territory of the Party from which the good was exported for repair or alteration.

2. Neither Party will apply a customs duty to a good that, regardless of its origin, is temporarily admitted from the territory of another Party, to be repaired or altered.

3. Repairs or alterations do not include an operation or process that destroys the essential characteristics of a good or converts it into a new or commercially different good, or transforms an unfinished good into a finished good.

Article 3.13: Duty-free import for trade samples of negligible value and printed advertising materials

Each Party shall authorize duty-free importation of commercial samples of negligible value and printed advertising materials imported from the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin, but may require that:

a) such samples are imported only for the purpose of soliciting orders for goods or services provided from the territory of the other Party, or from another country that is not a Party; either

b) such advertising materials are imported in packages that each do not contain more than one copy of each form and that neither the materials nor the packages form part of a larger consignment.

Section F: Market Access Committee

Article 3.14: Market Access Committee

1. The Parties establish a Market Access Committee that will be made up of representatives of the Parties:

a) in the case of Mexico, by the Ministry of Economy or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, by the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism or its successor.

2. The Committee will meet preferably once a year in an ordinary way, and at any time in an extraordinary way, at the request of any of the Parties.

3. Ordinary meetings will be held within a period of no more than 60 days following the request, and in the case of extraordinary meetings, said period will not exceed 30 days.

4. The Committee will have the following functions:

a) monitor compliance, application and correct interpretation of the provisions of this Chapter and its Annexes, including future amendments to the Harmonized System to guarantee the obligations of each Party under this Agreement;

b) serve as a discussion forum for the Parties to consult and resolve on aspects related to this Chapter, in coordination with any instance established in the Agreement;

c) address obstacles to trade in goods between the Parties, especially those related to the application of non-tariff measures regulated by Section D of this Chapter and, if appropriate, submit these matters to the Commission for its consideration;

d) make pertinent recommendations to the Commission on matters within its competence;

e) coordinate the exchange of information on merchandise trade between the Parties;

f) encourage cooperation for the application and administration of this Chapter; and

g) Any other functions entrusted to it by the Commission.

CHAPTER IV

RULES OF ORIGIN AND PROCEDURES RELATED TO ORIGIN

 

Article 4.1: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

Customs Valuation Agreement: the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, including its interpretative notes, which are part of the Agreement on the WTO;

aquaculture: the process of farming fish, crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates, even when farming is done from 1 or non-native larvae;

competent authority: the authority which, under the law of each Party, is responsible for the application of this Chapter:

a) in the case of Mexico, for certification and control of origin, the Ministry of Economy or its successor, and for verification of origin, the Tax Administration Service of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism or its successor;

valid certificate of origin: one that complies with the provisions established in this Chapter;

class of motor vehicles: any of the following categories of motor vehicles:

a) motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.20, tariff item 8702.10.aa or 8702.90.aa, subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90 or in heading 87.05 or 87.06;

b) motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.10 or 8701.30 to 8701.90;

c) motor vehicles included in tariff item 8702.10.bb or 8702.90.bb or in subheading 8704.21 or 8704.31; either

d) motor vehicles included in subheading 8703.21 to 8703.90;

shipping containers and packaging materials: those used to protect a merchandise during its transport, not including the containers and materials in which the merchandise is packed for retail sale;

exporter: a person located in the territory of a Party from which he exports a good;

importer: a person located in the territory of a Party into which a good is imported;

model line: a number of motor vehicles having the same platform or model name;

material: includes raw materials, inputs, ingredients, intermediate products, parts, components, pieces and goods that are used in the production of other goods;

merchandise: any good, product, article or material;

fungible goods or fungible materials: goods or materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;

identical goods: those that are the same in everything, as defined in the Customs Valuation Agreement;

simple mixing: an activity, including dilution with water or another substance, that does not substantially alter the characteristics of the merchandise. A simple mixture does not include the chemical reaction;

model name: the word, group of words, letter(s), number(s), or similar designation assigned to a motor vehicle by a marketing division of a motor vehicle assembler for:

a) differentiate the motor vehicle from other motor vehicles using the same platform design;

b) associate the motor vehicle with other motor vehicles that use a different platform design; either

c) indicate a platform layout;

plant: a building or buildings in close proximity, but not necessarily contiguous, machinery, apparatus and installations under the control of a producer used in the production of any of the following:

a) light vehicles and heavy vehicles;

b) automotive parts; either

c) assemblies of automotive components and subcomponents;

platform: the primary load-carrying structural assembly of a motor vehicle that determines the basic size of that motor vehicle and is the structural foundation that supports the powertrain, and serves as a bond for motor vehicle suspension components in various types of frames, such as for body mounting or dimensional frame and unit body;

CIF price: the price of the imported merchandise, including insurance and freight costs to the port or place of entry in the importing country;

FOB price: the price of the merchandise free on board, regardless of the means of transport, at the point of direct shipment from the seller to the buyer;

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles: the recognized consensus or substantial support authorized in the territory of a Party regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, the disclosure of information and the preparation of financial statements. These standards may include broad guides of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;

production: the growing, raising, extracting, harvesting, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, assembling, or processing of a good;

producer: a person located in the territory of a Party who grows, raises, mines, harvests, fishes, hunts, manufactures, assembles, or processes a good;

chemical reaction: processes, including biochemical processes, that result in a molecule with a new structure, breaking intramolecular bonds and forming new intramolecular bonds or altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule;

preferential tariff treatment: the preferential customs tariff applicable to a good, in accordance with this Agreement;

customs value: the transaction value of a merchandise, this being the price actually paid or payable for said merchandise, determined according to the application criteria of the agreement for the interpretation of Article VII of the Customs Valuation Agreement.

motor vehicle: an automobile, commercial truck, light truck, medium truck, or motor carrier vehicle, according to the following descriptions:

a) automobile: a vehicle intended for the transport of up to 10 people and established in subheading 8703.21 to 8703.33, tariff item 8703.90.aa or 8706.00.aa;

b) commercial truck: a vehicle with or without a chassis, intended for the transport of goods or more than 10 people, with a gross vehicle weight of up to 2,727 kg. and which is established in subheading 8702.10, tariff item 8702.90.cc, subheading 8703.21 to 8703.33, tariff item 8703.90.aa, 8704.21.aa, 8704.31.aa, 8705.20.aa, 8705.40.aa or 8706.00.aa;

c) light truck: a vehicle with or without a chassis, intended for the transport of goods or more than 10 people, with a gross vehicle weight of more than 2,727 kg. but not greater than 7,272 kg. and that is established in subheading 8702.10, tariff item 8702.90.cc, 8704.21.aa, 8704.22.aa, 8704.31.aa, 8704.32aa, 8705.20.aa, 8705.40.aa or 8706.00.aa;

d) medium truck: a vehicle with or without a chassis, intended for the transport of goods or more than 10 people, with a gross vehicle weight of more than 7,272 kg. but not greater than 8,864 kg. and that is established in subheading 8702.10, tariff item 8702.90.cc, 8704.22.aa, 8704.32.aa, 8705.20.aa, 8705.40.aa or 8706.00.aa; either

e) motor transport vehicle: any motor vehicle whose gross vehicle weight is greater than 8,864 kilograms and corresponds to one of the following types:

i) integral bus: a motor vehicle without a chassis and with an integrated body, intended for the transport of 10 or more people, classified in any of the following tariff fractions: 8702.10.cc or 8702.90.dd;

ii) heavy truck / bus: a motor vehicle with a chassis for the transport of effects or 10 or more people, classified in any of the following tariff fractions: 8702.10.dd, 8702.90.ee, 8704.22.bb, 8704.23.aa, 8704.32 .bb, 8705.20.aa, 8705.40.aa or 8706.00.bb; either

iii) tractor-trailer: a 2- or 3-axle motor vehicle intended for the transport of goods, by towing trailers or semi-trailers, classified in tariff item 8701.20.aa.

Article 4.2: Originating Goods

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the following shall be considered original:

a) goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties:

i) minerals extracted in the territory of one or both Parties;

ii) vegetables harvested in the territory of one or both Parties;

iii) live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or both Parties;

iv) goods obtained from hunting, fishing or aquaculture in the territory of one or both Parties;

v) goods obtained from live animals in the territory of one or both Parties, without their obtaining implying the slaughter of said animals;

vi) fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained outside the territory of the Parties by vessels registered, enrolled, flagged or reputed as such by any of the Parties, according to their legislation, through modalities such as affiliation, leasing or chartering;

vii) goods produced on board factory ships from the goods identified in numeral (vi), provided that such factory ships are registered, enrolled, flagged or reputed as such by any of the Parties, according to their legislation, through modalities such as affiliation, leasing or chartering;

viii) goods obtained by a Party or a person from a Party, from the seabed or subsoil, outside the territory of the Parties, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;

ix) waste and scrap derived from production in the territory of one or both Parties or from used goods collected in the territory of one or both Parties, provided that such goods are fit only for the recovery of raw materials; and

x) goods produced in the territory of one or both Parties, exclusively from the goods mentioned in numbers (i) to (ix);

b) goods produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties, exclusively from originating materials, in accordance with this Chapter; either

c) Goods produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties using non-originating materials, complying with the specific rules of origin established in the Annex to Article 4.2.

2. Likewise, the merchandise must comply with the provisions of this Chapter that are applicable.

Article 4.3: Operations and practices that do not confer origin

1. A good will not be considered originating, despite complying with the provisions of this Chapter, due to the fact that it has only been subjected to any of the following operations or practices:

a) Operations intended to preserve the goods during transport or storage, such as airing, refrigerating, freezing, removing damaged parts, drying or adding substances;

b) filtrations or dilutions in water or in another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the merchandise;

c) cooking, refrigerating and freezing operations;

d) simple mixing operations;

e) dust removal, screening, classification, selection, washing, filtering, maceration, drying or cutting;

f) packaging, repackaging, packaging, repackaging or packaging for retail sale;

g) the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;

h) cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings;

i) Fractioning into batches or volumes, shelling or shelling;

j) the assembly of parts and components that are classified as merchandise, in accordance with Rule 2(a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System;

k) any activity or practice of fixing prices of a good with respect to which it can be demonstrated, based on sufficient evidence, that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this Chapter;

l) any operation of conditioning merchandise for wholesale sale;

m) the disassembly of merchandise into its parts or pieces; either

n) the accumulation of two or more operations or practices indicated in subsections (a) to (m).

2. The provisions of this Article shall prevail over the specific rules of origin established in the Annex to Article 4.2.

Article 4.4: Regional value content

1. When a good is required to meet a regional value content requirement to determine whether said good is originating, the calculation shall be based on the following method:

VT - VMN
VCR= ----------------- x 100
VT

where:

VCR: is the regional content value of the merchandise, expressed as a percentage;

VT: is the transaction value of a merchandise on the FOB basis, adjusted in accordance with the provisions of Articles 1 to 8, 15 and their corresponding interpretative notes of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

VNM: is the value of all non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the merchandise.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, when the exporter is different from the producer, the latter may consider in the transaction value the costs of freight, insurance, packaging and all other costs incurred in transportation to the point at which the exporter receives the merchandise within the territory where the producer is located.

3. To calculate the regional content value of a merchandise classified in heading 87.01 to 87.07, the producer may average the calculation in its fiscal year or period, using any of the following categories, either taking as a base all motor vehicles of that category, or only motor vehicles of that category that are exported to the territory of the other Party:

a) the same model line of the same class of motor vehicles, produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;

b) the same class of motor vehicles, produced in the same plant in the territory of a Party; either

c) the same model line of motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party.

Article 4.5: Value of materials

1. For the purposes of Articles 4.4 and 4.9, the value of a material will be:

a) in the case of a material imported directly by the producer of the merchandise, the customs value of the importing country, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 1 to 8, 15 and their corresponding interpretative notes of the Customs Valuation Agreement;

b) in the case of a material purchased by the producer in the territory where the good is produced:

i) if it is an originating material, the transaction value, considering freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located; either

ii) if it is a non-originating material, the transaction value. However, freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where the producer is located will not be considered; either

c) in the case of an intermediate material or where there is a relationship between the producer of the good and the seller of the material that influences the price actually paid or payable for the material, the sum of all costs incurred in the production of the material , including general expenses. Additionally, the amount of benefits equivalent to that which would have been obtained in the normal course of trade may be added, in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement.

2. In determining the value of non-originating materials of a good, in accordance with Article 4.4, the producer of the good shall not take into account the value of non-originating materials used by another producer in the production of an originating material or of a material that has been designated as intermediate.

Article 4.6: Intermediate materials

1. For purposes of calculating the regional value content in accordance with Article 4.5, the producer of a good may designate as an intermediate material, any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good, provided that such material complies with the provisions in Article 4.2.

2. If a material designated as an intermediate material is subject to a regional value content requirement, any self-produced material used in its production that is subject to a regional value content requirement may not be designated by the producer. as intermediate material.

Article 4.7: Cumulation of origin between the Parties

1. Originating goods or materials of a Party, incorporated into a good in the territory of the other Party, shall be considered as originating in the territory of the latter.

2. The production carried out by a producer in a Party may be cumulated with that of one or more producers in the territory of that Party or of the other Party, so that the production of the materials incorporated in the good is considered as carried out. by that producer, provided that the good meets the requirements established in Article 4.2.

Article 4.8: Extended origin cumulation

1. When each Party has established a preferential trade agreement with a non-Party country, and for purposes of determining whether a good is originating under this Agreement, a material that is produced in the territory of said non-Party country, which would be originating under this Agreement Agreement, if produced in the territory of one or both Parties, may be considered as originating in the territory of the exporting Party.

2. For the application of paragraph 1, each one of the Parties must apply provisions equivalent to those indicated in said paragraph with the non-Party country. The Parties may also establish other conditions that they deem necessary for the purposes of applying paragraph 1.

Article 4.9: De minimis

1. A good produced in the territory of one or both Parties shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of that good that do not meet the applicable change in tariff classification requirement does not exceed 10 percent of the transaction value of the merchandise, adjusted in accordance with Article 4.5.

2. When the good mentioned in paragraph 1 is also subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of those non-originating materials shall be taken into account for the calculation of the regional value content of the good and the good must satisfy the other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to:

a) merchandise included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System; and

b) a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods included in chapters 01 to 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material is included in a different subheading than the good for which the determination of the non-originating material is carried out. origin in accordance with this Article. However, the de minimis may be applied when using non-originating materials from the same subheading, as long as the materials are different from the final merchandise.

4. A good included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System produced in the territory of one or both Parties shall be considered originating if the weight of all the non-originating fibers or yarns of the component that determines the tariff classification of the good, which does not comply with the applicable tariff classification change requirement, it does not exceed 10 percent of the total weight of the merchandise.

Article 4.10: Goods and consumable materials

1. For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined by any inventory management method recognized in the Principles. Generally Accepted Accounting Standards of the Party where the production is carried out and consigned in its national legislation.

2. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined, the origin of the good may be determined by any inventory management method recognized in the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles of the Party where the production takes place and consigned in its legislation. national. Goods to be exported to the territory of the other Party, whose origin has been determined in accordance with this Article, must not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than loading, unloading or any other operation necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of the other Party.

3. The inventory management method selected pursuant to this Section for a particular good or fungible material must continue to be used for that good or fungible material throughout the fiscal year of the person who selected the inventory management method.

Article 4.11: Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools

1. The origin of the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools delivered with the merchandise will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the merchandise comply with the corresponding tariff classification change, provided that :

a) the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the merchandise, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately on the invoice itself; and

b) the quantity and value of said accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the merchandise.

2. When the merchandise is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools will be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be.

3. When the spare parts or spare parts and tools correspond to self-manufactured materials, the producer may choose to designate such materials as intermediate materials.

Article 4.12: Games or assortments

1. The sets or assortments that are classified according to the provisions of Rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, as well as the merchandise whose description, according to the nomenclature of the Harmonized System, is specifically that of a set or assortment , will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in the set or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of those goods and the other applicable provisions of this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the transaction value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment, adjusted on the CIF basis, does not exceed the 10 percent of the transaction value of the kit or assortment, adjusted on an FOB basis.

3. The provisions of this Article shall prevail over the other provisions established in this Chapter.

Article 4.13: Containers and packaging materials for retail sale

1. The origin of the containers and packaging materials in which a merchandise is presented for retail sale when they are classified together with the merchandise they contain, in accordance with Rule 5 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System :

a) It will not be taken into account when the merchandise is subject to a change of tariff classification requirement, when the merchandise is obtained in its entirety or produced entirely, or when the merchandise is made exclusively from originating materials; and

b) it will be taken into account as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, if the merchandise is subject to a regional content value requirement, to carry out the corresponding calculation.

2. When the packaging materials and containers correspond to self-manufactured materials, the producer can designate those materials as intermediate materials.

Article 4.14: Shipping containers and packing materials

The containers and packaging materials in which a merchandise is packed or conditioned exclusively for its transport, will not be taken into account to determine the origin of that merchandise.

Article 4.15: Indirect materials

1. Indirect materials will be considered originating, without taking into account the place of their production. The value of these materials will be the cost that is recorded in the accounting records of the producer of the merchandise, for the purposes of the qualification of origin of the merchandise.

2. Indirect materials will be considered those used in the production of a good, but that are not physically incorporated into it, such as:

a) fuel and power;

b) tools, dies and molds;

c) spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

d) lubricants, greases, compound materials and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;

e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;

f) equipment, devices and attachments, used for the verification or inspection of the goods;

g) catalysts and solvents; either

h) any other material that is not incorporated into the merchandise, as long as it can be reasonably demonstrated that it was used in the production of said merchandise.

Article 4.16: Processes carried out outside the territories of the Parties

A good that qualifies as originating in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter will lose such condition if it undergoes a subsequent process or is subject to any other operation outside the territories of the Parties, other than loading, unloading or any other operation necessary to maintain it. in good condition or to transport it to the territory of the other Party.

Article 4.17: Expedition, transport and transit of goods

1. In order for the goods to retain their originating status and benefit from preferential tariff treatment, they must have been shipped directly from the exporting Party to the importing Party. To this end, they will be considered issued directly to:

a) goods transported solely through the territory of one or both Parties;

b) goods in transit through one or more countries that are not Parties to the Agreement, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the surveillance of the competent customs authority, provided that:

i) not intended for trade, use or employment in the country of transit; and

ii) they do not undergo, during their transport or temporary storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or any other operation necessary to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

2. The importer may prove compliance with paragraph 1 (b):

a) in the case of transit only, with transport documents, such as the air waybill, the bill of lading or the bill of lading, which prove the transport from the country of origin to the country of importation, as appropriate;

b) in case of transhipment, with the transport documents, such as the air waybill, the bill of lading, the consignment note or the multimodal or combined transport document, which accredit the transport from the country of origin to the importing country, as appropriate; either

c) In the case of storage, with the air waybill, the bill of lading, the bill of lading or the multimodal or combined transport document, which proves the transport from the country of origin to the country of importation, as the case may be, and the documents issued by the customs authority or other competent authority that authorizes the storage, in accordance with the national legislation of the country that is not a Party, as appropriate.

Article 4.18: Certification of origin

1. The certificate of origin is the document that certifies that the goods qualify as originating in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and, therefore, can benefit from the preferential tariff treatment agreed by the Parties.

2. The certificate of origin must be issued in the unique format agreed by the Parties, which will contain an affidavit from the final producer or exporter of the merchandise, in which it states full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the veracity of the information contained therein.

3. The issuance of certificates of origin must be made at the request of the final producer or exporter of the merchandise.

4. The certificate of origin covers the export of one or several goods to the territory of a Party.

5. The issuance and control of certificates of origin will be the responsibility of the competent authority designated by each Party, which may delegate their issuance to other public bodies or private entities, in accordance with their national legislation. The contact points of the competent authorities will be duly notified by the Parties.

6. The names and seals of the public bodies or private entities authorized to issue certificates of origin, as well as the register of the names and signatures of the officials accredited for this purpose, will be those that the Parties notify to the ALADI General Secretariat. , either for the registration process or for any change suffered by said registries, in accordance with the provisions established in ALADI Resolution 252.

7. The certificate of origin will be valid for 12 months from the date of its issuance.

8. The certificate of origin must:

a) be duly filled out in accordance with its instructions;

b) indicate the name and signature of the official of the certifying entity accredited in accordance with paragraph 6 that issues the certificate;

c) be numbered correlatively by each certifying entity;

d) Present the seal of the certifying entity, which corresponds to the one that has been officially notified to the General Secretariat of ALADI;

e) be presented without scratches, erasures or amendments in any of its fields; and

f) be issued on the date of issuance of the commercial invoice corresponding to the operation or after it, except as provided in Article 4.23.

9. In the event that a merchandise is interned, admitted or temporarily stored under customs control in the importing Party, the validity of the certificate of origin will be extended for a period equal to the period that the merchandise has remained under said regime.

10. For the issuance of a certificate of origin, the commercial invoice and all the necessary documents that demonstrate that the merchandise complies with the provisions established in this Chapter must be presented, including a declaration of origin provided by the final producer or by the exporter. of the merchandise that contains, as a minimum, the following information:

a) name, denomination or trade name of the declarant;

b) tax domicile of the declarant;

c) description of the merchandise to be exported, which must correspond to what is recorded in the exporter's commercial invoice;

d) classification of the merchandise to be exported in the Harmonized System;

e) FOB value in United States dollars of the merchandise to be exported, adjusted in accordance with Article 4.5;

f) information related to the components of the merchandise, indicating:

i) the originating materials of the Parties, for which the provenance must be indicated; the national tariff codes or the Harmonized System; the CIF value in United States dollars, adjusted in accordance with Article 4.5, if necessary; and the percentage they represent in the value of the final merchandise, if necessary;

ii) non-originating materials, for which the origin must be indicated; the national tariff codes or the Harmonized System; the CIF value in United States dollars, adjusted in accordance with Article 4.5, if necessary; and the percentage they represent in the value of the final merchandise, if necessary; and

iii) flowchart of the production process; and

g) signed statement indicating the veracity of the information provided.

11. When the exporter is not the producer of the merchandise, the exporter may request the issuance of a certificate of origin based on a declaration provided voluntarily by the producer of the merchandise to said exporter or directly to the competent authority or certifying entities of the exporting Party.

12. The Parties may agree on procedures for the issuance and transmission of certificates of origin electronically. These procedures will be adopted by the Commission.

Article 4.19: Obligations regarding imports

An importer requesting preferential tariff treatment with respect to a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party must:

a) declare in the import document established by its legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin, that the merchandise qualifies as originating;

b) have in their possession the valid certificate of origin at the time of making the declaration referred to in subsection (a);

c) have in their possession the document that certifies compliance with the requirements for issuance, transportation, and transit of the merchandise established in Article 4.17, as appropriate;

d) provide the documents indicated in subparagraphs (b) and (c), and in the case of the certificate of origin, a copy thereof, to the customs authority of the importing Party, when requested; and

e) Present, without delay, a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding customs duties, when you have reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which your import declaration is based contains incorrect information. The importer will not be penalized when submitting the aforementioned declaration before the importing Party exercises its powers of verification or control or notifies the initiation of a procedure for requesting information or verification of origin in accordance with Articles 4.26, 4.27 or 4.28.

Article 4.20: Obligations regarding exports

1. Before the importing Party exercises its verification or control powers or notifies the initiation of an information request or origin verification procedure in accordance with Articles 4.26, 4.27 or 4.28, an exporter or producer that has signed a certificate or a declaration of origin and you have reason to believe that that certificate or declaration contains incorrect information, you must notify this fact, without delay and in writing, to your competent authority and to all persons to whom you have issued the certificate or declaration of origin. In these cases, the exporter or producer will not be penalized for having submitted an incorrect certificate or declaration.

2. In the event that incorrect information is relevant to the origin of the merchandise, the importer must pay the corresponding customs duties. If the incorrect information has an impact on other taxes, the importer must pay them in accordance with their national legislation.

3. The exporter or producer who has signed a certificate of origin must keep the necessary background documents that demonstrate that the goods meet the requirements and make them available to the competent authority or authorized entity that issues the certificate or to the authority authority of the importing Party, when requested.

Article 4.21: Exceptions

1. The Parties shall not require a certificate of origin for originating goods in the following cases:

a) an importation of goods whose customs value does not exceed 1,000 United States dollars or its equivalent in national currency or a greater amount established by the Party; either

b) an importation of goods for which the importing Party has waived the requirement to present the certificate of origin.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to imports made or intended to be made with the purpose of evading compliance with the certification requirements of this Chapter.

Article 4.22: Issuance of duplicates of the certificate of origin

1. In the case of theft, loss or destruction of the certificate of origin, the exporter may request a duplicate of it in writing from the competent authority or certifying entity that issued it, based on the export documents in his possession.

2. The duplicate issued must contain the legend "DUPLICATE" in the "COMMENTS" field, as well as the date of issue and number of the original certificate, so that its validity will count from that date.

Article 4.23: Billing by a third country operator

1. Merchandise that complies with the provisions of this Chapter will maintain its original character, even when invoiced by commercial operators from a third country.

2. For the purposes of the provisions of paragraph 10 of Article 4.18, if exceptionally at the time of issuing a certificate of origin, the number of the commercial invoice that will be issued by an operator from a third country is not known, the competent authority or certifying entity will issue the certificate of origin, stating in said certificate, in the field corresponding to "COMMENTS", that the merchandise will be invoiced from a third country, indicating the denomination or company name and address of the operator of the third country.

3. When requesting preferential tariff treatment, the importer must have in his possession the commercial invoice issued by the third country operator.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the date of issuance of the certificate of origin may be prior to the date of issuance of the commercial invoice issued by the operator of the third country that covers the import.

Article 4.24: Form errors

Obvious formal errors, such as typing errors, in a certificate of origin will not cause the certificate to be rejected if they are errors that do not raise doubts as to the accuracy of the statements contained in the certificate.

Article 4.25: Requirements for keeping records

1. An exporter or a producer must keep for a minimum of 5 years, from the date of issuance of the certificate of origin, all the records necessary to demonstrate that the merchandise qualifies as originating, including the records related to:

a) the acquisition, costs, value and payment for the exported merchandise;

b) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials, including indirect materials, used in the production of the exported merchandise; and

c) the production of the merchandise, in the form in which it was exported.

2. All costs referred to in this Chapter will be recorded and maintained, in accordance with the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the merchandise is produced.

3. An importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good shall keep, for a minimum of 5 years from the date of said request, all records or documents necessary to support the preferential tariff treatment mentioned in Article 4.19. In the case of the certificate of origin, the importer must keep the original.

4. The competent authority of each Party shall keep an updated record of the names and seals of its certifying entities, as well as the names, signatures and seals of the officials who are authorized to issue the certificates of origin.

5. The competent authority or certifying entity of each Party will keep on file a copy of all certificates of origin issued for a minimum period of 5 years, from the date of issue. The file will include all the information that supports the issuance of the certificate.

Article 4.26: Origin verification and control

1. In case of doubts about the authenticity of the certificate of origin, the veracity of the information contained in said certificate or the presumption of non-compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the competent authority of the importing Party may initiate an information request procedure. or verification of origin, in accordance with Articles 4.27 and 4.28.

2. In the event that doubts arise at the time of dispatch of the merchandise, the customs authority may not prevent the continuation of the import process and the dispatch of the merchandise. However, the customs authority may adopt the measures it deems necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest, in accordance with its national legislation.

3. When measures are adopted to guarantee the fiscal interest, in accordance with paragraph 2, the competent authority of the importing Party must initiate the procedures referred to in Articles 4.27 or 4.28 within a period not exceeding 60 days following the adoption of the measures; Otherwise, the measures that have been adopted must be lifted.

Article 4.27: Information request procedure

1. The competent authority of the importing Party may request, through a request, information from the competent authority of the exporting Party responsible for the certification of origin, in order to verify the authenticity of the certificates of origin or the veracity of the information established. in the same

2. The information shall only be that which the competent authority of the exporting Party requests from a producer or exporter to issue certificates of origin, in accordance with paragraph 10 of Article 4.18.

3. The competent authority of the importing Party shall indicate in its request the legal basis, the number and date of the certificates of origin or the period of time for which it requests the information related to a producer or exporter.

4. The competent authority of the exporting Party will have a period of 60 days following the date of receipt of the request, to provide the requested information.

5. In the event that the competent authority of the importing Party does not receive the information and documentation requested within the established term or that the exporting Party does not recognize the authenticity of the certificates of origin or the veracity of the information contained therein, the it may deny preferential tariff treatment to the goods covered by the certificates of origin subject to review and execute the measures that have been adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest.

6. The competent authority of the importing Party shall have a period of 60 days following the date of receipt of the requested information and documentation, to determine the authenticity of the certificates of origin or the veracity of the information contained therein. If the competent authority of the importing Party does not issue a determination within the aforementioned period, it will proceed to accept the preferential tariff treatment and lift the measures that have been adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest within a maximum period of 90 days following the request for release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, which may be extended for up to 30 additional days in exceptional cases duly supported.

7. In the event that the competent authority of the exporting Party acknowledges the authenticity of the certificates of origin or the veracity of the information contained therein and there are no doubts of the competent authority of the importing Party, the treatment shall be accepted. preferential tariff and to lift the measures that have been adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest within a maximum period of 90 days following the request for the release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, which may be extended up to 30 additional days in exceptional cases duly supported. If there are still doubts regarding the origin of the merchandise, the competent authority of the importing Party shall notify the competent authority of the exporting Party of the initiation of a verification of origin,

Article 4.28: Origin verification procedure

1. The competent authority of the importing Party may initiate a verification of origin in order to verify the authenticity of the certificates of origin, the veracity of the information contained therein, or compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.

2. In order to carry out an origin verification procedure, the competent authority of the importing Party shall have the following mechanisms:

a) written origin verification questionnaires addressed to the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party;

b) visits to the facilities of an exporter or a producer in the territory of the other Party, in order to examine the facilities and production processes of the merchandise in question, review the accounting records and verify the information and documentation that proves the originating character of the merchandise; or

c) other procedures agreed by the Parties.

3. Pursuant to paragraph 2(a):

a) The competent authority of the importing Party, before sending an origin verification questionnaire, shall notify the competent authority of the exporting Party about the sending of said questionnaire, informing it of the name of the producing or exporting company, the review period , as well as the tariff classification and description of the merchandise subject to verification.

b) The origin verification questionnaire must be sent to the producer or exporter by certified mail with acknowledgment of receipt or by any other means that confirms its receipt, which will be made directly to the address declared in the corresponding certificates of origin.

c) The producer or exporter will have a period of 30 days following the date of receipt to answer the origin verification questionnaire. Within said period, the producer or exporter may request an extension of up to 30 additional days for the presentation of the requested information and documentation.

d) In the event that the producer or exporter does not answer the origin verification questionnaire within the established term, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the goods covered by the certificates of origin subject to verification and execute the measures that it has adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest.

4. Pursuant to paragraph 2(b):

a) The competent authority of the importing Party shall notify, by certified mail with acknowledgment of receipt or by any other means confirming receipt, the competent authority of the exporting Party, as well as the producer or exporter, of its intention to carry out an origin verification visit.

b) The visit proposal must contain:

i) the identification and contact details of the competent authority making the notification;

ii) the name of the exporter or producer to be visited

iii) the date of the proposed verification visit;

iv) the object and scope of the proposed verification visit, making specific mention of the verification period, the merchandise or merchandise, as well as the certificates of origin subject to verification;

v) the tariff classification and description of the goods;

vi) the names and titles of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; and

vii) the legal basis of the visit.

c) Any modification to the information referred to in numerals (i), (iii) or (vi) of subparagraph (b) shall be notified in writing to the exporter or producer and to the competent authority of the exporting Party at least 10 days before the proposed date for the visit.

d) The producer or exporter will have a period of 20 days following the date of notification of the visit proposal, to express in writing their consent to the verification visit to the competent authority of the importing Party, in which they must indicate both the address where the production process of the merchandise subject to verification was carried out, and the address where the records relating to the origin of said merchandise are located, the latter being the place where the verification visit will begin.

e) When the producer or exporter does not authorize the proposed origin verification visit within the established term, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the goods covered by the certificates of origin subject to verification and execute the measures it has adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest.

f) When the producer or exporter receives the notification of the visit proposal, he may request, within 15 days following the date of receipt of said notification, the one-time postponement of the start of the verification visit for a period up to 30 days. The importing Party may not deny preferential tariff treatment based solely on the postponement of the verification visit.

g) When the producer or exporter, during the verification visit, does not provide or refuses to deliver the records or other documentation related to the origin of the goods that are the subject of investigation, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise covered by the certificates of origin subject to verification and execute the measures that it has adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest.

h) The producer or exporter may designate 1 or 2 observers to be present during the visit. If observers are not appointed, this omission will not result in the postponement of the visit nor will it affect the validity or probative value of the record or the proceedings.

i) Notwithstanding any other type of formality that each Party deems necessary, once the verification visit has concluded, the officials of the competent authority of the importing Party must sign a record jointly with the producer or exporter and, if applicable, with the observers. Said record shall record the information and documentation collected by the competent authority of the importing Party, as well as any other fact that is considered relevant for determining the origin of the merchandise subject to verification and must include the name of the officials responsible for the visit, the name of the person responsible for attending the visit by the company and the name of the observers. In the event that the producer or exporter or the observers refuse to sign the minutes, a record of this fact will be recorded. The refusal to sign the certificate by the exporter, the producer or the observers does not invalidate it.

Article 4.29: Determination of origin

1. The competent authority of the importing Party must issue, within a period not exceeding 365 days following the date of notification of the initiation of the verification procedure, a written determination of origin in which it informs the producer or exporter, if the merchandise subject to verification qualifies or not as originating, which will include the factual considerations and legal grounds that justify such determination. Said determination of origin will be notified by certified mail with acknowledgment of receipt or by any other means that confirms its receipt.

2. The competent authority of the importing Party shall notify the competent authority of the exporting Party of the determination of origin within 30 days of its issuance. In the event that the competent authority of the exporting Party deems it necessary to have additional information in relation to the origin verification procedure, it may request it from the competent authority of the importing Party, indicating the reason for such request.

3. If the competent authority of the importing Party does not issue a determination of origin within the period mentioned in paragraph 1, it shall proceed to accept the preferential tariff treatment and lift the measures that have been adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest in a maximum period of 90 days following the request for release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, and may be extended for up to 30 additional days in duly supported exceptional cases.

4. If as a result of the verification of origin:

a) The originating character of the merchandise is recognized, the importing Party shall proceed to accept the request for preferential tariff treatment and lift the measures it has adopted to guarantee fiscal interest within a maximum period of 90 days following the request for release of the goods. measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, and may be extended for up to 30 additional days in exceptional cases duly supported.

b) The originating nature of the merchandise is unknown, the importing Party will deny the request for preferential tariff treatment and will proceed to execute the measures it has adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest. Additionally, the importing Party will apply the applicable sanctions, in accordance with this Chapter and its national legislation.

5. The importing Party shall not apply a determination that a good is not originating, issued pursuant to paragraph 4(b), to an importation made before the date on which such determination takes effect, provided that:

a) the importing Party has determined that the good does not qualify as originating according to the tariff classification or the value applied by said Party to one or more materials used in the production of said good, because they differ from the tariff classification or of the value applied to the materials on the basis of an advance ruling issued pursuant to Article 4.36 by the Party from whose territory the good has been exported; and

b) the aforementioned advance resolution is prior to the notification of the determination.

Article 4.30: Suspension of preferential tariff treatment for identical goods

1. When derived from the origin verification procedures carried out by the competent authority of the importing Party, the latter knows that a producer or exporter has presented, on at least 2 occasions, false or unfounded declarations with respect to identical goods that said producer or exporter has certified as originating, the importing Party may suspend the preferential tariff treatment applicable to identical goods that said producer or exporter certifies as originating, until it certifies before the competent authority of the importing Party that its goods qualify as originating in terms of this Chapter.

2. The suspension of the preferential tariff treatment shall be communicated by the competent authority of the importing Party, both to the competent authority of the exporting Party, as well as to the corresponding exporter or producer, stating the conclusions of fact and the legal grounds that justify its determination.

Article 4.31: Refund of duties

1. In the event that an importer has not requested preferential tariff treatment for an originating good at the time of importation, he may request, within a period not exceeding 365 days following the date of importation, the return of the tariffs paid in excess. , provided that the request is accompanied by:

a) a written statement stating that the good qualified as originating at the time of importation;

b) a copy of the certificate of origin; and

c) any other documentation related to the importation of the good, as required by the competent authority of the importing Party.

2. Goods may be subject to procedures for requesting information or verification of origin in accordance with the provisions of Articles 4.26, 4.27 and 4.28.

Article 4.32: Information sharing and confidentiality

1. The Parties shall quickly and timely exchange information related to the origin of the merchandise and information concerning the prevention, investigation, and punishment of customs offenses and illegal acts related to the origin of the merchandise.

2. Each Party will maintain, in accordance with the provisions of its national legislation, the confidentiality of the information obtained under this Chapter and will protect it from any disclosure that could harm the competitive position of the person who provides it.

Article 4.33: Exchange of information on customs matters

1. At the request of a Party, information will be exchanged quickly and in a timely manner that may help determine whether imports or exports from or to the other Party comply with its customs laws and regulations, subject to the confidentiality rules provided in the legislation. national of each Party.

2. For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, the Parties shall seek to implement mechanisms for the electronic exchange of information.

Article 4.34: Sanctions

Each Party shall establish or maintain criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations related to this Chapter, in accordance with its laws and regulations.

Article 4.35: Means of challenging administrative acts

Each Party shall ensure, with respect to its administrative acts related to matters covered by this Chapter, that importers, exporters or producers have access to:

a) a level of administrative review independent of the official or agency that issued the administrative act; and

b) a level of judicial review of the administrative act issued in the final administrative instance.

Article 4.36: advance rulings

1. Each Party shall expeditiously issue advance written resolutions prior to the importation of a good into its territory. Advance rulings shall be issued by the importing Party at the written request of an importer in its territory, or of an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by them, in relation to:

a) tariff classification;

b) if a good qualifies as originating, according to this Chapter;

c) the application of customs valuation criteria, in accordance with the Customs Valuation Agreement; and

d) other matters that the Parties agree.

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance rulings, including:

a) the information that is reasonably required to process the request;

b) the power of the authority to request additional information from the applicant during the application evaluation process; and

c) The obligation of the authority to issue a complete, well-founded and reasoned advance resolution.

3. Each Party shall issue an advance ruling in accordance with the term established in its national legislation, which may not exceed 150 days following the date on which the authority has obtained all the necessary information from the person who has requested the early ruling. . When issuing the advance ruling, the Party shall take into account the facts and circumstances that the applicant has presented.

4. The early resolution will enter into force from the date of its issuance or another date specified in the resolution, provided that the facts or circumstances on which it is based have not changed.

5. The Party issuing the ruling may modify or revoke an advance ruling after the Party notifies the applicant and shall take effect as of such notification. However, the Party issuing the ruling may retroactively modify or revoke the advance ruling, only if the person to whom it was issued has submitted incorrect or false information.

6. The advance resolution may be modified or revoked in the following cases:

a) when the advance ruling was based on an error:

i) in fact;

ii) in the tariff classification of the merchandise or materials object of the resolution; either

iii) in the application of the regional content value according to this Chapter;

b) when the resolution is not in accordance with an interpretation that the Parties have agreed with respect to this Chapter;

c) when the circumstances or facts that support it change; either

d) in order to comply with an administrative or judicial decision or to adjust to a change in the national legislation of the Party that issued the advance ruling.

7. Subject to the confidentiality requirements under its national law, each Party shall make its advance rulings publicly available.

8. If an applicant provides false information or omits relevant facts or circumstances related to the advance ruling, or does not act in accordance with the terms and conditions of the ruling, the Parties, in accordance with Articles 4.32 and 4.33, may exchange information to apply measures that are appropriate, including civil, criminal and administrative actions, monetary penalties or other sanctions.

9. The holder of an advance resolution may use it only while the facts and circumstances that served as support for its issuance are maintained. In this case, the holder of the resolution may present the information necessary for the authority that issued it to proceed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 6.

10. An advance ruling will not be issued on merchandise subject to an information request or verification of origin procedure or to any instance of review or challenge in the territory of any of the Parties.

Article 4.37: Short Supply Committee

1. The Parties establish the Short Supply Committee (CEA), in order to evaluate the inability of a producer to dispose in the territory of the Parties, in commercial quantities and in a timely manner, totally or partially, of certain materials classified in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, and if applicable, allow its temporary or indefinite importation from third countries.

2. The CEA must agree on a regulation within a period not exceeding 1 year from the entry into force of this Agreement. This regulation will include the operating rules of the CEA and the conditions for evaluating the inability to dispose of the materials mentioned in paragraph 1.

3. The Commission shall adopt the regulations referred to in paragraph 2, as well as the resolutions of the CEA.

4. The CEA will be valid for 10 years, extendable by decision of the Commission.

Article 4.38: Committee on Rules of Origin and Procedures related to Origin

1. The Committee for Rules of Origin and Procedures related to Origin will have the following functions:

a) cooperate in the application of this Chapter;

b) adapt the Annex to Article 4.2, in accordance with the modifications and updates of the Harmonized System;

c) at the request of any of the Parties, consider proposals for amendments to the Specific Rules of Origin in the Annex to Article 4.2, duly substantiated, that obey changes in production processes or other matters related to the determination of the origin of a good;

d) reach agreements, to the extent possible, on:

i) matters of tariff classification and customs valuation;

ii) the modifications to the format of the certificate of origin referred to in Article 4.18; and

iii) the uniform interpretation, application and administration of this Chapter;

e) propose to the Commission the adjustments to this Chapter, including the adoption of the agreements provided for in numerals (ii) and (iii) of subsection (d); and

f) Examine proposals for administrative or operational changes in customs matters that may affect the flow of trade between the territories of the Parties.

2. The Parties recognize the importance that trade facilitation represents in the commercial exchange between the Parties, considering it as an essential element for the correct implementation and application of this Chapter. Consequently, the Committee on Rules of Origin and Procedures related to Origin will seek to eliminate obstacles or unjustified delays generated in the territory of the Parties, which hinder commercial import or export operations, to the detriment of commercial operators.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the Committee will present to the Commission the proposals that allow the implementation of customs procedures that result in direct benefits for customs users, such as what may be referred to as improving clearance times and risk assessment techniques.

 

 

CHAPTER V

RECOGNITION AND PROTECTION OF APPELLATIONS OF ORIGIN

 

Article 5.1: Confirmation of WTO rights and obligations

The provisions contained in Article 23 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights of the WTO shall be applicable to the appellations of origin indicated in the following article.

Article 5.2: Recognition and protection of appellations of origin

1. Peru recognizes the designation of origin "Tequila" for its exclusive use in products originating in Mexico. Consequently, in Peru the import, manufacture or sale of products under the denomination of origin "Tequila" will not be allowed, unless they have been produced and certified in Mexico, in accordance with the laws, regulations and norms of Mexico applicable to those products.

2. Mexico recognizes the designation of origin "Pisco" for its exclusive use in products originating in Peru. Consequently, in Mexico the import, manufacture or sale of products under said denomination of origin will not be allowed, unless they have been produced and certified in Peru, in accordance with the Peruvian legislation applicable to such products. The recognition provided for in this paragraph is without prejudice to the rights that Mexico has recognized, exclusively, in terms of appellations of origin, in other trade agreements previously signed with other countries.

3. The Parties, by mutual agreement, may extend the protection granted to other denominations of origin of the Parties. For this purpose, one Party shall notify the other of the new denominations protected under its national legislation. The inclusion of said denominations of origin will be made effective through decisions adopted by the Commission within a period not exceeding 4 months from the date of notification by one Party to the other.

 

CHAPTER VI

SAFEGUARD CLAUSES

 

Article 6.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

threat of serious harm: the clear imminence of serious harm. The determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury will be based on facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility;

competent investigating authority:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, the National Institute for the Defense of Competition and the Protection of Intellectual Property or its successor (for global safeguard measures); and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism or its successor (for bilateral safeguard measures);

serious damage: a general and significant impairment of the situation of a certain industry of national production;

directly competitive merchandise: that merchandise that, being not similar with the imported merchandise with which it is compared, is essentially equivalent for commercial purposes because it is dedicated to the same use and is interchangeable with it;

similar merchandise: a merchandise identical to the imported merchandise with which it is compared or one that, even though it is not equal in all its aspects to the imported merchandise with which it is compared, has similar or similar characteristics and composition, which allows it to be fulfill the same functions;

official dissemination bodies:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Official Gazette of the Federation; and

b) in the case of Peru, the Official Gazette El Peruano;

transition period: the reduction term applicable to each merchandise according to the provisions of the Tariff Elimination Program, plus 3 years; and

domestic industry: the group of producers of the like or directly competitive good that operate within the territory of a Party, or those whose collective production of the like or directly competitive good constitutes a significant proportion of the total domestic production of those goods In one part.

 

Section A: Global Safeguard Measures

Article 6.2: Global Safeguard Measures

1. The Parties retain their rights and obligations to apply global safeguard measures under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards, except as provided in Article 6.3.

2. Neither Party shall apply, with respect to the same good and during the same period:

a) a bilateral safeguard measure; and

b) a safeguard measure pursuant to Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.

Article 6.3: Criteria for excluding imports originating in a Party from a global safeguard measure

1. When a Party decides to adopt a global safeguard measure, it may apply it only to goods originating from the other Party when it determines that imports of said goods represent a substantial part of total imports, and contribute significantly to the growth of the imports that caused serious injury or the threat of serious injury.

2. Imports of goods from the other Party shall be considered to be substantial if, during the 3 years immediately prior to the initiation of the investigation, they are included within the imports of the 5 main supplying countries of that good in the importing Party. .

3. Imports of goods from the other Party shall not be considered to contribute significantly to the growth of imports that caused serious injury or threat of serious injury, if their share in the absolute growth in the volume of imports during the period in which their increase occurred, is substantially less than the participation of the rest of the supplying countries in said period.

4. The Party that applies the global safeguard measure from which a good of the other Party has initially been excluded shall have the right to include it later when the competent investigating authority determines that a significant increase in imports of such good substantially reduces the effectiveness of the measure, in such a way that the real or potential growth of the domestic industry in the domestic market is limited.

 

Section B: Bilateral Safeguard Measures

Article 6.4: Bilateral safeguard measures

1. After investigation, the Parties may apply, exceptionally and in accordance with the conditions established in this Chapter, bilateral safeguard measures to imports of a good originating from the other Party, if due to the effect of the established tariff reduction or elimination in this Agreement, imports of such merchandise increase in absolute terms and in relation to domestic production, and under conditions such that they cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry of similar or directly competitive merchandise.

2. The bilateral safeguard measures that are applied in accordance with this Chapter, may consist of the temporary suspension of future reductions in the customs tariff as provided in Chapter III (Access to markets) or increase the customs tariff to a level that does not may exceed the lesser of:

a) the most-favored-nation (MFN) customs duty for that good on the date of adoption of the bilateral measure; either

b) the MFN customs duty applied to that good on the day immediately prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.

3. The Parties shall only apply bilateral safeguards to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate the adjustment of the domestic industry.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs, the preference applicable at the time of adoption of the bilateral safeguard measure will be maintained for a quota of imports that will be the average of the imports made in the 3 complete years or 36 months immediately prior to the period in which the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury was determined, unless a clear justification is given for the need to set a different level to prevent or remedy the serious injury.

5. At the end of the period of application of the bilateral safeguard measure, the Party that has adopted it must:

a) apply the corresponding customs duty in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program, as if the bilateral safeguard measure had not been applied; either

b) apply the preferential customs tariff in force at the time of the imposition of the bilateral safeguard measure, rescheduling the tariff elimination in equal annual stages, to conclude on the date initially indicated for the elimination of the tariff in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program.

6. The bilateral safeguard measure will have a maximum initial duration of 2 years, which may be extended for up to 1 year when it is determined, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, that it is still necessary to repair the serious damage or threat of serious injury and that there is evidence that the domestic industry is in the process of readjustment. The total period of application of the bilateral safeguard measure, including its extension, will not exceed 3 years.

7. The Parties shall not apply a bilateral safeguard measure more than once to a particular good originating from the other Party, unless a period equal to the total duration of the measure initially applied, including its extension, has elapsed.

8. No bilateral safeguard measure shall be applied or maintained after the end of the transition period, except with the consent of the Party against whose merchandise the measure was adopted.

Article 6.5: Procedures related to the application of bilateral safeguard measures

1. Each Party shall ensure the uniform, impartial, transparent, equitable and reasonable application of the provisions corresponding to a procedure for the adoption of bilateral safeguard measures in accordance with this Chapter.

2. The procedures for the adoption of bilateral safeguard measures may be initiated ex officio or by request submitted to the competent investigative authorities by companies or entities representative of the domestic industry (hereinafter, "the applicant"), which produce at least 25 percent of the total domestic production of a good that is like or directly competitive with the imported good.

3. When a procedure is initiated ex officio, the initiation resolution must be duly supported by sufficient elements tending to determine that the increase in imported goods subject to tariff preferences has caused or threatens to cause serious damage to the domestic industry.

4. When a procedure is initiated by means of a request submitted to the competent investigating authorities, the applicant will provide the following information indicating its sources or, to the extent that the information is not available, its best estimates and the bases that support them:

a) Detailed description of the merchandise that is the subject of the application and of its similar or directly competitive merchandise, tariff classification, applied tariff, characteristics and uses, as well as a brief description of the production process;

b) data on its representativeness:

i) the names and addresses of who or who submit the request, as well as the identification of the main establishments where the merchandise in question is produced; and

ii) the value and/or volume of the production of the similar or directly competitive merchandise produced by the applicant and the percentage that said production represents in relation to the total national production, as well as the reasons that lead it to affirm that it is representative of national production;

c) data, at least, of the 36 months available closest to the date of submission of the application, related to:

i) imports of the investigated merchandise (volume, price and country of origin), both in absolute terms and in relation to total imports;

ii) total national production of the similar or directly competitive merchandise (volume); and

iii) evidence that allows evaluating the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage caused by imports of the merchandise that is the subject of the request, such as the description of serious damage or threat of serious damage; information referring to production, sales in the national and export markets, installed and used capacity, productivity, employment, inventories, losses or profits, relative to the national industry; the prices of the national merchandise and the imported merchandise at the same level of commercialization within the market of the importing Party, which allows a reasonable comparison to be made; and any other information that supports the application request of the bilateral safeguard measure;

d) enumeration and description of the presumed causes of serious injury or threat of serious injury, and the justification that the increase in imports of that merchandise, either in absolute terms or relative to national production, is the cause of serious injury or threat of serious harm, supported by pertinent information;

e) description of the actions that are intended to be adopted, in order to adjust the conditions of competitiveness of the industry of national production; and

f) identification and justification of the confidential information, and non-confidential summary thereof; if it is indicated that said information cannot be summarized, statement of the reasons why it is not possible to do so.

5. If the application meets all the requirements set forth in this Article, the competent investigating authority will initiate the investigation after having carefully evaluated the accuracy and relevance of the evidence provided with the application and whether there are sufficient elements to justify the initiation of the procedure.

6. For the purposes of determining serious damage or threat of serious damage, the competent investigating authority will analyze, among other things, the information related to the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the merchandise in question in absolute and relative terms; the proportion of the domestic market covered by increased imports; and changes in the levels of sales, production, productivity, utilization of installed capacity, exports, prices and inventories, profits or losses, and employment. None of these factors in isolation, nor several of them together, will necessarily suffice to obtain a decisive orientation.

7. The competent investigating authority will not issue an affirmative determination on the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury unless its investigation demonstrates, based on objective evidence, the existence of a clear causal relationship between the increase in imports of the another Party and serious damage or threat of serious damage.

8. When other factors, in addition to the increase in imports from the other Party, cause or threaten to cause at the same time serious damage to the domestic industry, this damage shall not be attributed to said increase.

9. The final determination of the investigations on the application of bilateral safeguard measures must be issued and made public within a period of 1 year from the start of the procedure and, in exceptional circumstances that are duly justified by the competent authority and that will be made of the knowledge of the accredited interested parties, within a period of 18 months.

10. During the investigation, the competent investigating authority must collect, receive, examine and, where appropriate, verify the pertinent information, hold a public hearing, and give all accredited interested parties the opportunity to prepare and present their arguments.

Article 6.6: Publications and notifications

1. The Parties shall publish in their official dissemination bodies the resolutions issued by the competent authority indicated below:

a) those of initiation, those that determine the imposition of provisional or definitive measures, those that conclude the procedure without imposing them and those for which a measure is extended; and

b) those that, once an investigation has begun, accept the withdrawal of the applicants.

2. The competent investigating authority:

a) will notify in writing any of the resolutions referred to in paragraph 1, within 5 days of its publication, to the competent investigative authority and the diplomatic mission of the other Party and will attach a copy of the corresponding resolution and/or of the report that contains the factual and legal elements that support the respective determination;

b) In the case of the initiation resolution, it will send along with the notification a copy of the public version of the request to initiate the investigation and its annexes, as well as the questionnaires that each Party uses and that it will make available to the parties that demonstrate interest in research; and

c) In all cases, the notifications must include the name, address, email, telephone number, and fax of the office where additional information can be obtained, inquiries made, and access to the public version of the file that is the subject of the investigation.

3. During any stage of the procedure, the notified Party may request any additional information it deems necessary from the other Party.

Article 6.7: Deadlines

1. The competent investigating authority of each Party shall grant the interested parties a response period of not less than 30 days, counted from the start of the investigation, in order for them to submit the response to the questionnaires referred to in the previous article.

2. In the event that the competent investigative authority imposes a provisional measure, it will grant a term of not less than 30 days from the publication of the preliminary resolution, so that the interested parties can state what is convenient for them.

Article 6.8: Audiences

In bilateral safeguard investigations, accredited interested parties will be given the opportunity to participate in a public hearing convened by the competent investigating authority so that they can present the arguments they consider pertinent. Accredited interested parties will be notified of the date of the public hearing at least 14 days in advance.

Article 6.9: Provisional Bilateral Safeguard Measures

1. In critical circumstances, in which any delay means damage that is difficult to repair, the Parties may adopt a provisional bilateral safeguard measure by virtue of a duly reasoned preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence that the increase in imports subject to tariff preference has caused or threatens to cause serious injury to the domestic industry of the other Party.

2. The duration of the provisional bilateral safeguard measure shall not exceed 180 days.

3. Once the notification of the resolution imposing a provisional bilateral safeguard measure has been made, at the request of the exporting Party, the Parties shall meet within a period of no more than 30 days following the issuance of the notification, to carry out the of inquiries. Said consultations will have the main objective of exchanging information on the measure in question and seeking to resolve the clarifications raised.

Article 6.10: Consultations and compensations in the bilateral safeguard

1. The Party that applies or extends a definitive bilateral safeguard measure shall grant the other Party mutually agreed compensation in the form of concessions that have trade effects equivalent to the impact of the safeguard measure. For such purposes, consultations may be held in order to determine the compensations that have commercial effects equivalent to the corresponding measures.

2. If within a period of 30 days following the initiation of the consultations carried out in accordance with paragraph 1, a trade liberalization compensation agreement is not reached, the exporting Party may suspend the application of concessions that have trade effects equivalent to the measure imposed. on the other hand. The exporting Party must notify the other Party at least 30 days in advance of the suspension of concessions.

Article 6.11: Reinstatement of benefits and/or refund of tariffs

1. When a provisional bilateral safeguard measure has been imposed and the final determination is in the sense of not imposing a definitive bilateral safeguard measure, it will proceed promptly, at the request of the party, to return with interest any payment or deposit in cash and/or to release any guarantee presented.

2. When the final determination is in the sense of imposing a definitive bilateral safeguard measure, and this is less than the provisional one, any customs duty charged in excess will be reimbursed, at the request of the party, with interest or the guarantees presented in excess, as appropriate.

3. When a bilateral safeguard measure is eliminated in compliance with the decision of a national challenge mechanism, it shall proceed in accordance with the national legislation of each Party, promptly, at the request of a party, to return with interest any payment or deposit in cash and/or to release any guarantee presented.

4. When the bilateral safeguard measure is reduced in compliance with the decision of a national challenge mechanism, any fee paid or deposited in excess will be reimbursed with interest and/or the guarantees presented will be released, upon request by the party.

 

CHAPTER VII

SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

 

Article 7.1: Goals

The objectives of this Chapter are:

a) define the mechanisms so that, within the framework of free trade between the Parties, the life and health of people, animals and plants in their territories are protected;

b) strengthen the application of the SPS Agreement; and

c) promote, through the Committee provided for in Article 7.10, the constant improvement of the sanitary and phytosanitary situation of the Parties, as well as address and resolve sanitary and phytosanitary problems that arise in trade between the Parties.

Article 7.2: Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of Annex A of the SPS Agreement, definitions of the glossary of terms of the competent international organizations and definitions adopted by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 7(e) of Article 7.10 shall be used.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

SPS Agreement: the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures; and

Competent international organizations: the organizations mentioned in paragraph 3 of Annex A of the SPS Agreement.

Article 7.3: General disposition

1. The Parties agree to facilitate trade in agricultural, aquaculture, fishing, and forestry goods and their products, beverages, and food for human consumption, originating in the Parties, for which reason provisions are established based on the principles and disciplines of the SPS Agreement.

2. The Parties incorporate their rights and obligations established in the SPS Agreement, without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 7.4: Rights and obligations of the Parties

1. The Parties shall adopt, maintain or apply their sanitary and phytosanitary measures to achieve the appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection based on scientific principles.

2. The Parties may apply or maintain sanitary or phytosanitary measures that offer a higher level of protection than would be achieved by a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided there is scientific justification for doing so.

3. Sanitary or phytosanitary measures shall not constitute a disguised restriction on trade nor shall they have the object or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

Article 7.5: Equivalence

1. The Parties will hold consultations for the recognition of equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, considering the standards, guidelines and recommendations established by the competent international organizations and the decisions adopted by the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures on the matter.

2. Each Party will accept as equivalent the sanitary or phytosanitary measures of the other Party, even when they differ from its own, provided that it is demonstrated that they achieve and do not diminish the appropriate level of protection of the importing Party.

3. The Parties will define the mechanisms to evaluate and, if applicable, accept the equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

Article 7.6: Risk assessment

1. The sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be based on a scientific evaluation appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks for the life and health of people and animals or for the preservation of plants, including forest products and by-products. taking into account the relevant standards, guidelines and recommendations developed by the competent international organizations.

2. In establishing their appropriate level of protection, the Parties shall take into account the objective of minimizing negative effects on trade and shall avoid making arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions in the levels they consider appropriate in different situations, if such distinctions result in discrimination. or a disguised restriction on trade.

Article 7.7: Recognition of zones or areas, or compartments, free or with low prevalence of pests or diseases

The Parties shall establish, in accordance with paragraph 7(d) of Article 7.10, a procedure for the recognition of zones or areas, or compartments, free or of low prevalence of pests or diseases in the field of animal health, plant health and forest health. . For this, the Parties shall take into consideration the certifications issued by the competent international organizations, particularly those issued by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE).

Article 7.8: Control, inspection and approval

The Parties shall establish, in accordance with paragraph 7(d) of Article 7.10, the control, inspection and approval procedures, taking into consideration Article 8 and Annex C of the SPS Agreement.

Article 7.9: Transparency

1. The Parties shall notify each other, through the contact points they designate, of the adoption or application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures in accordance with the procedure set forth in Annex B of the SPS Agreement.

2. The Parties will be notified immediately:

a) changes that occur in the field of animal health, such as the appearance of exotic diseases and those diseases on the List

from the OIE;

b) the appearance of an outbreak or dissemination of plant pests that may constitute an immediate or potential risk for trade between the Parties; and

c) emergency situations regarding the control of foods subject to trade between the Parties, in which a risk of serious adverse effects on human health associated with the consumption of certain foods is detected and clearly identified, even though they could not be identified the agents that cause said effects, in accordance with the corresponding norm of the Codex Alimentarius Commission that is in force, and the causes for which a product from the exporting Party is rejected by the importing Party.

3. Additionally, the Parties will notify each other:

a) scientific findings of epidemiological importance and significant changes in relation to pests and diseases not included in paragraph 2(a) and 2(b) that may affect trade between the Parties, within a period to be agreed by the Committee;

b) the periodic registration of rejections of shipments by the importing Party, giving the best information available;

c) cases of suspected exotic or unusual pests or diseases when applicable;

d) the status of processes and measures in process regarding requests for access to products of interest between both Parties in an expeditious and timely manner;

e) non-compliance with measures detected in the certifications of animal, vegetable and forest products made by the exporting Party; and

f) Information regarding firms authorized to issue certificates, import and export permits, and details of authorized entry points.

4. To comply with the provisions of this Article, the Parties may establish an information system whose development, structure, and deadlines for its initiation and completion shall be agreed upon by the Committee.

5. A Party may adopt an emergency measure, promptly giving due notification to the other Party accompanied by the reasons that gave rise to the adoption of such measure, in accordance with paragraph 6 of Annex B of the SPS Agreement.

6. When a Party is affected by a measure adopted by the other Party, the latter shall provide progress information on the new scientific evidence available or on which it is investigating, in order to obtain more elements that allow it to eliminate the provisional measure or adopt a final measure on a specific and conclusive risk basis, which must be notified to the other Party.

Article 7.10: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures to implement this Chapter, as well as to contribute to the fulfillment of its objectives and provisions.

2. The Committee will be made up of the authorities of both Parties with responsibilities in this matter.

3. The Committee will meet at least once a year in person or by teleconference, videoconference or other technological means.

4. The Parties will assume the presidency of the meetings alternately. The Committee will hold its first session no later than 6 months after the entry into force of the Agreement. Likewise, the Committee may determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings will be held.

5. The Committee will submit to the Commission the reports it deems pertinent or those that are required by said Commission.

6. The Committee will be permanent and may establish the technical working groups on sanitary and phytosanitary matters that it deems pertinent.

7. The Committee will have the following functions:

a) serve as a discussion forum for the Parties to consult and timely resolve issues and problems related to this Chapter that may affect trade between the Parties;

b) promote cooperation, technical assistance, training and exchange of information on sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

c) monitor the agreements adopted within the Committee and in the technical working groups;

d) agree on the actions, procedures and deadlines for the recognition of equivalences; streamlining the risk assessment process; the recognition of zones or areas, or compartments, free or with low prevalence of pests or diseases; control, inspection and approval; as well as the transparency and information exchange mechanism;

e) Agree on definitions that are not contemplated in Article 7.2 or clarify existing ones, and recommend their adoption to the Commission;

f) work on the design and application of electronic systems for the issuance of sanitary and phytosanitary certificates; and

g) review this Chapter in light of any development of the work of the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and make any necessary recommendations to the Commission.

Article 7.11: Dispute Resolution

Once the consultation procedure has been exhausted, in accordance with paragraph 7(a) of Article 7.10, any Party that considers the result of such consultations unsatisfactory may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism of this Agreement.

 

CHAPTER VIII

TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE

 

Article 8.1: Aim

The objective of this Chapter is to increase and facilitate bilateral trade, preventing standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures from constituting unnecessary obstacles to trade, as well as increasing cooperation and technical assistance between the Parties.

Article 8.2: Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the provisions of Annex 1 of the TBT Agreement shall apply, as well as the general terms referring to standards and conformity assessment agreed upon by the Parties, contained in the standards, guides or recommendations adopted by the international standardization bodies.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

TBT Agreement: the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade;

legitimate objective: objective related to national security; prevention of practices that may mislead consumers; protection of human life, health or safety, animal or plant life or health, or the environment, among others;

standardization body: body whose standardization activities are recognized by the governments of the Parties; and

international standard-setting bodies: standard-setting bodies open to participation by relevant bodies of at least all WTO Members, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Codex Alimentarius Commission , the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML), or any other body designated by the Parties.

Article 8.3: Confirmation of international rights and obligations

The Parties incorporate their rights and obligations established in the WTO TBT Agreement, without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 8.4: Basic rights and obligations

1. Each Party may set the level of protection it considers appropriate to achieve its legitimate objectives. Likewise, it may prepare, adopt or maintain the necessary measures to ensure compliance with its standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, in accordance with the provisions of the TBT Agreement.

2. The Parties shall use as a basis for the preparation, adoption and application of their standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, international or imminently formulated standards, guidelines and recommendations, except when these do not constitute an effective or adequate means. to achieve its legitimate objectives, as set out in the TBT Agreement.

3. The standards, technical regulations, and conformity assessment procedures shall be prepared, adopted, and applied in such a way that products imported from the other Party are granted treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar products of national origin and similar products imported from any other country.

4. The Parties shall ensure that standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures are not prepared, adopted or applied which have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to international trade. To this end, standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures shall not be more trade restrictive than necessary to achieve a legitimate objective, taking into account the risks that failure to achieve it would create.

Article 8.5: Area of ​​application

1. The provisions of this Chapter apply to the preparation, adoption and application of all standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures of the Parties1 , including those at the central government level and local public institutions, which may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods between the Parties.

2. The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures, nor to purchase specifications established by government institutions for the production or consumption needs of said institutions.

Article 8.6: Technical regulations

1. In pursuit of its legitimate objectives, each Party may assess the risks that failure to achieve them would create. When evaluating said risks, the available scientific and technical information, the related processing technology, or the final uses to which the products are destined will be taken into consideration, among others.

2. The Parties shall favorably consider accepting their technical regulations as equivalent, even when they differ from their own, provided they are satisfied that they adequately meet the legitimate objectives of their own technical regulations.

3. When the technical regulation of a Party allows to achieve the legitimate objective established in the technical regulation of the other Party, it will be considered as equivalent by means of a common declaration of the Parties formalized by means of a decision of the Commission.

4. When a Party does not accept as equivalent a technical regulation of the other Party, it must justify the reasons for its decision so that the other Party can adopt the pertinent actions.

Article 8.7: Conformity assessment

1. The Parties shall promote the acceptance of the results of the conformity assessment procedures with respect to standards and technical regulations, conducted by bodies located in the territory of the other Party.

2. The Parties may initiate negotiations for the conclusion of mutual recognition agreements between the competent bodies in areas of conformity assessment following the principles of the TBT Agreement.

3. If a Party rejects a request from the other Party, to initiate or conclude negotiations in order to reach a mutual recognition agreement that facilitates the acceptance in its territory of the results of the conformity assessment procedures carried out by bodies in the territory of the other Party, it must justify the reasons for its decision so that the pertinent actions can be adopted.

4. The Parties will encourage the activities carried out within the framework of cooperation and technical assistance to serve as a reference in a process of recognition of conformity assessments.

5. If one of the Parties does not accept the results of a conformity assessment procedure carried out in the territory of the other Party, it must justify the reasons for its decision so that the pertinent actions can be adopted.

6. Each Party shall accredit, authorize or otherwise recognize conformity assessment entities in the territory of the other Party, under terms no less favorable than those granted to conformity assessment entities in its territory. If a Party accredits, authorizes or otherwise recognizes a conformity assessment entity for a specific standard or technical regulation in its territory and refuses to accredit, authorize or otherwise recognize a conformity assessment entity with that standard or technical regulation in the territory of the other Party, must, at the request of the other Party, justify the reasons for its decision so that the pertinent actions can be adopted.

Article 8.8: Transparency

1. The Parties shall ensure that standardization bodies comply with the Code of Good Practice in Annex 3 of the TBT Agreement.

2. The Parties shall transmit electronically, through the contact point established for each Party in accordance with Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, the notifications of draft technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures referred to in Articles 2.9. , 3.2, 5.6 or 7.2 of the TBT Agreement, at the same time that the Party notifies the countries with which it has signed free trade agreements.

3. The Parties shall notify even those draft technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures that are consistent with the technical content of the relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations.

4. Each Party shall allow at least 60 days for the interested parties of the other Party to have the possibility to make observations and consultations on the notified draft technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure, and take said observations and consultations into consideration. To the extent possible, a Party will give favorable consideration to requests to extend the period established for comments.

5. In urgent cases, when a Party makes a notification of a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure adopted as established in Articles 2.10, 3.2, 5.7 or 7.2 of the TBT Agreement, it must transmit it electronically to the other Party. , through the established contact point, at the same time that the Party notifies the countries with which it has signed free trade agreements. The Parties shall notify even those technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures that are consistent with the technical content of the relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations.

6. Each Party shall publish or make available to the public, in print or electronically, its responses to comments received no later than the date the final version of the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure is published.

7. Each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, provide information about the objective and justification of a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that the Party has adopted or proposes to adopt.

8. The Parties shall guarantee the reciprocal transparency of their technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, publishing their drafts, as well as those adopted on official Internet pages and with public access, free of charge, to the extent that the they exist or are implemented.

9. Each Party shall comply with this Article as soon as possible and in no event later than 2 years from the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 8.9: Cooperation and technical assistance

The Parties agree to provide reciprocal cooperation and technical assistance, under mutually agreed terms and conditions, for the purpose of:

a) promote the application of this Chapter;

b) favor the application of the TBT Agreement;

c) Strengthen their respective bodies for standardization, technical regulations, conformity assessment, metrology, and information and notification systems within the scope of the TBT Agreement, including training of human resources;

d) provide assistance for the establishment of mutual recognition agreements of interest to the Parties;

e) facilitate the acceptance of the equivalence of technical regulations;

f) collaborate in the development and application of international standards, guidelines or recommendations;

g) exchange information on their technical cooperation activities related to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

h) share information of a non-confidential nature that served as a basis for a Party in the development of a technical regulation; and

i) other cooperation and technical assistance activities agreed upon by the Parties.

Article 8.10: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties establish the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, made up of representatives of each Party, in accordance with the Annex to Article 8.10.

2. The functions of the Committee will include:

a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

b) promptly address the issues that a Party raises regarding the development, adoption or application of standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures;

c) increase cooperation in the development of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

d) facilitate, as appropriate, sectoral cooperation between governmental and non-governmental conformity assessment entities in the territories of the Parties;

e) exchange information about the work carried out in non-governmental, regional and multilateral forums involved in activities related to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

f) mutually facilitate access to information on standardization activities, technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures, especially those that influence trade between the Parties;

g) respond to queries on any matter that arises under the protection of this Chapter at the request of a Party;

h) review this Chapter in light of any developments in the work of the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade and make any necessary recommendations to the Commission;

i) take any other action that the Parties consider will assist them in the implementation of this Chapter and the TBT Agreement;

j) report to the Agreement Commission on the implementation of this Chapter;

k) establish, if necessary, working groups to deal with specific matters related to technical barriers to trade;

l) facilitate the process of negotiating mutual recognition agreements; and

m) discuss any other matter related to this Chapter.

3. The Committee will meet at least once a year in person or by teleconference, videoconference or other technological means. At the request of either Party, additional meetings will be held.

Article 8.11: Technical inquiries

1. The Parties may carry out technical consultations before the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, or alternatively attend the consultations provided for in Article 15.4 (Consultations), on the application, interpretation or obligations derived from this Chapter. The Parties may not use both channels simultaneously.

2. Technical consultations will have the following procedure:

a) the Party concerned shall communicate its request in writing to the other Party for it to consider the matter. The Parties may submit the matter to the opinion of experts in order to obtain advice or non-binding technical recommendations;

b) The Parties must meet, in person or by teleconference, videoconference or other technological means, within a period of no more than 30 days, unless they agree on a different period; and

c) the Parties will make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.

Article 8.12: Exchange of information

1. Any information or explanation that is provided at the request of a Party, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be provided in print or electronically within a reasonable period of time. The Party shall endeavor to respond to each request within 60 days.

2. Regarding the exchange of information, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 10 of the TBT Agreement, the Parties shall apply the recommendations under the sections Processing of requests for information and Requests for information that the competent services must be willing to respond contained in the document "Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade of the WTO since January 1, 1995", G/TBT/1/Rev.9, of September 8, 2008 and its revisions successive

 

Annex to Article 8.10

Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

The Committee will be coordinated by:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy, through the Undersecretary of Foreign Trade or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism, through the Vice Ministry of Foreign Trade or its successor.

 

 

CHAPTER IX

UNFAIR INTERNATIONAL TRADE PRACTICES

 

Article 9.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

Antidumping Agreement: the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

Subsidies Agreement: the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, which is part of the WTO Agreement;

investigating authority: the authority of the Party that has the power to conduct and resolve a dumping or subsidy investigation:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Economy or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, the Commission for the Control of Dumping and Subsidies of the National Institute for the Defense of Competition and the Protection of Intellectual Property (INDECOPI) or its successor;

injury: a material injury caused to a domestic industry, a threat of material injury to a domestic industry, or a significant delay in the creation of this industry;

domestic legislation on antidumping and countervailing duties: the laws, regulations and administrative rules of a Party relating to the application of antidumping and countervailing duties;

official dissemination bodies:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Official Gazette of the Federation; and

b) in the case of Peru, the Official Gazette El Peruano.

Article 9.2: General principles

The Parties recognize the need to eliminate export subsidies not permitted by the WTO and reject any unfair international trade practices and other internal policies that cause trade distortions between the Parties.

Article 9.3: Export subsidies

Neither Party may grant or maintain subsidies for the export of goods to the territory of the other Party, provided for in Article 3.1 of the Agreement on Subsidies.

Article 9.4: Procedures

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, regarding the investigation procedures for the application of antidumping or countervailing duties, the Parties agree to apply the provisions contained in the Antidumping Agreement and the Agreement on Subsidies, according to its domestic legislation on antidumping and countervailing duties.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Parties shall promptly publish the initiation resolutions; those that impose provisional or definitive antidumping and countervailing duties; those that modify the antidumping and countervailing duties imposed; those that declare the investigation concluded, whatever the reason, including the withdrawal of the applicants once the investigation has begun; and those issued as a result of a price commitment. The Parties will publish the aforementioned resolutions in their official dissemination bodies and on their Internet pages.

3. With the notification of commencement, a copy of the respective resolution shall be sent to the known exporters and to the investigating authority of the other Party; of the public version of the request to initiate an investigation and its annexes; of the questionnaires that will be used by the investigating authority or, where appropriate, the minimum information required by it; and the description of the way in which it should be presented.

4. Likewise, the Parties shall publish their resolutions or reports on their respective Internet pages, as the case may be, indicating the methodology used by the investigating authority to determine the dumping margin or the amount of the subsidy; harm arguments; and the causal relationship between the dumped or subsidized imports and the alleged injury.

Article 9.5: Technical information meetings

1. Upon written request from any accredited interested party, the investigating authority will hold technical information meetings, in order to explain the methodology used in the determinations of the preliminary and/or final resolutions.

2. The investigating authority will hold the meeting within the following 15 business days from the publication of the respective resolution.

3. In technical information meetings, the investigating authority will duly protect confidential information. The accredited interested parties shall have the right to obtain the spreadsheets and computer files that, where appropriate, the investigating authority may have used to issue its resolutions, provided that it is public information provided by any interested party.

4. The technical information meetings will not affect the deadlines established in the processes to challenge the resolutions contemplated in the internal legislation of each Party.

Article 9.6: Accreditation of personality of interested parties

1. The Parties will allow the interested parties to accredit their representatives through powers issued in accordance with the requirements contemplated in their internal legislation. For this purpose, the interested parties may submit the powers of attorney with the corresponding apostille or consular legalization or, alternatively, a copy of the powers duly certified by the investigative authority of the other Party, which will verify that the content of such documents matches that of the the originals, prior to their submission to the investigating authority. The presentation of certified copies of the powers of attorney by the investigating authority replaces the apostille or consular legalization of the powers of attorney.

2. No later than 3 months after the entry into force of the Agreement, the Parties shall notify each other in writing of the data (name, position, signature, among others) of the officials responsible for certifying the documents. Any change must be notified to the other Party immediately.

Article 9.7: Audiences

In anti-dumping or subsidy investigations, accredited interested parties will be given the opportunity to participate in a public hearing convened by the investigating authority in order for them to present the arguments they consider pertinent. Accredited interested parties will be notified of the date of the public hearing at least 14 days in advance.

Article 9.8: Establishment of anti-dumping duties

1. When one of the Parties decides to impose an antidumping duty, it shall be less than the margin of dumping found, as long as said lower duty is adequate to eliminate the damage to the domestic industry. For this purpose, the authorities will compare the import prices of the dumped product and the non-injurious price for the domestic industry calculated based on the methodologies described below:

a) Import price of the investigated product, corresponding to those exporters or producers from the same country of origin with respect to which it has been determined that they did not practice dumping.

b) Weighted average import price of the investigated product from the rest of the supplying countries of the domestic market.

c) Price of the domestic industry in a period comparable to the one investigated that is within the damage analysis period.

d) Production costs of the similar product produced by the domestic industry, plus expenses and a reasonable profit margin.

2. The investigating authority will justify the use of the applied methodology.

3. If the non-injurious price is higher than the import price plus the corresponding dumping margin, the amount of the anti-dumping duty will be equal to the dumping margin.

Article 9.9: Establishment of countervailing rights

1. When one of the Parties decides to impose a countervailing duty, it shall be less than the amount of the subsidy found, as long as that lesser duty is adequate to eliminate the damage to the domestic industry. For this purpose, the authorities will compare the import prices of the subsidized product and the non-injurious price for the domestic industry calculated based on the methodologies described below:

a) Import price of the investigated product, corresponding to those exporters or producers from the same country of origin for which it has been determined that they did not benefit from the subsidy.

b) Weighted average import price of the investigated product from the rest of the supplying countries of the domestic market.

c) Price of the domestic industry in a period comparable to the one investigated that is within the damage analysis period.

d) Production costs of the similar product produced by the domestic industry, plus expenses and a reasonable profit margin.

2. The investigating authority will justify the use of the applied methodology.

3. If the non-injurious price is higher than the import price plus the amount of the corresponding subsidy, the amount of the countervailing duty will be equal to the amount of the subsidy.

Article 9.10: Minimum margins and volumes

1. The Party shall immediately terminate the anti-dumping investigation proceedings when the dumping margin is less than 5 percent expressed as a percentage of the FOB export price.

2. The Party shall terminate the investigation immediately if the volume of total imports of the investigated product from the other Party represents less than 5 percent of the total imported or when they represent less than 2 percent of the domestic market for the investigated product.

Article 9.11: Duration and extent of anti-dumping duties

1. Definitive antidumping duties shall be abolished within a maximum period of 5 years from the date of their imposition unless the authorities have determined, in an examination carried out based on a duly substantiated request made by or on behalf of the industry that the removal of that duty would lead to recurrence or continuation of dumping and injury.

2. In no case will the validity of the rights be extended more than once. Once the validity has been extended, the Party may not apply a new anti-dumping duty in relation to the same product, until after at least 12 months have elapsed from the end of the validity of the definitive duty.

Article 9.12: Duration and extent of countervailing duties

1. Definitive countervailing duties will be eliminated within a maximum period of 5 years from the date of their imposition unless the authorities have determined, in an examination carried out based on a duly substantiated request made by or on behalf of the industry national, that the subsidy persists and that the removal of that right would lead to the continuation or repetition of the injury.

2. In no case will the validity of the rights be extended more than once. Once the term has been extended, the Party may not apply a new countervailing duty in relation to the same product, until after at least 12 months have elapsed from the end of the term of the definitive countervailing duty.

Article 9.13: Price commitments

1. They may1 suspend or terminate proceedings without imposition of provisional or definitive anti-dumping or countervailing duties if the exporter or the government concerned communicates that it voluntarily makes satisfactory commitments2 to review their prices or to put an end to exports at dumped or subsidized prices, so that the investigating authority is satisfied that the detrimental effect of the unfair international trade practice is eliminated. The price increases stipulated in such undertakings shall not exceed what is necessary to offset the margin of dumping or the amount of subsidy determined for that exporter. It is desirable that price increases be less than the margin of dumping or the amount of the subsidy, if that is enough to eliminate injury to the domestic industry.

2. Price undertakings shall not be sought or accepted from exporters or the government concerned, except in the case that the investigating authority of the importing Party has made an affirmative preliminary determination of the existence of dumping or subsidization and of injury caused for that dumping or subsidy. Prior to issuing said determination, the investigating authority must inform the exporters or the interested government of their right to offer price undertakings.

3. The acceptance or rejection of a price commitment will be based on its own merits. The investigating authority will present to the exporter or the government concerned the reasons that have led it to consider the acceptance of an undertaking inappropriate, and will give the exporter the opportunity to make observations in this regard and to reformulate its proposal only once.

4. In the case of dumping, the investigating authority may not require as a condition for its acceptance that the undertaking be submitted by all exporters, by a majority or by a specific group of exporters. Likewise, it will not be justified cause to reject the commitments offered if the number of actual or potential exporters is too large or for reasons of general policy.

5. In case of non-compliance with an undertaking, the investigating authority of the importing country will notify the exporter involved or the government concerned and will give it the opportunity to comment and correct errors or deficiencies. If information satisfactory to the investigating authority is not presented, the latter may promptly adopt measures that may consist of the immediate application of provisional duties based on the best information available. In such cases, definitive antidumping or countervailing duties may be levied on the products declared for consumption no later than 90 days before the application of the provisional duties imposed as a result of non-compliance,

Article 9.14: Restitution or elimination of antidumping and countervailing duties

1. When the final determination is in the sense of not imposing antidumping or countervailing duties, it will proceed promptly, at the request of a party, to return with interest any payment or deposit in cash and/or to release any guarantee presented.

2. When the final determination is in the sense of imposing a definitive antidumping or countervailing duty, and this is less than the provisional one, any provisional duty collected in excess will be reimbursed, at the request of the party, with interest or the guarantees presented in excess will be released. , as appropriate.

3. When an antidumping or countervailing duty is eliminated in compliance with the decision of a national challenge mechanism, it shall proceed in accordance with the national legislation of each Party, promptly, at the request of a party, to return with interest any payment or deposit in cash and/or to release any guarantee presented.

4. When the right is reduced in compliance with the decision of a national challenge mechanism, any amount paid or deposited in excess will be reimbursed with interest and/or the guarantees presented will be released, upon request by the party.

Article 9.15: Cooperation

The Parties recognize the importance of cooperation and coordination between their respective investigating authorities to achieve the effective application of the Antidumping Agreement and the Agreement on Subsidies, as well as their respective domestic legislation on antidumping and countervailing duties. Consequently, the Parties will cooperate in matters related to the application of the aforementioned rules, including the possibility of consulting and exchanging information, except confidential information, related to the application of the domestic legislation on antidumping and countervailing duties of the Party.

Article 9.16: Workgroup

1. The Parties shall establish a working group made up of representatives of each Party.

2. The working group shall seek to promote greater understanding, communication and cooperation between the Parties in relation to the matters covered by this Chapter, in particular with the aim of complying with Article 9.15.

3. Within 2 years of the entry into force of this Agreement, the working group shall report on the status of its progress to the Commission, and may make appropriate recommendations for the correct implementation of this Chapter.

Article 9.17: Multilateral negotiations

The Parties show their willingness to work, to the extent possible, jointly in multilateral forums, including the WTO, with a view to clarifying and improving the disciplines related to the application of antidumping and countervailing duties, with the aim of minimizing their potential to hinder or impede international trade.

Article 9.18: Dispute Resolution

Disputes that arise between the Parties regarding the application of this Chapter shall be resolved by the provisions of Chapter XV (Dispute Settlement). However, the Parties reserve the right to resort to the dispute settlement procedures provided for in the Understanding Regarding the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of WTO Disputes.

 

 

CHAPTER X

CROSS-BORDER TRADE IN SERVICES

 

Article 10.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services:

the provision of a service:

a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

b) in the territory of a Party, by a person of that Party, to a person of the other Party; either

c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by an investment as defined in Chapter XI (Investment);

service provider of a Party: a person of that Party who intends to supply or supplies a service1 ; and

professional services: services that require specialized higher education for their provision2 or training or training3 , or equivalent experience and whose exercise is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons who practice a trade or to crew members of merchant ships and aircraft.

Article 10.2: Scope of application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect cross-border trade in services supplied by service providers of the other Party. Such measures include measures affecting:

a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and supply of a service;

b) the acquisition or use of, or payment for, a service;

c) access to and use of distribution systems, transport or telecommunication networks and services related to the provision of a service;

d) the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; and

e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for the provision of a service.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, "measures adopted or maintained by a Party" means measures adopted or maintained by:

a) federal or national, state or regional, or municipal or local governments and authorities; and

b) non-governmental institutions in the exercise of the powers delegated to them by federal or national, state or regional, or municipal or local authorities or governments.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:

a) public procurement;

b) traffic rights and services directly related to the exercise of traffic rights, except:

i) aircraft repair and maintenance services while the aircraft is out of service;

ii) the sale and marketing of air transport services; and

iii) computerized reservation system (SRI) services; and

c) financial services as defined in Article 12.1 (Definitions).

4. Articles 10.6 and 10.9 shall apply to measures by a Party that affect the supply of a service in its territory by an investment4 as defined in Chapter XI (Investment).

5. This Chapter does not impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor does it confer any right on that national with respect to such access or employment. .

6. This Chapter does not apply to services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority in the territory of a Party. A "service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority" means any service not supplied on a commercial basis, nor in competition with 1 or more service providers.

Article 10.3: Subsidies

1. The Parties shall periodically exchange information on all existing or future subsidies or donations, including tax exemptions or rebates, and government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance related to trade in services, that they grant to their domestic service providers. . The first exchange will take place within a period not exceeding 1 year from the entry into force of this Agreement.

2. If the results of the negotiations related to GATS Article XV:1 (or the results of any similar negotiations undertaken in other multilateral fora in which both Parties participate) enter into force for each of the Parties, this Article it must be modified, as appropriate, after consultations between the Parties are carried out, so that those results form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 10.4: National treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to the other Party's service providers treatment no less favorable than it accords, in similar circumstances, to its service providers.

2. Treatment accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 means, with respect to a state or regional level government, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that state or regional government accords, in like circumstances, to service providers of the Party of which it is an integral part.

Article 10.5: Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall accord to service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than it accords, in similar circumstances, to service providers of a non-Party.

Article 10.6: Market access

1. In sectors where each Party has made market access commitments in accordance with its Schedule to Annex III (Market Access), neither Party may adopt or maintain, whether on the basis of a state subdivision or regional or its entire territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, measures that:

a) impose limitations on:

i) the number of service providers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service providers or through the requirement of an economic needs test;

ii) the total value of the transactions or service assets in the form of numerical quotas or through the requirement of an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of service operations or the total amount of service production, expressed in designated numerical units, in the form of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;5th or

(iv) the total number of nationals that can be employed in a given service sector or that a service provider can employ and who are necessary for and directly related to the supply of a specific service, in the form of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; either

b) restrict or prescribe the specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service provider can supply a service.

Article 10.7: Local presence

Neither Party may require the service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain representative offices or any other form of business, or to be a resident, in its territory as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.

Article 10.8: Non-conforming measures

1. Articles 10.4, 10.5 and 10.7 do not apply to:

a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party:

i) at the federal or national level, as stipulated in its Schedule to Annex I (Non-conforming Measures);

ii) at the state or regional level, during the 6 months following the entry into force of this Agreement and, from that date, as indicated by a Party in its Schedule to Annex I (Non-conforming Measures), in accordance with the paragraph 2; either

iii) at the municipal or local level;

b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subsection (a); either

c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) to the extent that said modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 10.4 , 10.5 or 10.7.

2. Each Party will have up to 6 months from the entry into force of this Agreement to indicate in its List of Annex I (Non-conforming Measures) any existing non-conforming measure maintained by a state or region referred to in subparagraph (a)( ii) of paragraph 1 and will be incorporated within said term into this Agreement through a decision adopted by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b)(viii) of Article 17.2 (Functions of the Administrative Commission).

3. Articles 10.4, 10.5 and 10.7 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to sectors, sub-sectors or activities, as set out in its Schedule to Annex II (Future Measures).

Article 10.9: National regulations

1. When a Party requires authorization for the supply of a service, the competent authorities of the Party, within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application considered complete in accordance with its laws and regulations, shall inform the applicant of the decision regarding your request. At the request of the applicant, the competent authorities of the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information concerning the status of the application.

2. In order to ensure that the measures related to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, the measures that each Party adopts or maintains:

a) be based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and ability to provide the service;

b) they should not be more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

c) in the case of licensing procedures, they shall not by themselves constitute a restriction on the supply of the service.

3. If the results of the negotiations related to GATS Article VI:4 (or the results of any similar negotiations undertaken in other multilateral fora in which both Parties participate) enter into force for each of the Parties, this Article it must be modified, as appropriate, after consultations between the Parties are carried out, so that those results form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 10.10: Transparency

Each Party shall establish or maintain adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations relating to the matters covered by this Chapter, in accordance with its laws and regulations on transparency.6

Article 10.11: mutual recognition

1. For the purposes of compliance, in whole or in part, with its standards or criteria for the authorization, licensing or certification of service providers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 3, a Party may recognize the education or experience obtained , the requirements fulfilled, or the licenses or certifications granted in a Party or in a country that is not a Party. Such recognition, which may be achieved through harmonization or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or arrangement with the Party or non-Party, or may be granted autonomously.

2. When a Party recognizes, autonomously or by agreement or agreement, the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or licenses or certifications granted in the territory of a country that is not a Party, Article 10.5 shall not be interpreted in the sense to require that the Party grant such recognition to education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. Neither Party shall grant recognition in such a way that the application of its rules or criteria for the authorization, licensing or certification of service providers constitutes a disguised restriction on trade in services.

4. The Annex to Article 10.11 applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party in connection with the granting of licenses or certificates to professional service providers, as established by the provisions of said Annex.

Article 10.12: Transfers and payments

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply of services to be made freely and without delay, to and from its territory.

2. Each Party shall allow all transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply of services to be made in freely circulating currency, at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of the transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay the transfer or payment through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws regarding:

a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;

b) issuance, trade or sale of securities, futures, options or derivatives;

c) financial reports or files of transfers, when necessary to collaborate in compliance with the law or with the regulatory authorities of financial affairs;

d) criminal offences; either

e) guarantee of compliance with orders or judicial or administrative rulings.

Article 10.13: denial of benefits

Upon notice and subject to Article 15.4 (Consultation), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

a) a service provider of the other Party, when the Party determines that the service is being supplied by a company owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party country and:

i) the Party denying the benefits does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; either

ii) the Party denying the benefits adopts or maintains measures in relation to the non-Party that prohibit transactions with that company that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were granted to that company; either

b) a service provider of the other Party, when the Party determines that the service is being supplied by a company that is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party country and that does not carry out substantial commercial activities in the territory of that other Party.

Article 10.14: Implementation and consultations

The Parties shall consult annually, unless otherwise agreed, to review the implementation of this Chapter and consider other matters of trade in services of mutual interest. Among other matters, the Parties will consult in order to determine the feasibility of removing any citizenship or permanent residence requirement that remains for the granting of licenses or certificates to the service providers of each Party. Such consultations shall also include consideration of the development of procedures that could contribute to increasing the transparency of the measures described in paragraphs 1(c) and 3 of Article 10.8.

 

Annex to Article 10.11

Professional services

 

Area of ​​application

1. This Annex applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Parties in connection with the granting of licenses or certificates to professional service providers, as established in the provisions below.

Aim

2. The purpose of this Annex is to establish the rules that the Parties will observe to harmonize between them, the measures that will regulate the mutual recognition of licenses or certificates for the provision of professional services, through the granting of authorization for professional practice.

Processing of applications for the granting of licenses and certificates

3. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities, within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application for licenses or certificates by a national of the other Party:

a) if the application is complete, decide on it and notify the applicant of the resolution; either

b) if incomplete, notify the applicant, without undue delay, of the status of the application and any additional information required under their national law.

Development of professional standards

4. The Parties shall encourage the relevant bodies in their respective territories to develop mutually acceptable standards and criteria for the granting of licenses and certificates to professional service providers, as well as to submit to the Commission recommendations on their mutual recognition.

5. The standards and criteria referred to in paragraph 4 may be developed in relation to the following aspects:

a) education: accreditation of educational institutions or academic programs;

b) examinations: qualification examinations for obtaining licences, including alternative methods of evaluation, such as oral examinations and interviews;

c) experience: length and nature of experience required to obtain a license;

d) conduct and ethics: rules of professional conduct and the nature of the disciplinary measures in case the providers of professional services contravene them;

e) professional development and recertification: continuing education and the corresponding requirements to maintain the professional certificate;

f) scope of action: extent and limits of authorized activities;

g) local knowledge: requirements on knowledge of aspects such as local laws and regulations, language, geography or climate; and

h) consumer protection: alternative requirements to residency, such as bonds, professional liability insurance and customer reimbursement funds to ensure consumer protection.

6. Upon receipt of a recommendation referred to in paragraph 4, the Commission will review it within a reasonable time to decide whether it is consistent with the provisions of this Agreement. Based on the review carried out by the Commission, each Party will encourage their respective competent authorities to put into practice that recommendation in the corresponding cases, within a mutually agreed term.

Granting of temporary licenses

7. When the Parties agree, each of them will encourage the relevant bodies in their respective territories to develop procedures for the issuance of temporary licenses to professional service providers of the other Party.

Revision

8. The Commission will periodically review, at least once every 3 years, the application of the provisions of this Annex.

Working Group on Professional Services

9. The Parties establish a Working Group on Professional Services, including representatives of each Party, to facilitate the activities listed in paragraphs 4 through 7 of this Annex.

10. Issues to be considered by the task force for general professional services and, as appropriate, for individual professional services, include:

a) develop viable procedures on standards for the granting of licenses and certificates to professional service providers;

b) provide for the granting in its territory of temporary licenses for service providers of the other Party; and

c) other matters of mutual interest related to the provision of professional services.

11. To facilitate the efforts of the working group, each Party shall consult with the relevant agencies in its territory to identify the professional services to which the working group will give priority. The first meeting of this group will focus on discussing the result of said consultations and will be held no later than one year after the entry into force of this Agreement.

12. The working group shall report to the Commission on its progress and future activities, within 18 months of the entry into force of this Agreement.

 

 

CHAPTER XI

INVESTMENT

Section A: General Provisions

 

Article 11.1 : Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

ICSID: the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

ICSID Convention: the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded in Washington, on March 18, 1965;

New York Convention: the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held in New York on June 10, 1958;

company: a company as defined in Article 2.1 (General Definitions), and the branches of that company;

investment: assets owned or controlled by investors of one Party, acquired in accordance with the laws and regulations of the other Party in its territory, listed below:

a) a company;

b) shares of a company;

c) debt instruments of a company:

i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; either

ii) when the original maturity date of the debt instrument is at least 3 years,

but does not include an obligation of a Party or of a State enterprise, regardless of the original due date;

d) a loan to a company:

i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; either

ii) when the original maturity date of the loan is at least 3 years,

but does not include a loan to a Party or to a State enterprise, regardless of the original due date;

e) a participation in a company, which allows the owner to participate in the income or profits of the company;

f) a share in a business that entitles the owner to participate in the stock of that business in a liquidation, provided it does not derive from an obligation or loan excluded under subparagraph (c) or (d);

g) real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit or for other business purposes; and

h) the participation resulting from the capital or other resources in the territory of a Party destined for the development of an economic activity in said territory, among others, according to:

i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of the other Party, including concessions, construction and turnkey contracts; either

ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company;

but investment does not mean:

i) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:

i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of a Party to a company in the territory of the other Party; either

ii) the granting of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, except for a loan covered by the provisions of subsection (d); either

j) any other pecuniary claim, which does not involve the interest rates set forth in subsections (a) to (h);

investor of a Party: a Party or a State enterprise, or a national or enterprise of such Party, that intends to carry out1 , makes or has made an investment;

disputing party: the disputing investor or the disputing Party;

Disputing Party: the Party against which a claim is made under the terms of Section C of this Chapter;

disputing parties: the disputing investor and the disputing Party;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976; and

ICSID Additional Facility Rules: The Additional Facility Rules for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

Article 11.2 : Scope of application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

a) investors of the other Party;

b) the investments of investors of the other Party made in its territory; and

c) all investments in its territory, in relation to Articles 11.7 and 11.17.

2. This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party to the extent that they fall under Chapter XII (Financial Services).

3. The obligations of a Party under this Chapter shall apply to a State enterprise or other person when any of them is acting in the exercise of a regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority that has been delegated by that Party.

 

Section B: Investment Protection

Article 11.3 : National treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to its own investors in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale, or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall grant to the investments of investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to the investments of its own investors with regard to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation , sale or other disposition of investments.

3. Treatment accorded by a Party in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with respect to a state or region, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that state or region accords, in similar circumstances, to investors and investments of the Party of which they are an integral part.

Article 11.4: Most Favored Nation Treatment2

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in similar circumstances, to investors of any non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments of investors of any non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale or other disposition of the investments.

Article 11.5: Treatment level

Each of the Parties shall accord to the investors and to the investments of the investors of the other Party the best of the treatments required by Articles 11.3 and 11.4.

Article 11.6: Minimum standard of treatment under customary international law

1. Each Party shall accord to the investments of investors of the other Party, treatment commensurate with the minimum level of treatment in accordance with customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, the concepts of "fair and equitable treatment" and "full protection and security" do not require treatment in addition to that required by the customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens, or that goes beyond this. A resolution in the sense that another provision of this Chapter or of a different international agreement has been violated, does not establish that this Article has been violated.

Article 11.7: Performance requirements

1. Neither Party may impose or enforce any of the following requirements or enforce any commitment or initiative, in relation to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct or operation of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a country that is not a Party in its territory to:

a) export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;

b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

c) acquire or use or grant preference to goods produced or services provided in their territory, or acquire goods from producers or services from service providers in their territory;

d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of currency inflows associated with said investment;

e) restrict the sales in its territory of the merchandise or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to earnings that they generate in foreign currency;

f) transfer to a person in its territory technology, a productive process or other reserved knowledge, except when the requirement is imposed or the commitment or initiative is enforced by a judicial or administrative court or competent authority to repair an alleged violation of the laws in competition matters, or to act in a manner that is not inconsistent with multilateral agreements related to the protection of intellectual property rights; either

g) act as the exclusive supplier of the goods it produces or services it provides for a specific, regional or global market.

2. A measure that requires an investment to use a technology to generally comply with applicable health, safety, or environmental requirements shall not be considered inconsistent with paragraph 1(f). For greater certainty, Articles 11.3 and 11.4 apply to such measure.

3. Neither Party may condition the receipt of an advantage or the continued receipt thereof, in relation to an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or of a country that is not a Party, on compliance with any of the following requirements:

a) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

b) buy, use or grant preference to goods produced in its territory, or to buy goods from producers in its territory;

c) relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; either

d) restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way such sales to the volume or value of their exports or to the earnings they generate in foreign currency.

4. Nothing in paragraph 3 shall be construed as preventing a Party from conditioning the receipt of, or continued receipt of, an advantage in connection with an investment in its territory by an investor of the other Party or by a country that is not a Party, to the requirement that it locate production, provide services, train or employ workers, build or expand particular facilities, or carry out research and development, in its territory.

5. Paragraphs 1 and 3 do not apply to any requirements other than those listed in those paragraphs.

6. Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in paragraphs 1(b) or 1(c), or 3(a) or 3(b) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including those of an environmental nature, necessary to:

a) ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

b) protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

c) the preservation of living or non-living non-renewable natural resources.

Article 11.8: Senior executives and boards of directors

1. Neither Party may require that an enterprise of that Party, which is an investment of an investor of the other Party, appoint individuals of any particular nationality to senior management positions.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of a board of directors or any committee of such a board of an enterprise of that Party that is an investment of an investor of the other Party be of a particular nationality or is resident in the territory of the Party, provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control over its investment.

Article 11.9: Non-conforming measures

1. Articles 11.3, 11.4, 11.7 and 11.8 shall not apply to:

a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party:

i) at the federal or national level, as stipulated in its Schedule to Annex I (Non-conforming Measures);

ii) at the state or regional level, during the 6 months following the entry into force of this Agreement and, from that date, as indicated by a Party in its Schedule to Annex I (Non-conforming Measures), in accordance with the paragraph 2; either

iii) at the municipal or local level;

b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subsection (a); either

c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that said modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force before the modification, with Articles 11.3, 11.4, 11.7 and 11.8.

2. Each Party will have 6 months from the entry into force of this Agreement to indicate in its Schedule of Annex I (Non-conforming Measures) any existing non-conforming measure maintained by a state or region referred to in subparagraph (a)(ii). ) of paragraph 1 and will be incorporated into this Agreement through a decision adopted by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Article 17.2 (Functions of the Administrative Commission).

3. Articles 11.3, 11.4, 11.7 and 11.8 shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II (Future Measures).

4. Neither Party may require, in accordance with any measure adopted after the entry into force of this Agreement and included in a Schedule of Annex II (Future Measures), an investor of the other Party, by reason of their nationality. , that sells or otherwise disposes of an investment existing at the time the measure enters into force.

5. The provisions contained in:

a) paragraphs 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c), and 3(a) and 3(b) of Article 11.7 shall not apply to the requirements for qualification of goods and services with respect to programs of promotion of exports and foreign aid;

b) paragraphs 1(b), 1(c), 1(f) and 1(g), and 3(a) and 3(b) of Article 11.7 shall not apply to purchases made by a Party or by a state enterprise; and

c) paragraphs 3(a) and 3(b) of Article 11.7 shall not apply to the requirements imposed by an importing Party on goods that, by virtue of their content, qualify for customs duties or preferential quotas.

Article 11.10: Exceptions

1. Articles 11.3, 11.4 and 11.8 do not apply to:

a) purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; either

b) subsidies or donations, including government-backed loans, guarantees and insurance, provided by a Party or by a State enterprise.

2. Article 11.4 does not apply to treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to international agreements, or with respect to sectors, set out in its Schedule to Annex II (Future Measures) or Annex IV (Exceptions to Nation Treatment). most favored).

3. A Party has the right to carry out exclusively the economic activities indicated in Annex V (Activities reserved to the State), and to refuse to authorize the establishment of investments in such activities.

Article 11.11: Compensation for losses

With respect to measures such as restitution, indemnity, compensation and other settlement, investors of a Party whose investments suffer losses in the territory of the other Party due to war, armed conflict, state of national emergency, revolt, insurrection, riot or any other similar event, they will receive treatment no less favorable than that which the other Party grants to its own investors or investments from any country that is not a Party.

Article 11.12: Expropriation and compensation3

1. No Party shall expropriate or nationalize an investment, directly or indirectly through measures equivalent to expropriation or nationalization (hereinafter referred to as "expropriation"), unless it is:

a) for public purposes 4 ;

b) on non-discriminatory grounds;

c) in accordance with the principle of legality; and

d) by payment of compensation in accordance with paragraph 2.

2. The compensation:

a) It will be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation took place. The fair market value will not reflect any change in value due to the fact that the expropriation was publicly known in advance. The valuation criteria will include the current value, the value of the assets, including the declared fiscal value of the property of tangible goods, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value;

b) will be paid without delay;

c) include interest at a reasonable commercial rate for the currency in which said payment is made, from the date of expropriation until the date of payment; and

d) It will be fully liquidable and freely transferable.

3. An investor whose investment is expropriated shall have the right, in accordance with the legislation of the Party that carried out the expropriation, to a prompt review of his case by a judicial authority or by any other competent authority and to a valuation of his investment in accordance with the provisions established in this Article.

Article 11.13: Transfers

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to an investment of an investor of the other Party to be made freely and without delay, to and from its territory.

2. Each Party shall allow transfers to be made in a freely convertible currency at the prevailing market exchange rate on the date of the transfer. Such transfers will include:

a) the initial capital and additional amounts to maintain or increase an investment;

b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration payments, technical assistance payments and other remuneration, as well as other sums derived from the investment;

c) products derived from the total or partial sale of the investment, or from the total or partial liquidation of the investment;

d) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or its investment is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

e) payments derived from compensation for expropriation; and

f) Payments derived from the application of the provisions relating to the settlement of disputes.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, it will be considered that the transfers were made without delay when they have been carried out within the period normally necessary to carry out the transfer.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, a Party may prevent a transfer through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws in the following cases:

a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

b) issue, trade or operations of securities;

c) criminal or administrative offences;

d) reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments; either

e) guarantee of compliance with rulings in contentious proceedings.

5. In the event of a fundamental imbalance in the balance of payments or a threat to it, each Party may temporarily restrict transfers, provided that Party applies measures or a program that:

a) is compatible with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

b) does not go beyond what is necessary to deal with the circumstances mentioned in paragraph 5;

c) is temporary and is removed as soon as conditions permit;

d) is promptly notified to the other Party; and

e) is fair, non-discriminatory and in good faith.

Article 11.14: Special formalities and information requirements

1. Nothing in Article 11.3 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of the other Party, such as the requirement that investors be residents of the Party or that the investments are constituted in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do not significantly impair the protection afforded by a Party to investors of the other Party and investments of investors of the other Party in accordance with this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 11.3 and 11.4, a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its investment, in its territory, to provide routine information regarding that investment, exclusively for information or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect confidential information that could negatively affect the competitive situation of the investment or the investor from any disclosure. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing a Party from obtaining or disclosing information regarding the fair and good faith application of its laws.

Article 11.15: Relationship with other Chapters

1. In case of incompatibility between this Chapter and another Chapter, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

2. The fact that a Party requires a service provider of the other Party to post a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for providing a service in its territory does not, by itself, make this Chapter applicable to the provision of services. cross-border of that service. This Chapter applies to the treatment granted by that Party to the posted bond or financial guarantee.

Article 11.16: denial of benefits

1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party that is a company of that Party and to investments of said investor, if such companies are owned or controlled by investors from a country that is not is Part, and:

a) the Party denying the benefits does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; either

b) the Party that denies the benefits adopts or maintains measures in relation to the non-Party that prohibit transactions with that company or that would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were granted to that company or its investments.

2. A Party, prior notification to the other Party, may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of the other Party that is a company of said Party and to the investments of such investor, if investors from a country that is not a Party are owns or controls the enterprise and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is incorporated or organized.

Article 11.17: Environmental measures

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to adopt, maintain or implement any measure, otherwise compatible with this Chapter, that it considers appropriate to ensure that investments in its territory are made taking into account has environmental concerns.

2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by relaxing domestic measures applicable to health, safety or the environment. Accordingly, no Party should waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or derogate from, such measures as a means to induce the establishment, acquisition, expansion or retention of an investor's investment in its territory. If a Party believes that the other Party has encouraged an investment in such a way, it may request consultations with that other Party and both shall consult in order to avoid such incentives.

 

Section C: Dispute Resolutionbetween a Party and an investor of the other Party

Article 11.18: Aim

This Section establishes a mechanism for the solution of controversies that arise between a Party and an investor of the other Party derived from an alleged breach of an obligation established in Section B of this Chapter, which involves damage.

Article 11.19: Notification and inquiries

1. The disputing parties will first try to settle the dispute through consultation or negotiation.

2. In order to settle the dispute amicably, the disputing investor shall notify the disputing Party in writing of its intention to submit the claim to arbitration at least 6 months before the claim is filed in accordance with the Annex to Article 11.19. . The notification will specify:

a) the name and address of the disputing investor and, when the claim is made by an investor on behalf of a company in accordance with Article 11.20, the name and address of the company;

b) the provisions of Section B of this Chapter allegedly breached and any other applicable provision;

c) the issues of fact and law on which the claim is based; and

d) the repair requested and the approximate amount of the damages claimed.

Article 11.20: Submission of a claim to arbitration

1. An investor of a Party may, at its own expense, submit a claim to arbitration that the other Party has breached an obligation set forth in Section B, and that the investor has suffered loss or damage by virtue of that breach. or as a consequence of it.

2. An investor of a Party may, on behalf of an enterprise that is a legal person incorporated under the laws of the other Party and owned or controlled by the investor, submit to arbitration a claim within the meaning of that the other Party has breached an obligation set forth in Section B, and that the enterprise has suffered loss or damage by virtue of or as a consequence of that breach.

3. An investment may not submit a claim to arbitration under this Section.

4. An investor may not submit a claim to arbitration under this Section unless 6 months have elapsed since the events that gave rise to the claim occurred.

5. A disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration pursuant to:

a) the ICSID Convention, provided that both the disputing Party and the investor Party are parties to the ICSID Convention;

b) the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, when either the disputing Party or the investing Party, but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention;

c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; either

d) if the disputing parties so agree, any other arbitration rules.

6. A disputing investor may submit a claim to arbitration only if:

a) the investor expresses his consent to submit to arbitration in accordance with the procedures established in this Chapter; and

b) the investor and, when the claim refers to loss or damage of a participation in a company of the other Party that is a legal person owned or controlled by the investor, the company, waive their right to start or continue any proceedings before an administrative or judicial tribunal in accordance with the Party's law, or other binding dispute resolution procedures, with respect to the measure of the disputing Party alleged to be in violation of Section B, which is aimed at the compensation of damages caused by the measure, arguing the breach of obligations other than those contained in Section B,except for the procedures in which the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declaratory or extraordinary nature is requested, which do not imply the payment of damages, in accordance with the legislation of the disputing Party.

7. A disputing investor may, pursuant to paragraph 2, submit a claim to arbitration on behalf of an enterprise of the other Party that is a legal person owned or controlled by the investor, only if both the investor and the enterprise:

a) express their consent to submit to arbitration in accordance with the procedures established in this Chapter; and

b) the investor and, when the claim refers to loss or damage of a participation in a company of the other Party that is a legal person owned or controlled by the investor, the company, waive their right to start or continue any proceedings before an administrative or judicial tribunal in accordance with the Party's law, or other binding dispute resolution procedures, with respect to the measure of the disputing Party alleged to be in violation of Section B, which is aimed at the compensation of damages caused by the measure, arguing the breach of obligations other than those contained in Section B,except for the procedures in which the application of precautionary measures of a suspensive, declaratory or extraordinary nature is requested, which do not imply the payment of damages, in accordance with the legislation of the disputing Party.

8. The consent and waiver required by this Article must be expressed in writing, delivered to the disputing Party and included in the submission of the claim to arbitration.

9. The applicable arbitration rules will govern the arbitration, except to the extent modified by this Section.

10. A dispute may be submitted to arbitration provided that the investor has delivered to the Party that is a party to the dispute, the notification of intent referred to in Article 11.19, at least 180 days in advance and provided there is no after a period of more than 3 years from the date on which the investor or the company of the other Party that is a legal person owned by the investor or that is under its control, had for the first time or should have had knowledge for the first time instead of the facts that gave rise to the dispute.

11. If the investor, or a company owned or controlled by the investor, presents a claim that an obligation of Section B of this Chapter has been violated before a competent administrative or judicial court of the Party, or in In his case, before any other binding dispute resolution procedure, he may not submit to arbitration under Section C of this Chapter a claim regarding the allegedly infringing measure.

12. The responsibility of the disputing parties for the expenses derived from their participation in the arbitration must be established:

a) by the arbitral institution before which the dispute has been submitted, in accordance with its rules of arbitration procedure; either

b) in accordance with the rules of the arbitration procedure agreed by the investor and the Party, when applicable.

Article 11.21: Consent of the Party

1. Each Party gives its unconditional consent to submit a dispute to international arbitration in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section.

2. The consent referred to in paragraph 1 and the submission of a claim to arbitration by a disputing investor shall comply with the requirements indicated in:

a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, which require the written consent of the parties; and

b) Article II of the New York Convention, which requires a written agreement.

Article 11.22: Integration of the arbitral tribunal

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the arbitral tribunal will be made up of 3 arbitrators. Each disputing party shall appoint an arbitrator. The third arbitrator, who will be the President of the arbitral tribunal, will be appointed by agreement of the disputing parties.

2. The arbitrators referred to in paragraph 1 will have experience in international law and investment matters.

3. If an arbitral tribunal has not been formed within a period of 90 days from the date the claim was submitted to arbitration, either because one of the disputing parties has not appointed any of the members or not If there is an agreement on the appointment of the President of the tribunal, the Secretary General of ICSID, at the request of any of the disputing parties, will appoint, at his discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed. However, in the appointment of the President of the arbitral tribunal, the Secretary General of ICSID will ensure that he is not a national of any of the Parties.

Article 11.23: accumulation

1. Pursuant to the provisions of this Article, the Secretary General of ICSID may establish a consolidation tribunal in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The consolidation tribunal shall proceed in accordance with said Rules, except to the extent modified by this Section.

2. In the interest of a fair and efficient resolution, and unless it is determined that the interests of any of the disputing parties would be seriously prejudiced, a tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall consolidate the procedures:

a) when 2 or more investors related to the same investment submit a claim to arbitration in accordance with this Chapter; either

b) when 2 or more claims derived from common factual or legal considerations are submitted to arbitration.

3. At the request of a disputing party, a tribunal established pursuant to Article 11.22, pending a determination by a consolidation tribunal pursuant to paragraph 4, may order proceedings that have been commenced to be stayed.

4. A tribunal established under this Article, having heard the disputing parties, may determine that:

a) assumes jurisdiction, knows and resolves jointly, all or part of the claims; either

b) assumes jurisdiction, knows and resolves one or more of the claims, on the basis that this would contribute to the resolution of the others.

5. A tribunal established under Article 11.22 shall not have jurisdiction to hear and decide a claim, or part of a claim, in respect of which a consolidation tribunal has assumed jurisdiction.

6. A disputing party seeking accumulation determined under this Article may request the ICSID Secretary-General to establish a tribunal, specifying in its request:

a) the name and address of the disputing Party or of the disputing investors in respect of whom the accumulation order is sought;

b) the nature of the accumulation order requested; and

c) the grounds on which the request is based.

7. A disputing Party shall deliver a copy of its request to the other disputing Party or to any other disputing investor in respect of whom the accumulation order is sought.

8. Within 60 days from the date of receipt of the request, the ICSID Secretary General, having heard the disputing parties for whom a consolidation order is sought, shall establish a tribunal composed of three referees. One arbitrator shall be a national of the disputing Party and the other arbitrator shall be a national of the Party of the investors. A third arbitrator, who will serve as President of the arbitral tribunal, will not have the nationality of any of the disputing parties.

9. Where a disputing investor submitting a claim to arbitration under Article 11.20 has not been named in the joinder request, the disputing investor or the disputing Party may request the tribunal in writing to include the disputing investor in the order made pursuant to with paragraph 2. The disputing investor shall specify in its request:

a) the name and address of the disputing investor;

b) the nature of the accumulation order requested; and

c) the grounds on which the request is based.

10. A disputing investor referred to in paragraph 9 shall deliver a copy of its request to the other disputing parties named in a request made pursuant to paragraph 6.

Article 11.24: Notification

The disputing Party shall deliver to the other Party:

a) written notice of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration no later than 30 days after the date of submission of the claim to arbitration; and

b) copies of all the pleadings submitted in the arbitration proceedings.

Article 11.25: Participation of a Party

Upon written notice to the disputing parties, a Party may submit submissions to a tribunal on a question of interpretation of this Chapter.

Article 11.26: Documentation

1. A Party shall be entitled to receive from the disputing Party a copy of:

a) the evidence offered to the court; and

b) the written arguments presented by the disputing parties.

2. A Party receiving information pursuant to paragraph 1 shall treat the information as if it were a disputing Party.

Article 11.27: Seat of the arbitration procedure

Any arbitration under this Section shall, at the request of either disputing party, be conducted in a State that is a party to the New York Convention. For purposes of Article 1 of the New York Convention only, claims submitted to arbitration under this Section shall be deemed to arise out of a business relationship or transaction.

Article 11.28: Compensation

In an arbitration under this Section, a disputing Party shall not argue as a defense, counterclaim, right of set off or for any other reason that indemnification or other compensation, in respect of all or part of the alleged loss or damage, has been received. or shall be received by the investor, in accordance with an indemnity, guarantee or insurance contract.

Article 11.29: Applicable law

1. An arbitral tribunal established in accordance with this Section will decide the controversies that are submitted to its consideration, in accordance with this Agreement and with the applicable norms of international law.

2. An interpretation by the Commission of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on any court established pursuant to this Section.

Article 11.30: Interpretation of annexes

1. When one of the Parties alleges as a defense that a measure allegedly in violation falls within the scope of a reservation or exception set forth in Annex I (Non-conforming Measures), Annex II (Future Measures), Annex IV (Exceptions to the treatment of most favored) or Annex V (Activities reserved to the State), at the request of the disputing Party, the court will request the Commission an interpretation on that matter. The Commission, within a period of 60 days from the delivery of the request, will submit its interpretation to the court in writing.

2. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 11.29, the Commission's interpretation, submitted pursuant to paragraph 1, shall be binding on the court. If the Commission does not submit an interpretation within the 60-day period, the court will decide the matter.

Article 11.31: Awards and enforcement

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, an arbitral award that determines that a Party has failed to comply with its obligations under this Chapter, may only award separately or in combination:

a) pecuniary damages and any applicable interest; either

b) restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the disputing Party may pay pecuniary damages, plus the applicable interest, instead of the restitution.

A court may also award costs and attorneys' fees in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, when the claim is filed on behalf of a company:

a) an award granting restitution of property will provide that restitution be granted to the enterprise in the territory of the disputing Party;

b) an award awarding pecuniary damages and any applicable interest, will provide that the sum be paid to the company in the territory of the disputing Party; and

c) an award will provide that it be rendered without prejudice to any right that any person may have regarding reparation under applicable domestic law.

3. Arbitration awards will be final and binding only between the disputing parties and only with respect to the particular case.

4. The arbitral award will be public, unless the disputing parties agree otherwise.

5. An arbitral tribunal may not order the payment of punitive damages.

6. Each Party shall adopt in its territory the necessary measures for the effective enforcement of the awards, in accordance with the provisions of this Article, and shall facilitate the enforcement of any award issued in a proceeding to which it is a party.

7. A disputing investor may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award pursuant to the ICSID Convention or the New York Convention, if both Parties are party to such instruments.

8. A disputing party may not enforce a final award until:

a) in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID Convention:

i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered, and none of the disputing parties has requested its review or annulment; either

ii) the review or annulment proceedings have been concluded; and

b) in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID Additional Facility, the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or any other arbitration rules previously agreed upon by the disputing parties:

i) 3 months have elapsed from the date the award was rendered, and none of the disputing parties has commenced a proceeding to review, revoke or annul the award; either

ii) a court has authorized or dismissed an application to review, revoke or annul the award and there is no further appeal.

9. A Party may not initiate proceedings under Chapter XV (Dispute Settlement) for a dispute relating to the violation of the rights of an investor, unless the other Party breaches or does not abide by the award rendered in a dispute that said investor submitted pursuant to this Section. In that case, the arbitral tribunal established pursuant to Chapter XV (Dispute Settlement) may, at the request of the Party whose investor was a party to the dispute, issue:

a) a determination that the breach or contempt of the final award is inconsistent with the obligations of this Chapter; and

b) a recommendation that the other Party comply with or abide by the final award.

Article 11.32: Expert opinions

Without prejudice to the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the court, at the request of a disputing party, or on its own initiative unless the disputing parties do not accept it, may appoint one or more experts to rule in writing on any matter of fact relating to environmental, health, safety, or other scientific matters that has been raised by a disputing party in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.

Article 11.33: Provisional protection measures

An arbitral tribunal may order a provisional measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party or to ensure that the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal is fully effective, including an order to preserve evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party, or to protect the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. An arbitral tribunal may not order the seizure or the suspension of the application of the presumably infringing measure referred to in Article 11.20. For purposes of this paragraph, an order includes a recommendation.

Article 11.34: Transparency of arbitration proceedings

1. Any disputing party may make public any documentation submitted to, or issued by, a tribunal established pursuant to this Section, including an award, provided that it protects:

a) the confidential information of the company;

b) privileged information or in any other way protected from disclosure under the terms of the applicable legislation of any of the Parties; and

c) as appropriate, the information that the disputing party must protect in accordance with the relevant arbitration rules.

2. Each of the Parties may share with government officials at the federal or national, state or regional, or municipal or local level, all relevant documentation that has been generated in the course of a dispute established in accordance with this Section, including information considered confidential.

In addition, the disputing parties may disclose documents submitted to or issued by a tribunal established pursuant to this Section to other persons associated with the arbitration proceedings, as they deem necessary for the preparation of their cases, provided they ensure that such persons will protect the confidential information contained in such documents.

Article 11.35: Exceptions

1. Notwithstanding the application or non-application of the dispute settlement provisions of this Section or of Chapter XV (Dispute Settlement) to other actions taken by a Party pursuant to Article 18.2 (National Security), the resolution of a Party that prohibits or restricts the acquisition of an investment in its territory by an investor of the other Party or its investment, in accordance with that Article, shall not be subject to such provisions.

2. In the case of Mexico, the provisions relating to the dispute resolution mechanism set forth in this Section and in Chapter XV (Dispute Resolution) shall not apply to a decision of the National Foreign Investment Commission resulting from the compliant evaluation. to the provisions of Annex I (Non-conforming Measures), reservation IMF-4, established in Mexico's Schedule, regarding whether or not to allow an acquisition that is subject to said evaluation.

 

 

Annex to Article 11.19

Notification

1. The notice of intent referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 11.19 of this Chapter shall be delivered:

a) in the case of Mexico, at the General Directorate of Negotiation Legal Consulting of the Ministry of Economy or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, at the General Directorate for International Economic Affairs, Competition and Private Investment of the Ministry of Economy and Finance or its successor.

Any change in relation to the entities indicated above, will be published, in the case of Mexico, in the Official Gazette of the Federation, and in the case of Peru, in the Official Gazette El Peruano; and will be communicated by the corresponding Party to the other Party through a diplomatic note.

2. The disputing investor will submit the notification of intent referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 11.19 of this Chapter, in Spanish.

3. In order to facilitate the consultation process, the investor will present, along with the notification referred to in the preceding paragraphs, a copy of the following documents:

a) when the investor is a national, passport or other official proof of nationality of the investor, or when the claim is made by an investor who is a company of that Party, articles of incorporation or any other proof of incorporation or organization under the law of the non-disputing Party;

b) when an investor of a Party intends to submit a claim to arbitration on behalf of a company of the other Party that is a legal person owned or controlled by the investor:

i) Articles of Incorporation or any other evidence of constitution or organization under the law of the disputing Party; and

ii) document proving that the disputing investor owns or controls the company; and

c) where appropriate, power of attorney from the legal representative or the document containing sufficient power to act on behalf of the disputing investor.

 

 

CHAPTER XII

FINANCIAL SERVICES

Article 12.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

competent authority: the authority of each Party indicated in the Annex to Article 12.1;

business: any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit and whether privately or governmental owned, including partnerships, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, or other associations;

enterprise of a Party: an enterprise incorporated or organized under the law of a Party;

State enterprise: an enterprise owned or controlled by the State of a Party, through ownership rights;

public entity: a central bank or monetary authority of a Party, or an entity owned or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in performing governmental, regulatory or supervisory functions, or conducting activities for governmental purposes, excluding entities primarily engaged in the supply of financial services on commercial terms;

financial institution: any financial intermediary or an enterprise that is authorized to do business and is regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the laws of the Party in whose territory it was incorporated;

financial institution of the other Party: a financial institution incorporated in the territory of a Party, owned or controlled by persons of the other Party;

investment:

a) shares and corporate quotas and any other form of participation, in any proportion, in a financial institution including the investment that it makes in a company that provides complementary or auxiliary services for the fulfillment of its corporate purpose, which grants the right to owner to participate in the income or profits thereof; and

b) a stake in a financial institution, including the investment that it makes in a company that provides complementary or auxiliary services for the fulfillment of its corporate purpose, which grants the owner the right to participate in the corporate assets of that financial institution in a settlement;

however, it will not be understood by investment:

c) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:

i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a person in the territory of a Party to a company in the territory of the other Party; either

ii) the granting of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing;

d) any other pecuniary claim that does not entail the types of rights provided in subsections (a) and (b); neither

e) a loan granted by a financial institution or a debt security owned by a financial institution, except in the case of a loan granted to a financial institution or a debt security issued by a financial institution, which is treated as capital for regulatory effects by the Party in whose territory the financial institution is incorporated;

investment of an investor of a Party: the investment owned by an investor of a Party, or under its direct or indirect control, in the territory of the other Party;

non-Party investment: the investment of an investor that is not an investor of a Party;

investor of a Party: a Party, a State enterprise of the Party, or a person of that Party that intends to make, is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party;

disputing investor: a person who files a claim in accordance with the provisions of Section C of Chapter XI (Investment);

new financial service: a financial service not provided in the territory of a Party that is provided in the territory of the other Party, including any new form of distribution of a financial service or sale of a financial product that is not sold in the territory from one side;

Self-regulatory bodies: any non-governmental entity, including any stock exchange or financial derivatives exchange, clearing house or any other association or organization that exercises its own or delegated regulatory or supervisory authority over financial institutions or financial service providers cross-border;

person: a national or an enterprise of a Party, not including branches;

cross-border provision of financial services or cross-border trade in financial services: the provision of a financial service:

a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

b) in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a person of the other Party; either

c) by a person of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a financial service in the territory of a Party by an investment in that territory;

financial service provider of a Party: a person of a Party who is engaged in the business of providing any financial service in the territory of that Party;

cross-border financial service provider of a Party: a person of a Party that is engaged in the business of providing financial services in the territory of the Party and whose purpose is to provide or provides financial services through the cross-border provision of such services; and

financial service: any service of a financial nature offered by a financial service provider of a Party. Financial services comprise the following activities:

A. Insurance and insurance-related services:

1. direct insurance, including coinsurance;

a) life insurance;

b) non-life insurance;

2. reinsurance and retrocession;

3. insurance intermediation activities, for example those of insurance brokers and agents; and

4. Ancillary insurance services, such as consulting, actuarial, risk assessment, and loss compensation services.

B. Banking and other financial services, excluding insurance:

1. acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

2. Loans of all kinds, including personal loans, mortgage loans, factoring, and commercial transaction financing;

3. leasing services;

4. all payment and money transfer services, including credit, debit and similar cards, traveler's checks and bank drafts;

5. guarantees and commitments;

6. trading for own account or for clients, whether on the stock market, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, of the following:

a) money market instruments, including checks, bills and certificates of deposit;

b) currencies;

c) derivative financial products, including, but not limited to, futures and options;

d) currency and money market instruments, eg swaps and forward interest rate agreements;

e) transferable securities; and

f) other negotiable financial instruments and assets, including metal for minting coins;

7. participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including subscription and placement as agents (publicly or privately) and the provision of services related to those issues;

8. exchange brokerage;

9. asset management, for example, cash or portfolio management, collective investment management in all its forms, pension fund management, depository and custody services, and trust services;

10. payment and clearing services in respect of financial assets, including securities, derivative products and other negotiable instruments;

11. provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, by providers of other financial services; and

12. advisory and brokerage services and other ancillary services in respect of any of the activities listed in paragraphs 1 to 11, including credit reporting and analysis, investment and portfolio research and advice, and acquisition and investment advice corporate restructuring and strategy.

Article 12.2: Scope of application and extent of obligations

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

a) financial institutions of the other Party;

b) cross-border trade in financial services; and

c) investors of the other Party and investments of those investors in financial institutions in the territory of the Party, as well as their investments in companies that provide complementary or auxiliary services for the fulfillment of their corporate purpose.

2. This Chapter does not apply to:

a) Activities or services that are part of public retirement or retirement plans, or public social security systems;

b) the use of financial resources owned by the other Party; neither

c) other financial activities or services on behalf of the Party or its public entities or with its guarantee.

3. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Chapter and any other provision of this Agreement, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 12.3: Self-regulatory bodies

Where a Party requires that a financial institution or cross-border financial service provider of the other Party be a member of, participate in, or have access to a self-regulatory body to offer a financial service in or to its territory, the Party shall ensure that such body complies with the obligations of this Chapter.

Article 12.4: Right of establishment

1. The Parties recognize the principle that investors of one Party should be allowed to establish a financial institution in the territory of the other Party, through any of the modalities of establishment and operation that its legislation allows.

2. Each Party may impose, at the time of the establishment of a financial institution, terms and conditions that are consistent with Article 12.6.

Article 12.5: Cross-border trade1

1. Each Party shall permit persons located in its territory and its nationals, wherever located, to purchase financial services from cross-border financial service providers of the other Party located in the territory of that other Party. This does not oblige a Party to allow such cross-border financial service providers to advertise or conduct business by any means in its territory. The Parties may define what is "advertise" and "do business" for purposes of this obligation.

2. When a Party allows the provision of cross-border financial services and without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in financial services, the Party may require the registration of cross-border financial service providers of the other Party and of financial instruments.

Article 12.6: National treatment

1. Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants to its own investors, in similar circumstances, with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other forms of alienation of similar financial institutions and investments in similar financial institutions in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to financial institutions of the other Party and to investments of investors of the other Party in financial institutions treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to its own financial institutions and to investments of its own investors in similar financial institutions with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale or other forms of alienation of financial institutions and investments.

3. When a Party allows the cross-border provision of a financial service in accordance with Article 12.5, it shall grant to cross-border financial service providers of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that it grants to its own financial service providers in similar circumstances, with respect to to the provision of such service.

4. The treatment that a Party accords, in like circumstances, to financial institutions and cross-border financial service providers of the other Party, whether identical or different from that accorded to its own institutions or service providers, is consistent with paragraphs 1 through 3 , if it offers equal opportunities to compete.

5. Treatment by a Party, in like circumstances, does not provide equal opportunity to compete if it disadvantages financial institutions and cross-border financial service providers of the other Party in their ability to provide financial services, compared with the capacity of the Party's own financial institutions and financial service providers to provide those services.

Article 12.7: Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall grant financial institutions of the other Party, cross-border financial service providers of the other Party, investors of the other Party, and investments of such investors in financial institutions, treatment no less favorable than that granted, in similar circumstances, to financial institutions, cross-border financial service providers, investors and investments of such investors in similar financial institutions of a non-Party country.

Article 12.8: Recognition and harmonization

1. When applying the measures included in this Chapter, a Party may recognize the prudential measures of the other Party or of a non-Party country. Such recognition may be:

a) granted unilaterally;

b) achieved through harmonization or other means; or

c) granted based on an agreement or convention with the other Party or with a non-Party country.

2. The Party granting recognition of prudential measures in accordance with paragraph 1 shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party to demonstrate that there are circumstances whereby equivalent regulations exist or will exist, supervision and enforcement of the regulation and, if applicable, appropriate, procedures for sharing information between the Parties.

3. Where a Party grants prudential measures recognition in accordance with paragraph 1 and the circumstances provided for in paragraph 2 exist, that Party shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party to negotiate accession to the agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate an agreement or similar agreement.

Article 12.9: Exceptions

1. The provisions of this Chapter or Chapters X (Cross-border trade in services), XI (Investment) and XIII (Entry and temporary stay of business persons) shall not be construed as an impediment for a Party to adopt or maintain reasonable prudential measures. of a financial nature for reasons such as:

a) protect investors, depositors or other creditors, holders or beneficiaries of policies or creditors of fiduciary obligations in charge of a financial institution or a provider of cross-border financial services;

b) maintain the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers; and

c) ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system of that Party.

2. The provisions of this Chapter or Chapters X (Cross-border trade in services), XI (Investment) and XIII (Entry and temporary stay of business persons) do not apply to non-discriminatory measures of general application adopted by a public entity. in conducting monetary policies or credit policies, or exchange policies. This paragraph shall not affect any Party's obligations under Articles 12.17 or 11.13 (Performance Requirements).

3. Notwithstanding Article 12.17, a Party may prevent or limit transfers from a cross-border financial institution or financial service provider to, or for the benefit of, an affiliate or person related to that institution or financial service provider. service provider, through the fair and non-discriminatory application of measures related to maintaining the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply without prejudice to any other provision of this Agreement that allows a Party to restrict transfers.

4. Article 12.6 shall not apply to the grant of exclusive rights by a Party to a financial institution to provide one of the financial services referred to in paragraph 2(a) of Article 12.2.

Article 12.10: Transparency

1. In addition to the provisions of Article 16.3 (Publication), each Party shall ensure that any measure it adopts on matters related to this Chapter is officially published or timely disclosed to the addressees thereof by some other written means.

2. The competent authorities of each Party shall make available to the interested parties all information regarding the requirements to fill out and submit an application for the provision of financial services.

3. At the request of the applicant, the competent authority will inform him about the status of his application. When that authority requires additional information from the applicant, it will communicate it without undue delay.

4. Each competent authority will issue, within a period of 180 days, an administrative resolution regarding a complete application related to the provision of a financial service, presented by an investor in a financial institution, by a financial institution or by a service provider. cross-border financial services of the other Party. The authority will communicate the resolution to the interested party without delay. The application will not be considered complete until all relevant hearings are held and all necessary information is received. When it is not feasible to issue a resolution within 180 days, the competent authority will notify the interested party without undue delay and will subsequently seek to issue the resolution within a reasonable period of time.

5. Nothing in this Chapter requires a Party to disclose or allow access to:

a) information relating to the financial affairs and accounts of individual clients of financial institutions or of cross-border financial service providers; either

b) any confidential information whose disclosure could hinder the application of current regulations, be contrary to the public interest or harm the legitimate commercial interests of a specific person.

6. Each competent authority shall maintain or establish one or more consultation centers to respond in writing as soon as possible to all reasonable questions submitted in writing by interested persons regarding the measures of general application adopted by each Party in relation to this Chapter.

Article 12.11: Financial Services Committee

1. The Parties establish the Financial Services Committee, made up of the competent authorities of each Party. Likewise, representatives of other institutions may participate when the competent authorities deem it appropriate.

2. The Committee:

a) supervise the application of this Chapter and its further development;

b) will consider the aspects related to financial services that are presented to it by any Party;

c) participate in dispute resolution procedures in accordance with the provisions of Articles 12.19 and 12.20; and

d) Facilitate the exchange of information between national supervisory authorities and cooperate in matters of advice on prudential regulation, seeking the harmonization of regulatory regulatory frameworks, as well as other policies when deemed appropriate.

3. The Committee will meet at least once a year to evaluate the operation of this Chapter.

Article 12.12: Queries

1. Either Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter related to this Agreement that affects financial services and the other Party will consider such request. The consulting Parties shall inform the Committee of the results of their consultations during the meetings it holds.

2. Officials from the competent authorities of the Parties will participate in the consultations provided for in this Article.

3. Each Party may request that the competent authorities of the other Party intervene in the consultations carried out in accordance with this Article, to discuss the measures of general application of that other Party that may affect the operations of financial institutions or service providers. cross-border financial services in the territory of the Party that requested the consultation.

4. The provisions of this Article shall not be interpreted in the sense of obliging the competent authorities that intervene in the consultations in accordance with paragraph 3, to disclose information or to act in a way that could interfere in particular matters regarding regulation, supervision, administration or application of measures.

5. In cases where, for supervisory purposes, a Party needs information on a financial institution in the territory of the other Party or on cross-border financial service providers in the territory of the other Party, the Party may resort to the authority responsible authority in the territory of that other Party to request the information.

Article 12.13: New financial services

Each Party will allow a financial institution of the other Party to provide any new financial services of a type similar to those that that other Party allows its financial institutions to provide, in accordance with its legislation. The Party may decide the institutional and legal modality through which said service is offered and may require authorization for its provision. When said authorization is required, the respective resolution will be issued within a reasonable period of time and authorization may only be denied for prudential reasons.

Article 12.14: Data processing

Subject to prior authorization from the relevant regulator, when required, each Party will allow financial institutions of the other Party to transfer information within or outside the territory of the Party, using any of the means authorized by it, for processing, when necessary to carry out the ordinary business activities of those institutions.

Article 12.15: Senior business management and boards of directors

1. Neither Party may compel financial institutions of the other Party to hire personnel of any particular nationality to fill senior business management positions or other essential positions.

2. Neither Party may require that the board of directors or the board of directors of a financial institution of the other Party be composed of a greater than simple majority of nationals of that Party, residents of its territory, or a combination of both.

Article 12.16: denial of benefits

A Party may deny, in whole or in part, the benefits derived from this Chapter to a financial institution of the other Party or to a cross-border financial service provider of the other Party, prior notification and consultation, in accordance with Articles 12.10 and 12.12. , when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out important business activities or substantive commercial operations in the territory of the other Party or that, in accordance with the current legislation of each Party, is owned or under control of persons from a non-Party country.

Article 12.17: Transfers

1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to an investment of an investor of the other Party to be made freely and without delay, to and from its territory.

2. Each Party shall allow transfers to be made in a freely convertible currency at the prevailing market exchange rate on the date of the transfer. Such transfers will include:

a) the initial capital and additional amounts to maintain or increase an investment;

b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration payments, technical assistance payments and other remuneration, as well as other sums derived from the investment;

c) products derived from the total or partial sale of the investment, or from the total or partial liquidation of the investment;

d) payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or its investment is a party, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;

e) payments derived from compensation for expropriation; and

f) Payments derived from the application of the provisions relating to the settlement of disputes.

3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, it will be considered that the transfers were made without delay when they have been carried out within the period normally necessary to carry out the transfer.

4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, a Party may prevent a transfer through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws in the following cases:

a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

b) issue, trade or operations of securities;

c) criminal or administrative offences;

d) reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments; either

e) guarantee of compliance with rulings in contentious proceedings.

5. In the event of a fundamental imbalance in the balance of payments or a threat to it, each Party may temporarily restrict transfers, provided that Party applies measures or a program that:

a) is compatible with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

b) does not exceed what is necessary to deal with the circumstances mentioned in the previous paragraph;

c) is temporary and is removed as soon as conditions permit;

d) is promptly notified to the other Party; and

e) is fair, non-discriminatory and in good faith.

Article 12.18: Expropriation and compensation

1. No Party shall expropriate or nationalize an investment, directly or indirectly, through measures equivalent to expropriation or nationalization (hereinafter referred to as "expropriation"), unless it is:

a) for public purposes2 ;

b) on non-discriminatory grounds;

c) in accordance with the principle of legality and in accordance with the minimum level of treatment; and

d) by payment of compensation in accordance with paragraph 2.

2. The compensation:

a) It will be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation took place. The fair market value will not reflect any change in value due to the expropriation having been publicly known in advance;

b) the valuation criteria will include the current value, the value of the assets, including the declared fiscal value of the property of tangible goods, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value;

c) will be paid without delay;

d) include interest at a reasonable commercial rate for the currency in which said payment is made, from the date of expropriation until the date of payment; and

e) It will be fully liquidable and freely transferable.

3. An investor whose investment is expropriated shall have the right, in accordance with the legislation of the Party that carried out the expropriation, to a prompt review of his case by a judicial authority or by any other competent authority and to an evaluation of his investment in accordance with the provisions established in this Article.

Article 12.19: Settlement of disputes between the Parties

1. In the terms in which this Article modifies it, Chapter XV (Dispute Settlement) applies to the settlement of disputes that arise between the Parties regarding this Chapter.

2. The Committee shall draw up by consensus a list of up to 10 individuals that includes up to 5 individuals from each Party, who have the necessary skills and dispositions to act as panelists in controversies related to this Chapter. The members of this list must, in addition to satisfying the requirements established in Chapter XV (Dispute Resolution), have specialized knowledge in matters of a financial nature or extensive experience derived from the exercise of responsibilities in the financial sector, or its regulation.

3. For the purposes of constituting the Panel, the list referred to in paragraph 2 shall be used, except that the disputing Parties agree that individuals not included in that list may be part of the Panel, provided they meet the requirements established in paragraph 2. The Chairperson of the Panel will always be chosen from that list.

4. In any dispute in which the Panel has found that a measure is incompatible with the obligations of this Agreement, when the suspension of benefits referred to in Chapter XV (Dispute Settlement) is applicable and the measure affects:

a) only to the financial services sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits only in that sector;

b) to the financial services sector and to any other sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits in the financial services sector that have an effect equivalent to the effect of that measure in the financial services sector; either

c) any sector other than financial services, the complaining Party may not suspend benefits in the financial services sector.

Article 12.20: Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of the other Party

1. Except as provided in this Article, claims filed by a disputing investor against a Party in relation to the obligations set forth in this Chapter, shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Section C of Chapter XI (Investment).

2. When the Party against which the claim is filed invokes any of the exceptions referred to in Article 12.9, the following procedure shall be observed:

a) The arbitral tribunal shall refer the matter to the Committee for its decision. The court may not proceed until it has received a decision from the Committee under the terms of this Article or 60 days have elapsed from the date of receipt by the Committee; and

b) once the matter has been received, the Committee will decide whether and to what degree, the exception of Article 12.9 invoked is a valid defense against the investor's claim and will transmit a copy of its decision to the arbitral tribunal and to the Commission. That decision will be binding on the court.

3. Each disputing Party shall take the necessary steps to ensure that the members of the arbitral tribunal have the knowledge or experience described in paragraph 2 of Article 12.19. The knowledge or experience of the private candidates regarding financial services will be taken into account to the extent possible in the case of the appointment of the arbitrator to preside over the arbitral tribunal.

Article 12.21: Non-conforming measures

1. Articles 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7 and 12.15 do not apply to:

a) any existing non-conforming measures that are maintained by a Party, as set out by that Party in the non-conforming measures contained in Section A of its Schedule to Annex VI;

b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subsection (a); either

c) a modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a), provided that said modification does not diminish the conformity of the measure as it was in force immediately before the modification. Non-conforming measures shall include measures with respect to which neither Party will increase the degree of non-conformity with those Articles as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall gradually liberalize, through future negotiations with each other, any non-conforming measure referred to in paragraph 1.

3. In the interpretation of a non-conforming measure, all the elements of the non-conforming measure will be considered.

4. Articles 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7 and 12.15 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in Section B of its Schedule to Annex VI.

5. When a Party has established, in Chapters X (Cross-border trade in services) and XI (Investment) of this Agreement, a reservation to Articles 10.4 (National Treatment), 11.3 (National Treatment), 10.5 (National Treatment plus favored nation), or 11.4 (Most Favored Nation Treatment), the reservation shall be understood to be made to Articles 12.6 and 12.7, as the case may be, to the extent that the measure, sector, subsector or activity specified in the non-conforming measure is covered by This chapter.

Article 12.22: Future jobs

The Commission will determine the procedures for establishing the obligations regarding access to markets or quantitative restrictions.

 

Annex to Article 12.1

competent authority

For the purposes of this Chapter, the competent authority of each Party shall be:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, the Ministry of Economy and Finance or its successor.

  

 

CHAPTER XIII

ENTRY AND TEMPORARY STAY OF BUSINESS PERSONS

Article 13.1: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

temporary entry: the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;

migratory measure: any law, regulation, procedure, provision, requirement or practice that affects the entry and stay of foreigners;

business person: the national of a Party who participates in the trade of goods or supply of services, or in investment activities in the other Party;

professional: the business person of a Party who carries out a specialized occupation that requires:

a) post secondary education1 , which requires 4 or more years of studies (or the equivalent of said degree), related to a specific area of ​​knowledge; and

b) the theoretical and practical application of said area;

technical professional: the business person of a Party who carries out a specialized occupation that requires:

a) Post-secondary 1 or technical education that requires between 1 and 4 years of study (or the equivalent of said degree), related to a specific area of ​​knowledge; and

b) the theoretical and practical application of said area.

Article 13.2: General principles

1. This Chapter reflects the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating entry and temporary stay in accordance with the provisions of the Annex to Article 13.4, according to the principle of reciprocity and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for entry and temporary stay, as well as guaranteeing border security and protecting the national labor force and permanent employment in any of the Parties.

2. Each Party shall expeditiously apply its measures relating to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with paragraph 1, to avoid undue delay or impairment in trade in goods and services, or in the conduct of investment activities included in this Chapter. this agreement.

Article 13.3: Area of ​​application

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures affecting the entry and temporary stay of nationals of a Party who enter the other Party for business purposes.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures related to nationality or citizenship, or permanent residence or employment.

3. This Chapter shall not prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry of nationals of the other Party to, or their temporary stay in, that Party, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity and ensure the orderly movement of natural persons through its borders, provided that such measures are not applied in such a way as to nullify or impair the benefits granted to the other Party in accordance with the terms of the categories provided in the Annex to Article 13.4.

4. The fact of requiring a visa for nationals will not be interpreted in the sense of nullifying or impairing the benefits granted to any specific category.

Article 13.4: Entry authorization and temporary stay

1. Each Party shall authorize the entry and temporary stay of business persons of the other Party in accordance with this Chapter, including the terms of the categories provided in the Annex to Article 13.4.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the amounts of the fees charged by its competent authorities for the processing of requests for entry and temporary stay of business persons of the other Party take into account the administrative costs involved in such processing.

Article 13.5: Provision of information

1. In addition to the provisions of Article 16.3 (Publication), each Party:

a) provide the other Party with the information that allows it to know the measures related to this Chapter; and

b) no later than 1 year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish and make public, explanatory material in a consolidated document relating to the requirements for entry and temporary stay under this Chapter.

2. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party, to the extent possible, will collect, maintain, and make known to the other Party, the information related to the authorization of the entry and temporary stay of persons of business of the other Party under this Chapter.

Article 13.6 : Committee on Entry and Temporary Stay

1. For the purposes of the implementation and operation of this Chapter, in accordance with Article 17.1 (Administrative Commission), the Committee for Entry and Temporary Stay is hereby established, which will meet at least once a year.

2. The functions of the Committee will be:

a) review the implementation and operation of this Chapter;

b) consider the development of additional measures aimed at facilitating the entry and temporary stay of business persons in accordance with the provisions of the Annex to Article 13.4-A;

c) improve the mutual understanding between the Parties on credentials and other aptitudes relevant to the entry and temporary stay of business persons in accordance with this Chapter;

d) present their conclusions and make recommendations to the Commission, including possible modifications or additions to this Chapter; and

e) carry out other functions delegated by the Commission, in accordance with Article 17.2 (Functions of the Administrative Commission).

Article 13.7: Dispute Resolution

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 15.4 (Consultations), a Party may not request consultations from the other Party with respect to a refusal to authorize the entry and temporary stay of business persons pursuant to this Chapter, except that:

a) the matter refers to a recurring practice; and

b) the affected business persons have exhausted the available administrative remedies applicable to this particular matter.

2. The remedies referred to in paragraph 1(b) shall be considered exhausted when the competent authority of a Party has not issued a final decision within 1 year from the date of initiation of an administrative proceeding, and the decision does not has been delayed for reasons attributable to the affected business persons.

Article 13.8: Relationship with other Chapters

1. Except as provided in this Chapter and in Chapters I (Initial Provisions), II (General Definitions), XV (Dispute Settlement), XVII (Agreement Administration), XIX (Final Provisions), and Articles 16.2 (Points of contact), 16.3 (Publication), 16.4 (Notification and provision of information) and 16.5 (Administrative procedures), nothing in this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose obligations or commitments with respect to other Chapters of this Agreement.

Article 13.9: Transparency in the application of regulations

1. In addition to Chapter XVI (Transparency), each Party shall maintain or establish adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from interested persons regarding the regulations relating to the temporary entry of business persons, in accordance with its laws and regulations. in terms of transparency.

2. Each Party shall, within a period of 30 working days, after considering that the application for temporary entry is complete in accordance with its laws and regulations, inform the applicant of the decision taken regarding his application. At the request of the applicant, the Party shall provide, without undue delay, information regarding the status of the application.

 

Annex to Article 13.4

Entry and temporary stay of business people2

Part I

Categories of entry and temporary stay of business persons

Section A: Business Visitors

1. Each of the Parties will authorize temporary entry to the business person who intends to carry out any business activity mentioned in Appendix 13.4-A, without requiring employment authorization, provided that, in addition to complying with existing immigration measures , applicable to temporary entry, display:

a) proof of nationality of a Party;

b) documentation that proves that they will undertake such activities and indicates the purpose of their entry; and

c) proof of the international character of the business activity that is proposed to be carried out and that the person does not intend to enter the local labor market.

2. Each of the Parties shall provide that a business person meets the requirements set forth in paragraph 1(c) when it demonstrates that:

a) the main source of remuneration for that activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; and

b) the main place of business and where most of the profits are obtained are outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry.

The Party will normally accept an oral statement as to the principal place of business and place of profit. When the Party requires additional verification, a letter from the employer stating such circumstances will normally be considered sufficient proof.

3. Each of the Parties will authorize temporary entry to the business person who intends to carry out any activity other than those indicated in Appendix 13.4-A, without requiring employment authorization, in terms no less favorable than those provided for in the existing provisions indicated in Part II of this Annex, provided that said business person also complies with the existing immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.

4. Neither Party may:

a) require as a condition to authorize temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1 or 3, prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests or other procedures of similar effect; either

b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1 or 3.

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this Section to obtain a visa or equivalent document prior to entry. Before imposing the visa requirement, the Party shall consult with the other Party, whose business persons would be affected, in order to avoid applying the requirement. When a visa requirement exists in one Party, at the request of the other Party, consultations will be held in order to eliminate it.

 

Section B: Traders and Investors

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and provide the corresponding documentation to the business person who intends to:

a) carry out an important commercial exchange of goods or services, between the territory of the Party of which he is a national and the territory of the Party to which he requests entry; either

b) establish, develop, or manage an investment in which the person or his company has committed, or is in the process of committing, a significant amount of capital and that exercises supervisory, executive functions or that involve essential skills, provided that the person also complies with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.

2. Neither Party may:

a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1; neither

b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.

3. Except as provided in paragraph 2, a Party may expeditiously review a business person's investment proposal to assess whether the investment complies with applicable legal provisions.

4. Except as provided in paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this Section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document.

 

Section C: Transfer of personnel within a company

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to a business person employed by a legally constituted company operating in its territory, who intends to act as a manager, executive, specialist, or qualified technical personnel in that company or in one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, provided that that person and that company comply with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.

2. Each Party may require the approval of the employment contract by the competent authority as a prerequisite for the authorization of temporary entry.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, each Party within a period of 2 years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall evaluate the possibility of relaxing or eliminating the requirement of approval of the employment contract required by the Authority. Labor Administration or by the competent authority.

4. No Party may impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.

5. For the purposes of this Section, it shall be understood as:

executive: person who is mainly in charge of the management of the organization and has wide freedom of action to make decisions;

specialist: person who possesses specialized knowledge of an advanced level essential for the establishment, provision of the service and/or possesses knowledge of the organization's private domain;

manager: person who is primarily in charge of the direction of the organization or one of its departments or subdivisions and supervises and controls the work of other supervisors, managers or professionals; and

Qualified technical personnel: person with a completed post-secondary education level who is the holder of diplomas, titles or certificates granted by a university or non-university higher education entity3 , who possesses all the necessary and valid documents for the exercise in accordance with the legislation of the Party from which it comes.

6. Except as provided in paragraph 2, a Party may require that a business person applying for temporary entry under this Section obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document. The Parties shall consult with each other in order to eliminate the visa or equivalent document requirements.

 

Section D: Professionals and Technical Professionals

1. The entry and temporary stay will be authorized, and the supporting documentation will be issued for a period established in Part II of this Annex, to the business person who intends to carry out activities as a professional or technical professional.4 , on the basis of a personal contract5 in the other Party, when the business person, in addition to complying with the immigration requirements applicable to entry and temporary stay, exhibits:

a) proof of nationality of a Party;

b) documentation proving that the person will undertake such activities and indicating the purpose of their entry; and

c) Documentation proving that said person has the relevant minimum academic requirements or alternative titles.

2. No Party:

a) impose or maintain quantitative restrictions on entry in accordance with paragraph 1;

b) will require other prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests or others of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. A Party may require a business person of the other Party who applies for entry and temporary stay under paragraph 1 to obtain a visa or equivalent document prior to such entry.

4. The Parties shall exchange information on the study programs of the professions taught in each Party, in order to facilitate the evaluation of applications for temporary entry.

5. In the case of the technical professional, the commitments of this Section will apply only to the technical professions listed in Appendix 13.4-D.

6. For greater certainty, the entry and temporary stay of a professional or technical professional does not imply the recognition of titles or certificates, nor the granting of licenses for professional practice.

 

 

Appendices to the Annex to Article 13.4

Appendix 13.4-A

business visitors

research and design

- Technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out research independently or for a company located in the territory of another Party.

Cultivation, manufacturing and production

- Owners of harvesting machines who supervise a group of operators admitted in accordance with the applicable provisions.

- Purchasing and production personnel, at the managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company located in the territory of another Party.

Commercialization

- Market researchers and analysts who carry out research or analysis independently or for a company located in the territory of another Party.

- Trade fair and promotional staff who attend trade conventions.

Sales

- Representatives and sales agents who place orders or negotiate contracts for goods and services for a company located in the territory of another Party, but who do not deliver the goods or provide the services.

- Buyers who make acquisitions for a company located in the territory of another Party.

Distribution

- Transport operators that carry out operations to transport goods or passengers to the territory of one Party from the territory of the other Party, or carry out cargo and transport operations of goods or passengers from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party, without carrying out unloading operations, in the territory of the other Party.

- Customs agents that provide advisory services with the purpose of facilitating the import or export of merchandise.

After sales services

- Installation, repair, maintenance and supervision personnel who have the essential specialized technical knowledge to comply with the contractual obligation of the seller; and that provides services, or trains workers to provide such services, pursuant to a warranty or other service contract in connection with the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company located outside the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, during the validity of the guarantee or service contract.

General services

- Professionals who carry out business activities at a professional level within the scope of Section D.

- Managerial and supervisory personnel involved in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

- Financial services personnel (insurance agents, banking personnel or investment brokers) involved in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

- Public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions.

- Tourism personnel (excursion and travel agents, tourist guides or travel operators) who attend or participate in conventions or conduct any excursion that has started in the territory of the other Party.

- Translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company located in the territory of the other Party.

- Kitchen staff (cooks and kitchen assistants) who attend or participate in gastronomic events or exhibitions, or carry out consultations with clients/business contacts.

- Providers of information technology and telecommunication services that attend meetings, seminars, or conferences; or carry out consultations with a business contact.

- Marketers and franchise developers who wish to offer their services in the territory of the other Party.

 

Appendix 13.4-D

technical professionals

Technical Professions:

1. Technical Professional in Advertising, Communication and Design

2. Technical Professional in Architecture and Interior Design

3. Technical Professional in Administration and Accounting

4. Technical Professional in Tourism and Gastronomy

5. Technical Professional in Systems, Computing and Informatics

6. Technical Professional in Engineering

7. Technical Health Professional (includes technicians in Nursing, Pharmacy and Physiotherapy)

8. Technical Professional in Construction

9. Electrical Technical Professional

10. Technical Professional in Industrial Production Processes

11. Technical Professional in Maintenance and Repair of Machinery and Equipment (includes maintenance and repair of all types of vehicles, ships and aircraft), as long as they are not part of the personnel that crews any ship or aircraft covered by the flag or insignia mexican merchant

Part II

Deadlines for the entry and temporary stay of business people

1. For purposes of entry and temporary stay pursuant to Section A of Part I, each Party shall authorize a stay of up to 183 days.

2. For purposes of entry and temporary stay in accordance with Sections B, C and D of Part I, both Parties will authorize a stay of up to 1 year, which can be extended as many times as necessary until completing a total term. 4 years, counted from the first renewal.

3. Notwithstanding what is stated in paragraph 2, in the case of Peru, business persons who are merchants or are in the process of committing an investment will be authorized a stay of up to 183 days.

 

 

CHAPTER XIV

MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF CERTIFICATES, TITLES AND/OR ACADEMIC DEGREES

Article 14.1: Relationship with other agreements

1. The Parties acknowledge:

a) the Regional Agreement for the Validation of Higher Education Studies, Titles and Diplomas in Latin America and the Caribbean, of 1974;

b) the 1990 Andrés Bello Agreement on Educational, Scientific, Technological and Cultural Integration; and

c) any other convention or agreement to which they are parties prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Notwithstanding what is established in paragraph 1, the Parties recognize the need to deepen the provisions related to the mutual recognition of certificates, titles and/or academic degrees established in said paragraph.

3. In case of incompatibility between the provisions of this Chapter and the conventions or agreements mentioned in paragraph 1, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.

Article 14.2: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

certificate: document that accredits having completed a partial or total period of studies of the corresponding professional or academic training. The certificate is issued by the university or by non-university higher education centers;

professional experience: effective and lawful exercise in any of the Parties of the profession in question;

academic degree: document issued by the competent authority in each of the Parties that certifies that the holder has completed Baccalaureate studies1 or university, Master's and/or Doctorate in universities and other authorized institutions, complying with specific academic standards;

Party of origin: the Party where the certificate, title and/or academic degree whose recognition is intended to be obtained in the receiving Party is issued;

Receiving Party: the Party where the recognition of the certificate, title and/or academic degree obtained in the Party of origin is requested;

pre-professional practices or student social service: the exercise of competencies, under the responsibility of a qualified professional, in accordance with the requirements of the Party where they are carried out;

aptitude test: an examination carried out by the competent authorities of the receiving Party, through which the applicant's aptitude to practice a profession in said Party and that he is a qualified professional in the Party of origin will be appreciated. This examination covers the professional knowledge of the applicant, the essential knowledge for the exercise of the profession and may include the ethics applicable to the activities in question. The modalities of the aptitude test will be established by the competent authorities of the receiving Party; and

title: document issued by the competent authority in each of the Parties that certifies that the holder has completed post-secondary studies at universities or non-university higher education centers2 meeting specific academic standards;

Article 14.3 : Scope of application

This Chapter shall apply to any person who has completed their studies in one of the Parties, regardless of their nationality, and who intends to practice a profession.3 , or continue post-secondary studies4 , in the receiving Party.

Article 14.4: Mutual recognition of certificates, titles and/or academic degrees

1. Except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 3, the receiving Party shall automatically recognize the certificates, titles and/or academic degrees obtained by the applicant in the Party of origin. To obtain said recognition, the applicant from the Party of origin must present the certificate, title and/or academic degree obtained in said Party.

2. When there is no reasonable equivalence, either due to a difference in the duration of the training5 or because the certificate, title and/or academic degree obtained in the Party of origin includes subjects that are substantially different from those covered by them in the receiving Party, the latter may require the applicant:

a) That they submit to an aptitude test on the branches of the profession that accredits the respective certificate, title and/or academic degree, when the training they have received includes subjects substantially different from those covered by them in the receiving Party.

b) That accredits a certain period of professional experience, when the difference between the duration of the training on which the application is based and the duration of the training required in the receiving Party, is greater than one year. In this case, the period of professional experience required will be at most:

i) double the missing study period; either

ii) equal to the missing training period, when this period corresponds to a pre-professional practice or student social service.

3. When the aptitude test established in paragraph 2(a) is not passed or when the period of professional experience cannot be accredited as established in paragraph 2(b), the validation of the certificate, title and/or respective academic degree before the competent authorities, carrying out the respective studies in universities or non-university higher education centers in the receiving Party.

4. When a profession of the Party of origin does not exist in the receiving Party, the competent authority of the latter may establish a sufficient affinity with the respective certificate, title and/or academic degree offered by universities or non-university higher education centers authorized by the competent authority of the receiving Party. Otherwise, the applicant may follow the revalidation process of the corresponding studies.

5. The certificates, titles and/or academic degrees obtained in the Party of origin will be recognized to continue studies in the receiving Party.

Article 14.5: Pre-professional practices or student social service

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 14.4, when the receiving Party requires pre-professional internships or student social service as a condition for professional practice, said Party shall recognize that this requirement has been met when the pre-professional internship or social service period between the Party of origin and the receiving Party are similar.

Article 14.6: Study abroad

Any national of a Party who has obtained in a non-Party country one or more certificates, titles and/or academic degrees may avail himself of the benefits of this Chapter if they have been recognized or validated by any of the Parties.

Article 14.7: Complementary measures

1. The competent authority of the receiving Party that makes access to a profession subordinate to the presentation of evidence relating to good repute or morality, or that suspends or prohibits the exercise of said profession in case of serious professional misconduct or criminal offense, will accept as sufficient proof for those applicants from the Party of origin who wish to practice said profession in its territory, the presentation of documents issued by competent authorities of the Party of origin that demonstrate compliance with such requirements.

2. When the documents referred to in paragraph 1 cannot be issued by the competent authorities of the Party of origin, they will be replaced by an affidavit or under protest to tell the truth that the interested party will make before a competent judicial or administrative authority or, in your case, before a notary or before a qualified professional body of the Party of origin in accordance with its national legislation.

3. When the competent authority of the receiving Party requires for access to a profession the presentation of a document related to physical or psychological health, said authority will accept that applicants from the Party of origin present a certification issued by a competent authority of said Party, which are equivalent to the certifications of the receiving Party.

4. The competent authority of the receiving Party may require that no more than 120 days have elapsed between the date of issuance of the documents or certifications contemplated in this Article and the time of their presentation.

Article 14.8: Facilitation

1. The receiving Party will accept, as means of proof of compliance with the conditions set forth in Article 14.4, the documents issued by the competent authorities of the Party of origin, which the applicant must present as support for his request for recognition of the certificate, Title and/or academic degree in question.

2. The procedure for analyzing the applications for recognition must be concluded in the shortest possible time and be the subject of a reasoned resolution from the competent authority of the receiving Party no later than 90 days after the presentation of the documentation. full of the applicant.

Article 14.9: Mutual Recognition Committee

1. The Parties will designate, within a period of 6 months following the entry into force of this Agreement, the competent authorities empowered to form the Committee, which will have the following functions:

a) facilitate the execution of the commitments established in this Chapter;

b) review at least once a year the procedures to validate the certificates, titles and/or academic degrees in each of the Parties;

c) define mechanisms to promote the exchange of study plans between universities, institutes and higher schools in force in each of the Parties; and

d) define mechanisms to promote the exchange of good practices in the development of educational systems in each of the Parties.

2. The Committee will adopt the necessary actions to facilitate the information related to the recognition of certificates, titles and/or academic degrees, and those related to the conditions and requirements necessary for professional practice. To carry out this task, it may resort to existing information networks and, if necessary, to the appropriate professional associations or organizations. Likewise, it will adopt the necessary initiatives to guarantee the development and coordination of the process of gathering the pertinent information.

 

 

CHAPTER XV

DISPUTE RESOLUTION

Section A: Dispute Resolution

 

Article 15.1: Cooperation

The Parties will at all times endeavor to reach an agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement and will make every effort, through cooperation, consultation or otherwise, to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that could affect its operation.

Article 15.2: Area of ​​application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the prevention or settlement of disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement, or where a Party considers that :

a) an existing or proposed measure of another Party is or may be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement;

b) the other Party has in any way breached the obligations of this Agreement; either

c) the measure of the other Party could cause nullification or impairment within the meaning of the Annex to Article 15.2.

Article 15.3: Choice of the forum

1. Any dispute arising in connection with this Agreement or in connection with the WTO Agreement may be resolved in one or the other forum, at the choice of the complaining Party.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested the establishment of a Panel pursuant to Article 15.6, or a panel pursuant to Article 6 of the Understanding Concerning Rules and Procedures Governing WTO Dispute Settlement , the selected forum will be exclusive of the other.

Article 15.4 : Consultations

1. A Party may request in writing to the other Party consultations regarding any current or proposed measure, or regarding any other matter that it considers could affect the application of this Agreement. If a Party requests consultations, the consulted Party shall respond within 10 days of receipt of that request and enter into consultations in good faith. In the case of perishable goods, the term to respond to the inquiry request will be 5 days after receipt.

2. The consulting Party shall deliver the request to the consulted Party and explain the reasons for its request, including the identification of the current or proposed measure or other matter that it considers could affect the application of this Agreement, as well as an indication of the grounds. legal claims.

3. The Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution. During consultations, each Party:

a) provide sufficient information to permit a full examination of how the current or proposed measure, or any other matter, may affect the operation and application of this Agreement; and

b) will give the confidential information exchanged in the consultations the same treatment as that granted by the Party that provided it.

4. Consultations may be carried out in person or by any technological means available to the Parties. If they are carried out in person, the consultations will take place in the capital of the consulted Party, unless both Parties agree otherwise.

5. In consultations pursuant to this Article, the consulting Party may request the consulted Party to make available to it personnel from its government agencies or other regulatory entities that have knowledge of the subject matter of the consultations.

6. The consultation period shall not exceed 30 days following receipt of the consultation request, unless both Parties decide to modify said period. For cases of perishable goods, the consultation period shall not exceed 15 days following receipt of the request for consultations, unless both Parties decide to modify said period.

7. If the consulted Party does not respond to the request for consultations or these are not carried out within the terms established in this Article, the consulting Party may directly request the intervention of the Commission or the establishment of a Panel.

8. Direct consultations and negotiations shall not prejudice the rights of the Parties in other forums.

Article 15.5: Intervention of the Administrative Commission

1. If the Parties fail to resolve the matter within the period established in Article 15.4, the Party that has requested the consultations may request the meeting of the Commission in writing.

2. The consulting Party may also request in writing that the Commission meet when consultations have been carried out in accordance with Chapters VII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and VIII (Technical Barriers to Trade), provided that such consultations have been carried out in accordance with the provisions of Article 15.4.

3. The consulting Party shall notify the request to the other Party, and explain the reasons for its request, including identification of the current or proposed measure or other matter in question, and an indication of the legal grounds for the claim.

4. Unless the Parties decide on a different term, the Commission must meet within 10 days of delivery of the request and will try to resolve the dispute as soon as possible. In order to help the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, the Commission may:

a) convene technical advisers or create the working groups on the matter that it deems necessary;

b) resort to good offices, conciliation or mediation or other dispute resolution procedures; either

c) make recommendations.

5. Unless it decides otherwise, the Commission will accumulate 2 or more procedures that it hears under this Article, related to the same measure or matter. The Commission may accumulate 2 or more procedures referring to other matters that it hears in accordance with this Article, when it deems appropriate to examine them jointly.

6. Either Party may request the establishment of a Panel if the Commission fails to resolve the dispute:

a) within 30 days of the meeting referred to in paragraph 4;

b) within 20 days after the meeting referred to in paragraph 4, in the case of perishable products;

c) within 30 days of the day the Commission met to address the most recent matter submitted to it, when several proceedings have been accumulated pursuant to paragraph 5; either

d) in any other period that the Parties agree.

Article 15.6: Application for the establishment of the Panel

1. Once the period for carrying out consultations has expired, or, if applicable, for the meeting of the Commission, any of the Parties may request in writing the establishment of a Panel, having to identify the measure or other issue that concerned and indicate the reasons on which you base your request and the legal grounds of the claim.

2. On the date of receipt of the application, the Panel will be considered established.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Panel will be composed and perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Model Rules of Procedure.

4. The Panel may not be established to examine a proposed measure.

Article 15.7: List of panelists

1. No later than 6 months after the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall integrate and maintain an indicative list of up to 5 national individuals who have the necessary aptitude and disposition to be a panelist in disputes pursuant to This chapter. These lists will be called "Mexico Panelists List" and "Peru Panelists List". The lists and their modifications will be immediately communicated to the other Party.

2. No later than 6 months after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will form by mutual agreement and will keep an indicative list of 5 individuals who are not nationals of the Parties and who have the necessary aptitude and disposition to be a panelist. This list will be called "List of Panelists from Third Countries". The members of the list will be appointed by consensus for periods of 3 years and may be automatically reelected unless the Parties agree otherwise.

3. The Parties, by mutual agreement, may replace or include panelists in the "List of Panelists from Third Countries".

4. The Parties may use the indicative lists even when they have not been completed with the number of members established in paragraphs 1 and 2.

Article 15.8: Qualities of Panel members

1. All members of the Panel shall:

a) have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this Agreement or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;

b) be selected strictly based on their objectivity, impartiality, reliability and good judgment;

c) be independent, have no relationship with any of the Parties and not receive instructions from them; and

d) comply with the Code of Conduct approved by the Commission.

2. The individuals who have intervened in the consultations or in the meeting of the Commission in a controversy, may not be members of the Panel established to resolve the same controversy.

Article 15.9: Selection of Panel members

1. The Panel will be made up of 3 members. The Parties will apply the following procedures in the selection of Panel members:

a) Within 15 days of delivery of the request for the establishment of the Panel, each Party must designate its panelist. If one of the Parties does not designate it within the previously established period, the Secretary General of ALADI, at the request of any of the Parties, will designate it within 10 days following said request;

b) The Parties will appoint the third panelist, who will be the Chairman of the Panel, within 15 days following the appointment or selection of the second panelist. If the Parties do not reach an agreement regarding the appointment of the President within the previously established period, the Secretary General of ALADI, at the request of any of the Parties, will designate him within 10 days following said request;

c) The selection made by the Secretary General of ALADI referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) must be carried out by lottery from the indicative lists referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 15.7, as appropriate, or failing that, it will choose them from the indicative list provided for in the Understanding Related to the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of WTO Disputes; and

d) each Party to the dispute shall endeavor to select panelists who have relevant experience in the subject matter of the dispute.

2. If a Party considers that a panelist violates the Code of Conduct, the Parties to the dispute shall consult and if they agree, the panelist shall be removed and a new panelist shall be appointed in accordance with this Article.

Article 15.10: Rules of procedure

1. Within the 6 months following the entry into force of this Agreement, the Commission will adopt the Model Rules of Procedure that will guarantee:

a) the right, at least, to a hearing before the Panel;

b) the opportunity for each Party to present initial and counter arguments in writing; and

c) that all the writings and communications with the Panel, the hearings before the Panel, the deliberations and the Preliminary Report, are confidential.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the procedure before the Panel will be followed in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure.

3. The Commission may modify the Model Rules of Procedure in accordance with the powers set forth in Article 17.2 (Functions of the Administrative Commission).

4. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within 20 days of the date of delivery of the request for the establishment of the Panel, the terms of reference of the Panel shall be:

"To examine, in light of the applicable provisions of the Agreement, the matter submitted in the request for the establishment of the Panel and issue the conclusions, determinations and recommendations as provided in Articles 15.12 and 15.13."

5. If the complaining Party considers that a matter has caused nullification or impairment of benefits, the terms of reference must indicate so.

6. When a Party requests that the Panel formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse trade effects generated by the measure adopted by the other Party, the terms of reference must indicate so.

Article 15.11: Powers of the Panel

1. At the request of a Party, or on its own initiative, the Panel may gather information and technical advice from persons or technical groups that it deems pertinent.

2. The technical or advisory group will be selected by the Panel from among highly qualified independent advisors or experts in scientific or technical matters, in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure.

3. Before the Panel requests the advice referred to in paragraph 1, it must notify the Parties of its intention to request such advice, establishing an adequate term for the Parties to formulate the observations they deem appropriate.

4. The Panel shall notify the Parties of any information or advice referred to in paragraph 1, establishing a term for them to formulate their comments.

5. If the Panel takes into account the information or advice requested under paragraph 1 for the preparation of its report, it must also take into account all the observations and comments made by the Parties in this regard.

Article 15.12: Preliminary report

1. The Panel shall base its Preliminary Report on the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the arguments and submissions submitted by the Parties, and any information it has received pursuant to Article 15.11.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within 90 days following the appointment of the last panelist, and in the case of perishable goods within 45 days, the Panel will submit to the Parties a Preliminary Report that will contain:

a) findings of fact, including any resulting from a request under paragraph 6 of Article 15.10;

b) the determination of whether the measure in question is or may be inconsistent with the obligations under this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the Annex to Article 15.2, or any other determination requested in the terms of reference; and

c) its recommendations, when any, for the solution of the dispute.

3. The panelists will be able to formulate particular votes on questions regarding which there is no unanimous decision.

4. The Parties may make observations or request clarifications in writing from the Panel on the Preliminary Report within 15 days of its presentation.

5. In this case and after examining the written observations, the Panel may, ex officio or at the request of any Party:

a) carry out any diligence it deems appropriate; and

b) reconsider or correct its Preliminary Report.

Article 15.13: Final report

1. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the Panel shall base its Final Report on the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the submissions and arguments of the Parties, any information submitted to it pursuant to Article 15.11, and any comments submitted. by the Parties under Article 15.12.

2. If requested by either Party, the Panel may make recommendations to implement its decision.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, within 120 days of the selection of the last member of the Panel, and 80 days in the case of perishable goods, the Panel will present to the Parties a Final Report and, if applicable, the individual votes on issues for which there has not been a unanimous decision. Said report will contain:

a) the conclusions of fact and law;

b) its determination as to whether a Party has breached its obligations under this Agreement, or has caused nullification or impairment within the meaning of the Annex to Article 15.2 or any other determination requested in the terms of reference;

c) its recommendations for the implementation of its decision, if either Party has requested it; and

d) if requested, its conclusions regarding the degree of adverse trade effects caused by the measure imposed by the Party that breached its obligations under this Agreement, or by the measure that has caused nullification or impairment within the meaning of of the Annex to Article 15.2.

4. The Final Report must be adopted by consensus or, failing that, by the majority of Panel members. The Final Report may be subject to corrections or clarifications of form, in accordance with paragraph 6 of this Article.

5. No Panel may reveal the identity of the panelists who have voted with the majority or the minority.

6. The Parties may request in writing from the Panel only corrections or clarifications regarding the Final Report within 10 days following its presentation. The Panel must respond to such request within 20 days following its presentation, sending when appropriate the clarifications and the corrected version of the report that will constitute the Final Report.

7. The Final Report of the Panel will be published within 15 days of its communication to the Parties, unless both Parties decide otherwise and subject to the protection of confidential information.

Article 15.14: Compliance with the Final Report

1. Once the Final Report of the Panel has been notified in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 15.13, the Parties may agree on the solution of the dispute, which will normally be adjusted to the determinations and recommendations that, if applicable, the Panel formulates.

2. If in its Final Report the Panel determines that a Party's measure is inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement, or has caused nullification or impairment within the meaning of the Annex to Article 15.2, the solution will be to repeal, modify or abstain. to execute the measure declared inconsistent or that has caused nullification or impairment in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

Article 15.15: Default - suspension of benefits

1. If the Panel has made a determination under paragraph 2 of Article 15.14, and the Party complained against has not complied, or the Parties are unable to reach agreement on a remedy under paragraph 1 of Article 15.14, the Parties may initiate negotiations with a view to establishing mutually acceptable compensation.

2. The complaining Party may suspend the application of benefits of equivalent effect to the defendant Party, if after 30 days of having notified the Final Report of the Panel, the Parties:

a) do not agree to compensation; either

b) have agreed to a solution pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 15.14 and the complaining Party considers that the Party complained against has not complied with the terms of that agreement.

3. The complaining Party must notify the defendant Party and the Commission in writing of its decision, specifying the sector and the level of benefits to be suspended.

4. The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant Party complies with the Final Report of the Panel or until the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory agreement on the controversy, as the case may be.

5. In considering the benefits to be suspended pursuant to paragraph 2, the complaining Party:

a) first seek to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the Panel has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or that has been cause of nullification or impairment in the meaning of the Annex to Article 15.2; and

b) may suspend benefits in other sectors when it considers that it is unfeasible or ineffective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors.

6. At the written request of either Party, and having notified the other Party, a Panel shall be established to determine whether the level of benefits that the complaining Party has suspended in accordance with paragraph 2 is manifestly excessive.

7. Proceedings before the Panel constituted pursuant to paragraph 6 shall be conducted in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure. The Panel will present its conclusions within 60 days of the composition of the Panel, or in any other term that the Parties agree.

Article 15.16: Compliance Review

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 15.15, the Party complained against may submit the matter to the attention of the Panel, prior written notification to the other Party, if there is disagreement with the other Party regarding compliance:

a) of the recommendations and determinations of the Panel; either

b) of the agreement referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 15.14.

2. The procedure before the Panel constituted for the purposes of this Article shall be processed in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure. The Panel will present its conclusions within 60 days of the composition of the Panel or in any other term that the Parties agree.

3. If the Panel concludes that the Party complained against has removed the non-conformity, complied with the Panel's recommendations, or complied with the agreement referred to in paragraph 1(b), the complaining Party shall promptly remove the suspension of benefits it has adopted. .

 

Section B: Internal Procedures

 

Article 15.17: Procedures before internal judicial and administrative instances

1. When a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement arises in a judicial or internal administrative proceeding of a Party, or when a court or administrative body requests the opinion of one of the Parties, that Party shall notify the other. The Commission will try, as soon as possible, to agree on an appropriate response.

2. The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall submit to them any interpretation agreed upon by the Commission.

3. When the Commission fails to reach an agreement, either Party may submit its own opinion to the court or administrative body.

 

Annex to Article 15.2

Nullification and impairment

 

A Party may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism of this Chapter when, by virtue of the application of a measure that does not contravene the Agreement, it considers that the benefits that it could reasonably have expected to receive from the application of the following Chapters are annulled or impaired. :

1. Chapter III Access to markets.

2. Chapter IV Rules of origin and procedures related to origin.

3. Chapter VII Sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

4. Chapter VIII Technical barriers to trade.

5. Chapter X Cross-border trade in services.

 

CHAPTER XVI

TRANSPARENCY

Article 16.1: Definition

For the purposes of this Chapter, it shall be understood as:

administrative resolution of general application: an administrative resolution or interpretation that applies to all persons and events that are generally within its scope and that establishes a standard of conduct, but does not include:

a) a determination or resolution made in an administrative proceeding that applies to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party, in a specific case; either

b) a resolution that decides on a particular act or practice.

Article 16.2: Contact point

1. Each Party shall designate a unit or office as a contact point to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. When requested by a Party, the contact point of the other Party will indicate the official responsible for the matter and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.

Article 16.3: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement, are promptly published or made available for the knowledge of the Parties and any interested party. .

2. To the extent possible, each Party shall publish in advance any measure that it proposes to adopt that relates to any matter related to this Agreement, and shall provide the other Party with a reasonable opportunity to request information and comment on the proposed measures. .

Article 16.4: Notification and provision of information

1. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, notify the other Party of any current measures that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the interests of that other Party under the terms of this Agreement.

2. Each Party, at the request of the other Party, shall provide information and promptly respond to information requests from that other Party on any measure in force relating to this Agreement, notwithstanding whether or not that other Party has been previously notified of the that measure.

3. The notification or provision of information referred to in this Article will be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

4. When a Party provides information of a confidential nature to the other Party in accordance with this Agreement, the other Party will maintain the confidentiality of such information.

Article 16.5: Administrative procedures

In order to administer in a compatible, impartial and reasonable manner all the measures of general application that affect the aspects covered by this Agreement, each Party shall ensure that, in its administrative procedures in which the measures mentioned in Article 16.3 are applied with respect to to people, goods or services:

a) whenever possible, the persons of the other Party who are directly affected by a procedure, receive, in accordance with the internal provisions, reasonable notice of the initiation of the same, including a description of its nature, the exposition of the legal basis in accordance with the which procedure is initiated and a general description of all the issues in dispute;

b) when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest permit, the persons of the other Party are given a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their claims, prior to any final administrative action; and

c) conform to the national legislation of that Party.

Article 16.6: Review and challenge

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of prompt review and, where warranted, correction of final administrative actions related to matters covered by this Agreement. These courts will be impartial and will not be linked to the agency or authority in charge of the administrative application of the law, and will not have a substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, before such courts or in such proceedings, individuals have the right to:

a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

b) a resolution based on the evidence and presentations or, in cases where required by its national legislation, on the file compiled by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with the means of challenge or subsequent review that could be resorted to in accordance with its national legislation, said resolutions are implemented by the agencies or authorities.

 

CHAPTER XVII

AGREEMENT ADMINISTRATION

Article 17.1: Administrative Commission

1. In order to achieve the best operation of this Agreement, the Parties establish a Commission made up of the Secretary of the Economy or his successor, on behalf of Mexico, and the Minister of Foreign Trade and Tourism or his successor, on behalf of the Peru, or the representatives they designate.

2. The Commission will establish and modify its rules and procedures, and its decisions will be adopted by mutual agreement.

3. The Commission shall meet at least once a year, unless the Parties agree otherwise. The meetings of the Commission will be chaired successively by each Party, and may be held in person, or by teleconference, videoconference, or through any other technological means.

Article 17.2: Functions of the Administrative Commission

The Commission will have the following functions:

a) ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Agreement;

b) consider and adopt the necessary decisions for the implementation and fulfillment of this Agreement, in particular regarding:

i) improvement of market access conditions, in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 3.4 (Elimination of customs duties);

ii) updating the rules of origin established in the Annex to Article 4.2 (Specific Rules of Origin), in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 4.38 (Committee on Rules of Origin and Procedures related to Origin);

iii) the incorporation of new appellations of origin for their protection in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 5.2 (Recognition and protection of appellations of origin);

iv) the recommendations presented by the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, provided for in Article 7.10 (Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and by the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, provided for in Article 8.10 (Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade);

v) the recommendations presented by the Committee on Entry and Temporary Stay, provided for in Article 13.6 (Committee on Entry and Temporary Stay of Business Persons); and

vi) other provisions of the Agreement that grant specific powers, other than those mentioned above;

c) recommend to the Parties, if applicable, amendments to this Agreement;

d) establish mechanisms that contribute to an active participation of the representatives of the business sectors;

e) resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement, in accordance with Chapter XV (Dispute Resolution);

f) determine the amount of remuneration and expenses that will be paid to the members of the Panel in dispute settlement procedures;

g) supervise the work of all committees and working groups or the like established pursuant to this Agreement; and

h) Any others derived from this Agreement or entrusted to it by the Parties.

Article 17.3: Attributions of the Administrative Commission

The Commission may:

a) establish committees and working groups to facilitate the fulfillment of their functions;

b) issue interpretations on the provisions of this Agreement;

c) seek advice from non-governmental individuals or groups; and

d) carry out any other activity that contributes to the better implementation of this Agreement.

Article 17.4: Agreement Coordinators

1. The Coordinators of each Party will be:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Undersecretary of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Economy or his successor, or the representative designated by him; and

b) in the case of Peru, the Vice Minister of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism or his successor, or the representative designated by him.

2. The Agreement Coordinators will give appropriate follow-up to the decisions of the Commission and will work together in the preparations for the Commission meetings.

 

 

CHAPTER XVIII

EXCEPTIONS

Article 18.1: General exceptions

1. Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of Chapter III (Market Access), Chapter IV (Rules of origin and procedures related to origin) , Chapter VII (Sanitary and phytosanitary measures), Chapter VIII (Technical barriers to trade); except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to trade in services or investment.

2. Article XIV of the GATS, including footnotes, is hereby incorporated into and made an integral part thereof.1 , for the purposes of Chapter X (Cross-border trade in services), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to trade in goods.

Article 18.2: National security

The provisions of this Agreement shall not be construed to mean:

a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;

b) prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:

i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on merchandise, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment ;

ii) relating to fissionable or fusionable materials, or those used for their manufacture;

iii) taken in time of war or in the event of serious international tension; either

iv) regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; neither

c) prevent any Party from adopting measures in accordance with its obligations derived from the Charter of the United Nations, as amended, for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Article 18.3: Exceptions to the disclosure of information

The provisions of this Agreement shall not be construed in the sense of obliging a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which may impede compliance or be contrary to its Political Constitution or its laws, in what refers to the protection of the privacy of people, financial, tax matters and bank accounts of individual clients of financial institutions, or be contrary to the public interest.

Article 18.4: Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement will affect the rights and obligations of any of the Parties that derive from any tax agreement. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any of these agreements, the agreement will control to the extent of the inconsistency.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

a) Article 3.3 (National Treatment), and those other provisions in this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same extent as Article III of the GATT 1994; and

b) Article 3.9 (Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. Articles 11.12 (Expropriation and compensation) and 12.18 (Expropriation and compensation) shall apply to tax measures. However, no investor may invoke those Articles as the basis of a claim, made under Article 11.20 (Submission of a claim to arbitration), when it has been determined in accordance with this paragraph that the measure does not constitute an expropriation. The investor shall submit the matter, at the time of making the notification referred to in Article 11.19 (Notification and consultations), to the competent authorities indicated in the Annex to Article 18.4, so that said authority may determine if the measure does not constitute an expropriation. If the competent authorities do not agree to examine the matter or if,

Article 18.5: Balance of payments

1. If a Party experiences serious difficulties in its balance of payments, including the state of its monetary reserves, or in its external financial situation or faces the imminent threat of experiencing them, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures or price-based measures.2 with respect to trade in goods and services, and with respect to payments and capital movements, including those related to direct investment.

2. The Party that maintains or has adopted any of the measures provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article or any modification thereof, will present, whenever possible, a schedule for their elimination. Likewise, it must communicate to the other Party without delay:

a) What are the serious foreign balance of payments or financial difficulties or threat thereof, as appropriate;

b) the situation of the economy and foreign trade of the Party;

c) alternative measures available to you to correct the problem; and

d) the economic policies adopted to address the problems mentioned in paragraph 1, as well as the direct relationship between them and their solution.

3. The measure adopted or maintained by the Party, at all times:

a) avoid unnecessary damage to the economic, commercial or financial interests of the other Parties;

b) it will not impose greater burdens than those necessary to face the difficulties that cause the measure to be adopted or maintained;

c) it will be temporary and will be released progressively to the extent that the serious difficulties of the balance of payments or external financial or threats of these improve;

d) it must be applied according to the most favourable, between the principles of national treatment and most favored nation; and

e) It must be compatible with the conditions established in the WTO Agreement and with the Articles of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund and other internationally accepted criteria.

 

Annex to Article 18.4

competent authority

For the purposes of Article 18.4, the competent authority will be:

a) in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit or its successor; and

b) in the case of Peru, the General Directorate for International Economic Affairs, Competition and Private Investment of the Ministry of Economy and Finance or its successor.

 

 

CHAPTER XIX

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 19.1: Annexes, appendices and footnotes

The annexes, appendices and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.

Article 19.2: Entry into force

This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after the exchange of communications in writing, through diplomatic channels, certifying that the Parties have concluded the legal formalities necessary for the entry into force of this instrument, unless the Parties Parties agree to a different term.

Article 19.3: Agreement Amendment

1. The Parties may agree, at the request of any of them and at any time, amendments to this Agreement for its better operation and implementation.

2. Amendments to this Agreement as provided in this Article shall enter into force once both Parties have complied with the internal legal procedures for their approval, and shall form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 19.4: future negotiations

One year after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will begin negotiations regarding a Chapter on public sector procurement and a Chapter on trade facilitation and customs cooperation.

Article 19.5: Accession

1. In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement is open to accession, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries.

2. The accession will be formalized once its terms have been negotiated between the Parties and the adhering country, through the execution of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement that will enter into force 30 days after being deposited with the ALADI General Secretariat.

Article 19.6: Complaint

1. Any Party may terminate this Agreement. The denunciation shall be notified in writing to the other Party, as well as to the General Secretariat of ALADI, and shall take effect 180 days after being notified to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term.

2. In the event of the accession of a country or group of countries in accordance with the provisions of Article 19.4, notwithstanding that a Party has denounced the Agreement, it shall remain in force for the other Parties.

3. The investment provisions will remain in force for a period of 10 years from the termination date of this Agreement, with respect to investments made only during its validity, and without prejudice to the subsequent application of the general rules. of international law.

Article 19.7: Completion of ACE No. 8

This Agreement annuls Economic Complementation Agreement No. 8, its annexes, appendices and protocols that have been signed under its protection.

Article 19.8: Transitional provision

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 19.7, the preferential tariff treatment granted by ACE No. 8 will remain in force for 30 days following the entry into force of this Agreement, for importers who request it and use the certificates of origin issued in within the framework of ACE No. 8, provided they were issued prior to the entry into force of this Agreement and are in force.

Article 19.9: Bookings

This Agreement may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations at the time of its ratification or approval according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party.

 

Signed in the city of Lima, Peru, on April 6, 2011, in two original copies in Spanish, both being equally authentic.

 

 

FOR THE UNITED
MEXICAN STATES
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF PERU
Bruno Francisco Ferrari García de Alba
Secretary of Economy
Eduardo Ferreyros Küppers
Minister of Foreign Trade and Tourism