FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN UKRAINE AND THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA 


DATE OF SIGNING: 18.01.2001 
DATE OF RATIFICATION: 05.07.2001


PREAMBLE


willing to develop and strengthen friendly relations, particularly in the areas of trade
and economic cooperation, with the aim to facilitate economic
cooperation between the two countries and to increase the volume of bilateral trade,
THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA AND UKRAINE (hereinafter referred to as "the
Contracting Parties "),
reaffirming their commitment to the principles of market economy, which
constitute the basis for their relations,
taking into account their common desire to participate actively in the process of
international economic integration,
confirming their intention to take an active part in the process of economic
integration in Europe ,
expressing their willingness to co-operate in seeking the means and ways to 
strengthen this process,
adhering to the stated above, and aiming to eliminate expeditiously the obstacles to their bilateral trade in accordance with provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT, 1994) and the Marrakech Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO),
expressing their readiness to implement measures that will facilitate harmonious 
development of trade between these countries, as well as expand and diversify their
bilateral co-operation in areas of common interest, including areas not covered by this
Agreement, thus creating a basis for cooperation and a facilitating environment based on equality,
non-discrimination and balanced rights and obligations,
being confident that this Agreement will help strengthen the mutually
beneficial trade between them and the process of integration in Europe,
maintaining that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting
the Contracting Parties from their obligations under other international agreements, particularly under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and the Marrakech Agreement
establishing the World Trade Organization,
have decided, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the following
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement")

Article 1
Goals
1. The Contracting Parties shall be gradually establishing a free trade area during a transitional period of more than 10 years, starting from the entry into force of this
Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in conformity
with the definition set forth in Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) of 1994, and the Marrakech Agreement establishing the WTO.
2. The Goals of this Agreement are:
a) to deepen the economic co-operation between the two countries and to raise the standards
of living of population of these countries,
b) to gradually eliminate restrictions on trade in goods,
c) to ensure conditions for fair competition in the trade between the Contracting Parties,
d) to facilitate this process by removing barriers to trade and thus facilitating harmonious
development and expansion of the world trade,
e) to enhance co-operation between the Contracting Parties,
f) to create conditions furthering investments, particularly joint investment projects in the Contracting Parties,
g) to promote trade and co-operation of the Contracting Parties in the third countries’
markets.

CHAPTER I
INDUSTRIAL GOODS
Article 2
Scope

Provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products, originating in one of the
Contracting Parties. For purposes of this Agreement, the term “industrial products”
means products falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of Harmonized Commodity Description
and Coding System with the exception of the products listed in Annex I.

Article 3
Basic duties

1. For commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Customs Tariffs of the
Republic of Macedonia shall apply to the classification of goods imported to the Republic of Macedonia. The Customs Tariffs of Ukraine shall apply to the goods imported in Ukraine.
2. For each product the basic duty, the rate of which is subject to the gradual reductions under this Agreement, shall be the most-favored-nation duty applied by the Contracting Parties on 1 January 2001.
3. If after this date, any reduced tariff rate is applied erga omnes, in particular, a rate reduced as a result of tariff agreements made in conformity with the Uruguay Round of the GATT 1994 and the Marrakech Agreement Establishing the WTO, the reduced duty shall replace the
basic duty set forth in Paragraph 2 from the date of application of the reduced tariff rate.
4. The reduced duties, calculated in accordance with Paragraph 2, shall be rounded off
to the first digit after the decimal point.
5. The Contracting Parties shall exchange information on their basic duties.

Article 4
Customs Duties on Imports
1. No new customs duties on imports or charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties.
2. The Contracting Parties shall abolish on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement all customs duties on imports and any charges having equivalent effect on products originating in Republic of Macedonia or Ukraine, except for those specified in
Protocol A.

Article 5
Charges Equivalent to Duties
1. No new charges, having effect equivalent to customs duties on imports, shall be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties.
2. All charges having effect equivalent to customs duties on imports shall be abolished
as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with Article 38.

Article 6
Fiscal Duties
1. The provisions of Article 4 shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature, except
for the fee charged for the customs documents processing and preparation.
2. Notwithstanding Paragraph 1 of this Article the Contracting Parties shall implement their national regulations on Value Added Tax and Excise Tax.

Article 7
Customs Duties on Exports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new customs duties on exports or charges, having equivalent effect, shall be introduced in trade between the Contracting Parties.
2. On the date of entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with Article 38, the Contracting Parties shall abolish all customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect, in their relations between themselves.

Article 8
Quantitative Restrictions on Imports or Exports and Measures Having
Equivalent Effect

1. No new quantitative restrictions on imports and exports or measures having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and exports of the Contracting Parties and measures, having equivalent effect, shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with Article 38, except for those that may be necessary to fulfill obligations assumed under international agreements of both Contracting Parties.

Article 9
Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate and share information in the field of standardization, metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation, for the purpose of elimination of technical barriers to trade and unification of domestic procedures
in conformity with the WTO rules relating to trade barriers when carrying out trade transactions.
2. A Contracting Party, upon a request from another Contracting Party, shall submit information concerning relevant individual cases that concern standards, technical rules or similar measures.
3. The Contracting Parties will, where appropriate, enter into negotiations for the conclusion of agreements on mutual recognition of conformity assessment, following the recommendations of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade relating to technical barriers issues when carrying out trade transactions.

CHAPTER II
AGRICULTURE, AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERY PRODUCTS

Article 10
Scope

Provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products originating in one of
the Contracting Parties. The term "agricultural products" for purposes of this Chapter
will refer to products falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding System., as well as to products listed in Annex 1 to this
Agreement.

Article 11
Exchange of concessions

The Contracting Parties declare their readiness to develop trade in agricultural products
in conformity with provisions of this Chapter and requirements of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

Article 12
Concessions and Agricultural Policy
The Contracting Parties shall grant each other concessions listed in Protocol B, while 
applying measures facilitating trade in agricultural products in conformity with provisions of this Chapter and provisions of the Protocol.

Article 13
Special Safeguards
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and, in particular, Article 19, in
case of particularly sensitive agricultural products, in instances where import of products originating in one of the Contracting Parties, and to which under this Agreement concessions apply, seriously disrupts operation of the market of the other Party, the former Party shall immediately enter into consultations to resolve this problem. Pending such a decision such Contracting Party may take measures it deems necessary in conformity with national legislation.

Article 14
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Contracting Parties shall apply their national veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary regulations on the nondiscriminatory basis and shall not introduce any new measures leading to unjustifiable barriers to trade.
2. Veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be applied in accordance with international conventions to which both Contracting Parties are parties.

CHAPTER III
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 15
Internal Taxation
1. The Contracting Parties shall not take any measures or actions of internal fiscal
nature, which may, directly or indirectly, cause discrimination against products originating in the Contracting Parties.
2. Products, exported to one of the Contracting Parties, shall not have advantages from the refunding of internal taxes in the amount exceeding the amount of direct or indirect taxes imposed on these products.

Article 16
Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas and Cross-border Trade
1. This Agreement shall not prohibit creation or administration of customs unions, free trade areas or cross-border trade agreements, provided that such unions do not negatively affect the trading regimes of the Contracting Parties and, in particular, this Agreement does not contain provisions concerning rules of origin.
2. The Contracting Parties shall immediately inform each other of any agreement establishing a customs union or a free trade area, as well as of accession to the European Union.

Article 17
Structural Adjustment
1. Any of the Contracting Parties may take emergency measures of limited duration in the form of higher customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern new industry sectors or certain sectors undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where such difficulties cause significant social problems.
3. Customs duties on imports applied by the Contracting Party to products originating in the other Party, introduced as part of such measures, may not exceed 25% of the value; certain preferences shall be maintainеd in such a case for products, originating in the other Party. The total volume of imports of products subject to these measures may not exceed 15% of total imports of industrial products from the other Contracting Party, under Article 4, during the last year for which statistical data are available.
4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding five consecutive years, unless a longer period is authorized by the Joint Committee.
5. No such measures can be introduced in respect of a product, if more than three years have passed since the elimination of duties and quantitative limitations, tariffs or measures, having equivalent effect, concerning the product in question.
6. The Contracting Party concerned shall inform the Joint Committee of any emergency measures it intends to take and, prior to the application of such measures, upon request of the other Party, consultations shall be held at the Joint Committee concerning such measures and relevant sectors. When taking such measures, the Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the customs duties carried out under this Article. This schedule shall provide information on the phasing out of these duties, starting not later than two years after their introduction, at equal annual rates. The Joint Committee may approve a different schedule.

Article 18
Antidumping and Countervailing Measures

Nothing in this Agreement shall prejudice or affect in any way the taking, by either
Party of anti-dumping or countervailing measures in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994 , the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Subsides and Countervailing Measures.

Article 19
General safeguards
Where a product is being imported into any of the Contracting Parties in such quantities and under such conditions that may cause or threaten to cause:

a) serious injuries to domestic producers of like or the same products in the
territory of the importing Party, or
b) serious disruptions to any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could
bring about serious deterioration of the economic situation in the region of the Contracting Parties.

the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures in conformity with conditions and the procedure set forth in Article 22.

Article 20
Re-export and acute shortage
1. Where compliance with provisions of Articles 7 and 8 causes:
(a) re-export to a third country against which the exporting Contracting Party
maintains for the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or
measures having equivalent effect; or
(b) an acute shortage, or a threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting
Contracting Party; and in cases where the situation referred to above causes or is likely to cause, major difficulties for the exporting Party, 
this Contracting Party may take appropriate measures following conditions and procedure set forth in Article 22.
2. Measures, taken as a result of the situation referred to in Paragraph 1, shall be applied
in a non-discriminatory manner and be eliminated when the existing conditions no longer justify their application.

Article 21
State Monopolies
1. The Contracting Parties shall carry out gradual adjustment of any state monopoly of a commercial nature to ensure that no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are produced and sold exists between nationals of the Contracting Parties.
2. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures taken to achieve this objective.

Article 22
Procedure for application of safeguard measures

1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set forth in
the following Paragraphs of this Article, the Contracting Parties shall seek to settle any disputes between themselves through the Joint Committee.
2. If a Contracting Party subjects imports of products that may give rise to the situation referred to in Article 19, to an administrative procedure aimed to promptly obtain information on the trade dynamics, it shall be required to notify the other Party of this measure.
3. Notwithstanding Paragraph 7 of this Article, a Contracting Party which intends to apply safeguard measures shall be required to immediately notify of that the other Party and provide it with all relevant information. Consultations between the Contracting
Parties shall take place without delay in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a mutually acceptable solution.
4. (a) In conformity with Articles 18, 19 and 20, the Joint Committee shall examine the situation and may take any decision needed to eliminate difficulties notified by the Party concerned. If such a decision has not been passed within thirty days after the matter was referred to the Joint Committee, the Contracting Party concerned may implement measures needed to remedy the situation,
(b) Under Article 33, the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures after the consultations have been concluded or after a period of three months has passed from the date of the first notification to the other Party,
(c) Under Article 26, the Contracting Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with all the assistance required to examine the situation and, if necessary, shall discontinue the activity that causes that situation. If the other Contracting Party fails to discontinue such activity within the period set forth by the Joint Committee, or if the Joint Committee fails to pass a decision on the matter during thirty working days, the Party concerned may take measures necessary to overcome difficulties resulting from the activity in question.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee.
The extent and to duration of such measures shall be limited to what is sufficient to remedy the situation so that injuries caused by the application of such measures would not exceed the injury caused by the practice or difficulties that caused application of these measures. Priority shall be given to measures that are the least distorting with respect to the functioning of this Agreement.
6. The safeguard measures taken shall periodically reviewed through the consultations in the
Joint Committee with a view to their weakening or elimination when their application is no longer justifiable.
7. Where exceptional circumstances requiring an immediate action make prior
examination impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may, in accordance with 
Articles 18, 19 and 20, apply provisional measures necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified immediately to the other Party, and consultations between the Contracting Parties shall be carried out as soon as possible through the Joint Committee.

Article 23
General exceptions

This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or
goods in transit, justified on the grounds of public ethics, public policy or public security,
protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants and environment; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archeological value; the protection of intellectual property or rules, relating to gold or silver or the conservation of exhaustible natural resources, if such measures are applied in combination with restrictions applied to domestic producers or consumers. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting Parties.

Article 24
Rules of origin, co-operation and customs administration
1. Protocol C of this Agreement sets forth rules of origin and related methods of administrative cooperation.
2. The Contracting Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews by the Joint Committee and administrative co-operation arrangements, to ensure effective and coordinated application of provisions of the abovementioned Protocol 2 and Articles 3 to 8, 12, 15 and 17 of this Agreement, and to reduce to the extent possible the formalities relating to trade and to achieve mutually satisfactory solutions to any disputes that may arise as a result of the application of these provisions.

Article 25
Payments
The Contracting Parties, in accordance with their legislation and by mutual consent, will allow making payments in freely convertible currencies to current accounts of the balance of payments, as far as adjustments related to the payments, affect trade.

Article 26
Rules of Competition between Undertakings and State Aid
1. The following are incompatible with the proper operation of this Agreement in so far
as they may affect trade between the Contracting Parties.
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices between undertakings which are aimed at obstructing, restricting or distorting competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the
Contracting Parties as a whole or in the part thereof;
(c) any state aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favoring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods.
2. If a Contracting Party finds that a given practice is incompatible with the principles of Paragraphs 1(a) and (b) of this Article, or if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious injury to the interests of that Party or material injury to its domestic industry, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article 22.
3. The provisions of Paragraph 1 (c) shall not apply to products referred to in Chapter
II.
4. The Joint Committee shall, within three years from the entry into force of this
Agreement, develop criteria for determination of practices falling under Paragraph 1 (c), as well as the rules for implementation of such criteria.

5. The Contracting Parties shall ensure transparency of state aid measures, inter alia by
reporting annually to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of
the aid provided by the state, and by providing, upon request, information on the plan for provision of the state aid in particular cases.
6. If a Contracting Party finds that a particular practice:
- is incompatible with the terms of Paragraph 1 (c), or is not applied consistently with the rules of Paragraph 4, or
- in the absence of rules, referred to in Paragraph 4, causes or threatens to cause serious injury to the interest of that Contracting Party or material injury to its domestic industry, that Contracting Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and provisions set forth in Article 22.
Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with procedures and under conditions set forth by the GATT 1994 and by the Marrakech Agreement establishing the WTO, and any other relevant instruments used between the Parties, agreements concerning which were adopted by the Parties under the auspices of the WTO.

Article 27
Payment difficulties

Where a Contracting Party faces serious payments difficulties, or where there is an imminent threat thereof, the Party concerned may, in accordance with the conditions established under the GATT 1994 and Article VIII of Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, apply provisional measures, including measures related to imports, for a limited period that does not exceed the period needed to remedy the balance of payments situation. Such measures shall be gradually relaxed as balance of payments conditions improve and will be eliminated when the conditions no longer justify their application. The Contracting Party implementing such measures shall inform the other Party of that before their application and, whenever practicable, of a time schedule for their elimination.

Article 28
Intellectual Property Rights

1. The Contracting Parties confirm their willingness to cooperate in the area of issues related to the trade-related intellectual property rights, and, if necessary, to apply measures provided for in Annex I C to the Marrakech Agreement establishing the WTO, as well as other multilateral agreements on issues concerning intellectual property protection, to which both Contacting Parties are parties; this list is included in Annex II.
2. For purposes of this Agreement, term "intellectual property" refers to all categories of intellectual property such as copyright and related rights, trademarks, geographical indications, integrated circuit layouts, industrial designs, patents, protected information, including know-how.
3. In fulfillment of their commitments under international agreements and legislation in the field of intellectual property rights, the Contracting Parties to this Agreement shall not grant to nationals of the other Party treatment less favorable than that accorded to nationals of any third state, with the exemption of relations between citizens of CIS countries and Ukraine.
4. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate in matters of intellectual property. Upon request of a Contracting Party, they shall hold expert consultations on these matters, in particular with respect to issues relating the existing or future international agreements on coordination, administration and protection of intellectual property rights and on activities in international organizations, such as the WTO, World Intellectual Property Organization, as well as relations of the Parties with third countries with respect to the intellectual property matters.
5. Implementation of provisions of this Article shall be regularly assessed by the Contracting Parties. If difficulties in trade arise due to the rights to intellectual property, including industrial property, either of the Contracting Parties may call for urgent consultations to find a mutually acceptable solution

Article 29
Public Procurement
1. The Contracting Parties consider liberalization of their public procurement markets an objective of this Agreement. The Parties shall seek to open up awarding of public contracts on the basis of non-discrimination and reciprocity. 
2. The Contracting Parties shall progressively develop their respective rules and practices 
of public procurement and shall grant suppliers of the other Contracting Party access to contract award procedures in their respective public procurement Markets, which will be not less favorable than that accorded to companies of any third country.
3. The Joint Committee shall review a list of tasks specified in this Article and may offer practical recommendations concerning implementation of provisions of Paragraph 2 of this Article to ensure free access, transparency and full balance of rights and obligations. During the examination of the situation referred to in Paragraph 2 of this Article, the Joint Committee may consider, especially in the light of international regulations in this area, the possibility of extending the coverage and/or the degree of openness of the market provided for in Paragraph 2 of this Article. 
4. The Contracting Parties shall endeavor to accede to relevant Agreements negotiated under the auspices of the GATT 1994 and the Marrakech Agreement establishing the WTO.


Article 30
The Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Contracting Party shall be represented.
2. The Joint Committee shall be responsible for, and shall ensure proper implementation of this Agreement.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Contracting
Parties will share information and, upon request of any Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee. The Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Contracting Parties.
4. The Joint Committee may, in accordance with provisions of Paragraph 3 of Article 31, take decisions in cases provided for in this Agreement. With respect to other Matters, the Committee may make recommendations.

Article 31
Rules of Procedure of the Joint Committee
1. To ensure proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet whenever necessary, but at least once a year. Either Party may request such a meeting.
2. If a Contracting Party's representative in the Joint Committee has agreed to a decision that requires implementation of domestic government procedures, such a decision shall enter into force after notification of the adoption of the relevant government decision of the other Party, unless a later date is specified in that decision.
3. The Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure which shall, inter alia, contain provisions concerning conduct of meetings, election of the Chairperson and establishment of his/her term of office.
4. The Joint Committee may decide to set up sub-committees and working groups it deems necessary to help implement particular tasks.

Article 32
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures which it finds necessary:
a) to prevent disclosure of information that will threaten its essential national security interests;
b) for protection of its essential national security interests or for implementation of international obligations or national policies:
I) relating to trade in arms, ammunition and military equipment, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not specifically intended for military purposes; it also applies to trade in other goods, materials and services, which is carried out directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
II) relating to non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
III) taken in time of war or other serious aggravation of the international situation presenting a threat of war.


Article 33
Fulfillment of obligations
1. The Contracting Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure achievement
of the objectives and fulfillment of obligations under this Agreement.
2. If a Contracting Party finds that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation under this Agreement, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under conditions and in accordance with procedures set forth in Article 22.

Article 34
Clause on development of trade relations
Where a Contracting Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the development of economies of the Contracting Parties to develop and deepen the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not covered by this Agreement, this Contracting Party shall submit a substantiated request to the other Party. The Contracting Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine this request and, where appropriate, to make recommendations to them, particularly with a view to commencing negotiations on this matter.

Article 35
Amendments
Any amendments to this Agreement other than those adopted under Paragraph 3 of Article 31, and those approved by the Joint Committee, shall enter into force on the date of the receipt of the latest diplomatic note confirming completion of all procedures required to enact the amendments in accordance with national legislation of each Contracting Party.

Article 36
Protocols and Annexes
Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement form an integral part of it. The Joint Committee may take a decision to amend the Annexes and Protocols on condition of conformity with domestic government procedures of the Contracting Parties.

Article 37
Effective period and termination
1. The Agreement is made for an indefinite period.
2. Each Contracting Party to this Agreement may withdraw therefrom by means of a written notification of that to the other Party. This Agreement shall be terminated effect sixth months after the date on which the notification was received by the other Party.
3. The Contracting Parties agree that in case of accession of one of the Parties to this
Agreement to the European Union, the Agreement will be terminated on the day preceding the date of the accession to the EU.
4. The Contracting Parties will resolve through negotiations all issues concerning relevant compensations provided for under Paragraph 3 of this Article.

Article 38
Entry into force
This Agreement shall enter into force within thirty days after the date of the receipt trough diplomatic channels of the last written notification confirming the fulfillment of all necessary national government procedures required for entry into force of this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned authorized officials have made this Agreement.
DONE in two copies on 18 January 2001 in Skopje, each copy presented in Macedonian, Ukrainian and English language, each of these texts being authentic. If differences arise concerning interpretation and application of provisions of this Agreement, the English-language copy shall prevail.



For Republic of Macedonia 

For Ukraine

ANNEX TEXT:

Annex II
concerning paragraph 1 of Article 28


Protection of intellectual property

The following multilateral agreements are referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 28:

1. Paris convention of 20 March 1883 on protection of industrial property (the Act of Stockholm, 1967, as amended in 1979);

2. Bern convention of 9 September 1886 on protection of literary and artistic creations (Paris Act, 1971);

3. International convention of 26 October 1961 on protection of performers, producers of phonograms and television and radio broadcasting organizations (Rome Convention);

4. Madrid agreement on international registration (the Act of Stockholm, 1967, as amended in 1979);

5. Budapest agreement on international recognition of preservation of microorganisms for purposes of patenting procedures (1977, as amended in 1980);

6. Agreement on patent cooperation (Washington, 1970, as amended in 1979 and with additions of 1984);

7. Convention founding the World Intellectual Property Organization (the Act of Stockholm, 1967, as amended in 1979);

8. Madrid agreement for the repression of false or deceptive indication of source on goods (1981, as amended in 1967);

9. Convention on protection of phonograms from unauthorized reproduction (Geneva, 1971);

10. Hague agreement on international protection of industrial designs (Hague, 1925, as amended in 1960 and complemented by the Act of Stockholm of 1967).


 

 
Protocol A
(referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 4)

Customs duty on imports and other fees having an equivalent effect

Article 1

This Protocol applies to products specified in Chapter I of this Agreement.

Article 2

As of the date of enactment of this Agreement Macedonia shall abolish the customs duty on imports of the products supplied from Ukraine except for the products falling into the categories specified in Annex 1 to this Protocol.

Article 3

As of the date of enactment of this Agreement Ukraine shall abolish the customs duty on imports of the products supplied from Macedonia except for the products falling into the categories specified in Annex 2 to this Protocol.

Article 4

Ukraine and Macedonia may continue to use their licensing systems for import and export products during the transition period that ends not later than 4 years after the enactment of this Agreement.

Article 5

In the event of changes in the national legislation concerning tariff codes specified in Annexes 1 and 2 to this Protocol, the Contracting Parties shall immediately notify each other of such changes.

 

Annex 1


1. As this Agreement takes effect, in accordance with Article 38 and the schedule presented below, the customs duties for product categories specified in list А shall be gradually abolished as follows:

- the first year - to the level of 90 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the second year - to the level of 80 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the third year - to the level of 60 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the fourth year - to the level of 50 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the fifth year - to the level of 40 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the sixth year - to the level of 20 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the seventh year - complete elimination.

1. As this Agreement takes effect, in accordance with Article 38 and in conformity with the schedule presented below, the customs duties for product categories specified in list B shall be gradually abolished as follows:

- the first year - to the level of 90 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the second year - to the level of 80 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the third year - to the level of 70 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the fourth year - to the level of 60 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the fifth year - to the level of 50 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the sixth year - to the level of 40 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the seventh year - to the level of 30 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the eighth year - to the level of 20 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the eighth year - to the level of 10 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the tenth year - complete elimination.

 

Annex 2


1. As this Agreement takes effect, in accordance with Article 38 and in conformity with the schedule presented below, the customs duties for the product categories specified above and marked with "1" shall be gradually abolished as follows:

- the first year - to the level of 75 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the second year - to the level of 50 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the third year - to the level of 25 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the fourth year - to the level of 0 % of the amount of the basic customs duty.

1. As this Agreement takes effect, in accordance with Article 38 and in conformity with the schedule presented below, the customs duties for the product categories specified above and marked with "2" shall be gradually abolished as follows:

- the first year - to the level of 80 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the second year - to the level of 60 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the third year - to the level of 40 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the fourth year - to the level of 20 % of the amount of the basic customs duty

- the fifth year - to the level of 0 % of the amount of the basic customs duty.

 
Protocol B
(referred to in Article 11)

Granting privileges and exemptions on the reciprocal basis in the area of agriculture between Republic of Macedonia on the one hand, and Ukraine – on the other hand

Article 1

This Protocol shall apply to products specified in Chapter II of this Agreement.

Article 2

As of the date on which this Agreement takes effect, the customs duties on imports applied in the Republic of Macedonia with respect to products supplied from Ukraine and specified in Annex I to this Protocol, shall be abolished or reduced within the limits of quotas established in this Annex and to the level specified in this Annex.

Article 3

As of the date on which this Agreement takes effect, the customs duty on imports applied in Ukraine to the goods supplied from the Republic of Macedonia and listed in Annex II to this Protocol, shall be eliminated or reduced within the limits of quotas established in this Annex and to the level specified in this Annex.

Article 4

1. The basic customs duties approved in accordance with Annexes to this Protocol, - these are the customs duty rates predominantly used in the country in question and applied at the time of the enactment of this Agreement. The product categories that are not included in Annexes to this Protocol, shall be subject to the customs duty rates predominantly used in the country at the time of actual importation of the products. The customs duties rates referred to in this Protocol include ad valorem and special customs duty rates, as well as special fees levied on the products.

2. To ensure proper application of provisions of the Protocol A of this Agreement and opportunities for the Parties’ providing each other with further privileges and exemptions, the Parties shall conduct regular consultations on the mutually beneficial basis within the framework of the Joint Committee.

3. In the event of changes in the national legislation concerning tariff codes specified in Annexes I and II to this Protocol, the Contracting Parties shall immediately notify each other of such changes.
Protocol C
On the rules of origin and administrative cooperation methods

Chapter I
General provisions


Article 1

Definitions of terms 

For purposes of this Protocol:

a) "production" means any kind of processing or reprocessing, including assembling or specific operations;

b) "material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part used in the production of the product;

c) "product" means a product that is produced, even if later it is planned to use it for other production operation;

d) "goods" means either materials or products;

e) "customs value" means value that is determined in accordance with the Agreement of 1994 on implementation of Article VII of the General agreement on tariffs and trade (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);

f) "price on the EXW basis" means the price paid for a product on the on the EXW basis to the producer in the Party where the last transformation or processing was performed provided that this price includes the value of all used materials including any domestic taxes that must or may be refunded at the time of export of this product;

g) "value of materials" means customs value at the time of importation of the used materials originating in the third countries, or, if such value is unknown or can not be established – the first established price paid for materials in the Party;

h) "value of originating materials" means value of such materials that is defined in subparagraph (g) applied on the mutatis mutandis basis;

i) "value added" is applied as the price on the EXW basis less the customs value of each included product originating in the other Party, as provided in Article 3, or, if the customs value is unknown or can not be established – the first confirmed price paid for the product in the Party;

j) "groups and product codes" means product groups and codes  ( four-digit codes ) used in the nomenclature that constitutes the Harmonized system for description and coding of goods, hereinafter referred to in the Protocol as the "Harmonized system" or "HS";

k) "classified" refers to classification of any products or materials of a particular product code;

l) "consignment" means goods which are either shipped simultaneously by an exporter to the same recipient, or are shipped on the basis of the same transport document which provides for their shipment from the exporter to the recipient, or, if there is no such document, - on the basis of the same invoice;

m) "territories" mean territories of the states, including territorial waters.


Chapter II
Definition of the "originating product"

Article 2
General requirements

1. For the purpose of implementation of this Agreement, the following products shall be considered products originating in a Party:

a) products that are entirely produced in this Party, as defined in Article 4 of this Protocol;

b) products produced in this Party, including materials which had not been entirely produced in this Party, on condition that such materials were substantially modified or processed in this Party as provided in Article 5 of this Protocol.

Article 3
Bilateral cumulation of origin

1. Materials originating in a Party shall be considered materials originating in this Party if such materials are included in the products produced in this latter Party. It is not necessary for such materials to be substantially transformed or processed if these materials were modified or processed in excess of the requirements specified in Article 6(1) of this Protocol.

Article 4
Wholly made products

1. The following products shall be considered fully produced in the Party:

a) minerals extracted within the limits of its territories or sea floor;

b) plant products grown on its soil;

c) live animals bred in its territory;

d) live animals products;

e) fishery or hunting products;

f) sea products and other products obtained from the sea outside territorial waters of the Parties by its vessels;

g) products produced aboard its factory ships exclusively from the products specified in subparagraph (f);

h) used goods collected in the Party that can be only used to produce raw materials, including used tires that can be used only for restoration or as waste;

i) waste and residue resulting from manufacturing operations carried out in the Party;

j) products extracted from or under the sea floor outside its territorial waters on condition that it holds an exclusive right to prospect this sea floor;

k) goods produced exclusively from products specified in subparagraphs (a) - (j).

2. The terms "its vessels" and "its factory ships" used in subparagraphs 1(f) and (g) shall apply only to the vessels and factory ships:

a) which are registered in the Party or area assigned to it;

b) which sail under the colors of this Party;

c) where at least by 50 percent are owned by the citizens of this Party or a company the management body of which is located in one of the Parties and the manager or managers of which, chairman of the board of directors or the supervisory board, as well as most members of such boards are citizens of this Party, and, in the event of establishment of associations or limited liability companies, at least half of the capital belongs to this Party or public bodies or citizens of this Party;

d) captain and officers of which are citizens of this Party; and 

e) at least 75 percent of the crew of which are citizens of this Party.

Article 5
Substantially transformed or processed products

1. For purposes of Article 2 products, which are not wholly made, shall be considered sufficiently processed or reprocessed if conditions specified in the list contained in Annex II to this Protocol are complied with.

The above conditions indicate for all products to which this Agreement applies, what transformation or  processing all the materials not originating in the Parties and used in production must undergo; these conditions shall apply only to such materials. Therefore, if products which have acquired the status of products originating in a Party by way of conforming to conditions specified in the list, are used for production of other products, conditions applicable to such other products part of which these products will become shall not apply to these products, excluding materials originating from the third countries that may have been used for their production.

2. Notwithstanding provisions of paragraph 1, materials originating in the third countries, which in accordance with conditions specified in the list should not be used for production purposes, may be used for that purpose provided that:

a) their total value does not exceed 10 percent of the product price on the EXW basis;

b) any specified in the list percentage indicator of the maximum value of the materials originating in the third countries does not get exceeded as a result of application of this paragraph.

This paragraph shall not apply to products that are classified under headings 50 - 63 of the Harmonized System.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply except for cases specified in Article 6.

Article 6
Insignificant transformation or processing

1. Without prejudice to provisions of paragraph 2, the following operations must be considered insignificant transformation or processing operations for purposes of verification of the status of the product as originating product, regardless of compliance with requirements of Article 5:

a) operations relating to preservation of the product in proper condition during transportation or storage (ventilation, distribution, drying, cooling, using salt, sulfur anhydrite or other water solutions, removal of damaged parts and other similar operations);

b) simple operations involving cleaning, sieving or selection, sorting, classification, selection of parts (including preparation of sets of items), washing, painting, cutting;

c) (i) changing a package and opening and assembling a package;

    (ii) putting in bottles, flasks, begs, boxes, crates, attaching to the planks, etc., and all other simple packaging operations;  


d) attaching signs, labels and other distinguishing marks to products or packaging;

e) simple mixing of products of one or several types, if one or several components of these mixes do not meet requirements specified in this Protocol, which is necessary for recognizing these products as products originating in a Party;

f) simple assembly of parts to form a complete product;

g) combining two or more operations specified in subparagraphs (a) - (f);

h) slaughter of cattle.

2. All operations carried out in the Parties with respect to a particular product must be considered together for purposes of establishing insubstantiality of transformation or processing of the product taking into account provisions of paragraph 1.

Article 7
Qualification unit 

1.  A qualification unit for application of provisions of this Protocol shall be a specific product that is considered a basic unit for purposes of determination of classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonized System.

Accordingly, it will be:

a) where a product consisting of the grouped or assembled items is classified in accordance with requirements of the Harmonized System under one product category, the classification unit shall be a complete product;

b) where a batch of products consists of several identical products classified under one category of the Harmonized System, for the purposes of application of provisions of this Protocol each product should be considered separately.

2. If, in accordance with General Rule 5 of the Harmonized System, a packaging is included in the product for classification purposes, the packaging must be also included in the product for the purpose of establishment of its origin.

Article 8
Components, spare parts and tools 

Components, spare parts and tools which are shipped together with the unit of equipment, machine, apparatus or a vehicle and which constitute a part of a regular equipment and are included in the price or for which no separate invoice is issued, shall be viewed as a whole product together with the equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.

Article 9
Sets of products

Sets of products, as provided by General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be recognized as originating if all their component products are originating. However, where a set fo products consists of originating products, and of non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be recognized as originating if value of non-originating products does not exceed 15 percent of the price of the set of products on the EXW basis.

Article 10
Neutral elements

To establish the origin of a product it is unnecessary to establish the origin of the following elements that may have been used in the course of its production:

a) energy and fuel;

b) industrial equipment and implements;

c) machines and tools;

d) goods which are not included and do not have to be included in the final product.


Chapter III
Territorial requirements

Article 11
Territoriality principle

1. Requirements concerning the status of origin, expressed in Chapter II, must be complied with by either of the Parties at any moment.

2. If originating goods exported from any of the Parties to another country, are being returned, such goods must be considered originating in the third countries until it will be demonstrated to the customs bodies that:

a) the returned goods are exactly the goods that were exported; and that

b) during their being in that country or at the time of the export they were not subjected to any operations, except for those required to preserve them in proper condition.

3. Acquiring a status of origin in accordance with conditions specified above in Chapter II shall not be hampered by the processing or transformation performed outside the Party with respect to materials exported from any of the Parties and later re-imported, on condition that:

a) materials were completely produced in one of the Parties or were subjected to transformation or processing which do not qualify as insignificant operations specified in Article 6, prior to their being exported; and

b) it can be demonstrated to the customs bodies that:

i) the re-imported goods were produced by way of transformation or processing od exported materials; and 

ii) the total value added outside the Party, determined by way of application of provisions of this Article, does not exceed 10 percent of the price of the final product (on the EXW basis) acquiring the status of origin. 


4. For purposes of paragraph 3 conditions for acquiring the status of origin specified in Chapter II shall not apply to transformation or processing performed outside the Party. However, if in the list contained in Annex II, the criterion used for purposes of determination of the status of origin of the final product is that of the maximum value of all materials originating in the third countries and included in the product, the total value of materials originating in the third countries added in the territory of respective Party, together with the total value added acquired outside the Parties determined by way of application of provisions of this Article, may not exceed the established percentage.

5. For purposes of application of provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4, "total value added" must be understood as all costs incurred outside the Party, including value of materials included there.

6. Provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which do not meet the conditions specified in the list provided in Annex II, or which may be considered completely processed or modified only on condition of the use of the total value fixed in Article 5(2).

7. Provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which belong to product groups 50 - 63 of the Harmonized System.

8. Any processing or transformation which fall under provisions of this Article and which are performed outside the Party, shall be carried out in accordance with foreign trade agreements on processing or other similar agreements.

Article 12
Direct transportation

1. Preferential treatment provided for in this Agreement shall apply only to products meeting the requirements of this Protocol and being directly transported between the Parties. However, products which form a single consignment, may be transported through other territories using, if necessary, transit or temporary warehouses in these territories on condition that they remain under control of the customs bodies in the transit country or remain kept in a warehouse and not subjected to operations other than loading or reloading or any other operations aimed at preserving them in proper condition.

Originating products may be transported by a pipeline via a territory that is not a territory of a Party.

2. Proof of compliance with conditions specified in paragraph 1 shall be provided to the customs bodies of the importing country by way of submission of:

a) a single transport document providing for transportation from the exporting country via the country of transit; or

b) a certificate issued by the customs bodies of the country of transit, which:

(i) contains precise description of the product; 

(ii) specifies dates set for unloading and reloading of the products and, where necessary, names of the vessels or of other means of transportation to be used; and 

(iii) specific conditions under which the products were treated in the country of transit; or 


c) in case of the absence of the above - any substitute documents.

Article 13
Exhibitions

1. To the products originating in a Party, which were shipped to an exhibition in another country that is not a Party, and which were sold after the exhibition for purposes of importation to a Party, at the time of importation provisions of the Agreement shall apply on condition that it will be demonstrated to the customs bodies that:

a) the exporter has shipped these products from one of the Parties to another country where the exhibition was held, and put these products on display there;

b) the products were sold or otherwise disposed of by this exporter for the benefit of a person from a Party;

c) the products were delivered at the time of the exhibition or immediately after its end in the same condition in which the products were shipped to the exhibition; and 

d) from the moment the products were shipped to the exhibition they were not used for any other purpose except for being displayed at the exhibition.

2. The verification of origin is to be issued or documented in accordance with provisions of Chapter V and must be submitted to the customs bodies of the importing country under existing regular procedures. Such verification must specify name and address of the exhibition. If necessary, additional documentary proof of conditions under which the products were exhibited may be requested.

3. Paragraph 1 shall be applied to any trade, industrial, agricultural or craft exhibition, fair or other similar public display which are not organized for private purposes in shops or in business premises with a view to selling foreign products, and during which the products remained under the customs control.


Chapter IV
Refund of the customs duty and exemption from payment of the customs duty

Article 14
Prohibition concerning refund of the customs duty and exemption from payment of the customs duty

1. To materials originating in the third countries and used in production of the products originating in a Party, for which a certificate of origin shall be issued or is being prepared in accordance with provisions of Chapter V, refund of customs duty and exemption from payment of customs duty shall not apply in such a Party.

2. The established in paragraph 1 prohibition shall be applied to any arrangement concerning refund, exemption from payment or concerning full or partial exemption from payment of customs duties or taxes that have equivalent effect and are imposed in the Party on materials used in production, if such refund, exemption from payment or non-payment are used or used in such a away that products produced from these materials are exported, but not where these products are left for domestic consumption.

3. The exporter of the products, which have a proof of origin, shall be required upon the demand of the customs bodies immediately provide all relevant documents confirming non-application of refund of customs duty in connection with materials originating in the third countries and being used in production of the products in question, as well as verifying the fact of payment of the customs duties or taxes that have equivalent effect in connection with these materials.

4. Provisions of paragraphs 1 - 3 shall also apply to the packaging, as defined в of Article 7(2), accessories, spare parts and tools, as defined in Article 8, and to the products supplied as part of the set, as defined in Article 9, if such a product is originating in the third countries.

5. Provisions of paragraphs 1 - 4 shall apply only to materials of the sort to which the Agreement applies. Moreover, these provisions do not prohibit application of a system for refunding taxes when exporting agricultural goods, which shall apply in accordance with provisions of the Agreement.

6. Notwithstanding provisions of paragraph 1, the Parties may agree to use customs duty refunds or exempt from payment of equivalent customs duties or taxes in connection with materials used in production of the products originating in a Party in conformity with the following provisions:

a) with respect to products included in groups 25 - 49 and 64 - 97 of the Harmonized System, 5 percent of the customs duties or a lesser percentage effective Ukraine or Republic of Macedonia shall be withheld;

b) with respect to products included in groups 50 - 63 of the Harmonized System, 10 percent of the customs duties or a lesser percentage effective Ukraine or Republic of Macedonia shall be withheld.

Provisions of this paragraph shall apply until 31 December 2002 and may be reviewed upon consent of the Parties.

Chapter V
Certificate of origin

Article 15
General requirements

1. Provisions of this Agreement shall apply to products originating in a Party, at the time of importation to the other Party in case of submission of a certificate of origin EUR. 1, a sample of which is presented in Annex III.

2. Notwithstanding provisions of paragraph 1, to products originating in a Party, in understanding of this Protocol, in cases specified in Article 23, provisions of this Agreement shall apply without submission of any documents specified above.

Article 16
Procedure for issuing a certificate of origin EUR. 1

1. A certificate of origin EUR. 1 shall be issued by the customs bodies of the Republic of Macedonia or by the authorized bodies of Ukraine (hereinafter referred to as the authorized bodies) on the basis of the application that is filed in written form by the exporter or by his authorized representative on the basis of the responsibility of the exporter.

2. To meet this end, the exporter or his authorized representative shall fill out a certificate of origin EUR. 1 and the application form the samples of which are presented in Annexes IIIa and IIIb. A certificate of origin EUR. 1 must be filled out in English. Other forms must be filled out in Ukrainian or Macedonian languages in accordance with provisions of the national legislation of the exporting country. In the event of filling out a form in hand-writing, it should be done in ink and in capital letters. Description of the products must be provided in the specifically designated for this purpose section without leaving a single line blank. If a section is not filled out completely, one should draw a horizontal line under the last line of the description and to cross out the remaining blank space.

3. An exporter who has filed an application for a certificate of origin EUR. 1, will be required, at any moment upon the demand of the customs bodies of the exporting country where the certificate of origin EUR. 1 is to be issued, to provide all relevant documents verifying the status of origin of the respective products, as well as to meet other requirements of this Protocol.

4. A certificate of origin EUR. 1 shall be issued by the authorized bodies of the Parties only if relevant products may be considered originating in either of the Parties and meeting other requirements of this Protocol.

5. The authorized bodies (for purposes of this paragraph customs bodies of Ukraine also may be engaged) are required to take all necessary measures concerning verification of the status of origin of the products from the Parties and compliance with other requirements of the Protocol. To meet this end, they may ask for any proof and carry out any inspection of the documents of the exporter or any other necessary examination. The authorized bodies issuing a certificate are also required to verify that the provided under paragraph 2 forms are properly filled out. In particular, they will be required to check if the space specified for description of the products is filled out in a way that makes it impossible to add any writing for cheating purposes.

6. Date of issue of a certificate of origin EUR. 1 shall be specified in section 11 of the certificate.

7. A certificate of origin EUR. 1 shall be issued by the authorized bodies and delivered to the exporter as soon as the exportation actually took place or was ensured.



Article 17
A certificate of origin EUR. 1 issued afterwards

1. Notwithstanding provisions of Article 16(7), a certificate of origin EUR. 1 may be issued in exceptional cases after the exportation of the products to which it concerns, provided that:

a) at the time of the export it wasn’t issued due to error or unintentional omission, or due to special circumstances; or

b) it will be demonstrated to the authorized bodies that the certificate of origin EUR. 1 has been issued but due to technical reasons it wasn’t received at the time of importation.

2. For purposes of application of provisions of paragraph 1, the exporter will be required to specify in one’s statement the place and date of the export of the product which the certificate of origin EUR. 1 concerns, as well as the reasons of one’s request.

3. The authorized bodies may issue a certificate of origin EUR. 1 afterwards only after verifying information presented in the exporter’s statement to ensure that it corresponds to the information contained in relevant documents.

4. On the certificate of origin EUR. 1 issued afterwards one should make the following note: "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY".

5. A note provided for by paragraph 4 must be made in section "Notes" of the certificate of origin EUR. 1.

Article 18
Issue of a duplicate certificate of origin EUR. 1

1. In the event of stealing, loss or destruction of a certificate of origin EUR. 1, the exporter may submit to the authorized bodies which issued that certificate a statement requesting issue of a duplicate certificate on the basis of the export documents available to these bodies.

2. The duplicate certificate issued as specified above must be marked with a word "DUPLICATE".

3. A note provided for in paragraph 2 must be put in section "Notes" in the duplicate certificate of origin EUR. 1.

4. A duplicate certificate must contain the date of issue of the original certificate of origin EUR. 1 and shall take effect as of this date.

Article 19
Issue of a certificate of origin EUR. 1 on the basis of the earlier issued certificate of origin.

If a product originating in a Party remains under control of a customs body of a Party, it will be possible to replace the original certificate of origin with one or several certificates of origin EUR. 1 for purposes of shipping all or some of these products to one of the Parties. Replaced certificate(s) of origin EUR. 1 shall be issued by the authorized bodies.

Article 20
Effectiveness of a certificate of origin

1. A certificate of origin shall be effective during four months following the date of issue in the exporting country and must be submitted during the specified period to the customs bodies of the importing country.

2. A certificate of origin, which is submitted to the customs bodies of the importing country after the end of the period set for its submission in paragraph 1, may be accepted for purposes of granting preferential treatment, if failure to submit these documents before the end of the specified period was caused by exceptional circumstances.

3. In other instances of the late submission, the customs bodies of the importing country may accept the certificate of origin if products were delivered before the expiry of the specified period.

Article 21
Filing a certificate of origin

A certificate of origin must be submitted to the customs bodies of the importing country under procedures established by this Party. The said bodies may require translation of the certificate of origin, as well as demand to attach to the import declaration a statement of the importer stating that the products are meeting requirements established for purposes of implementation of the Agreement.

Article 22
Import of the products by separate parts

If upon a request of the importer and in compliance with conditions established by the customs bodies of the importing Party, a disassembled or not-assembled product, as defined in the General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System, which classifies under sections XVI and XVII or product codes 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonized System, is imported in separate parts, the customs bodies shall be provided with a single certificate of origin for such product at the time of importation of its first part.

Article 23
Exemption from the requirement to submit a certificate of origin

1. Products which are shipped in small packages from private individuals to private individuals, or which constitute a part of personal luggage of passengers, shall be treated as products originating in a Party, without provision of a proof of origin provided that such products are not imported by way of a trade activity and were declared as meeting requirements of this Protocol, and provided that there are no grounds for doubts concerning accuracy of this declaration. In the event of sending of the products by mail, this declaration may be filed on the basis of the declaration form C2/CP3 or on a sheet of paper attached to such document.

2. A one-time import containing exclusively goods for personal use of the recipients, travelers or their families, shall not be treated as import through trade activity, if nature and quantity of the products obviously demonstrate that there is no commercial objective involved.

3. Moreover, the total value of the products in question may not exceed 500 EUR for small packages and EUR 1200 for products that constitute part of the travelers’ personal luggage.

Article 24
Accompanying documents

The documents specified in Article 16(3) and used for purposes of verification that the products which the certificate of origin EUR. 1 concerns, may be treated as products originating in the Parties and meeting other requirements of this Protocol, may in particular, include:

a) direct proof of operations involving processing, which were carried out by the exporter or supplier for purposes of production of respective goods, which are included, for instance, in his accounts or internal financial accounting;

b) documents that confirm the status of origin of the materials used, issued or prepared in the Party, where these documents are used in accordance with national legislation;

c) documents that confirm operations involving transformation or processing of materials in the Party, issued or prepared in the Party where these documents are used in accordance with national legislation;

d) a certificate of origin EUR. 1 confirming the status of origin of materials used in a Party, issued or prepared in the Party in accordance with this Protocol.

Article 25
Preserving a certificate of origin and accompanying documents

1. The exporter who filed an application for issuance of a certificate of origin EUR. 1 shall be required to keep the documents specified in Article 16(3) at least for three years.

2. The authorized bodies of the exporting country which issued the certificate of origin EUR. 1, are required to keep the application form provided for under Article 16(2) during a period of at least three years.

3. The customs bodies of the importing country are required to keep the submitted certificate of origin EUR. 1 during a period of at least three years.

Article 26
Differences and formal errors

1. discovery of insignificant differences between the data specified in the certificate of origin, and data specified in documents submitted to the customs services for purposes of complying with formal requirements concerning import of the products, may not, in itself, make the certificate of origin invalid and such that does not have legal effect, if it has been properly established that this document refers to the presented products.

2. Obvious formal errors, such as typing errors in the certificate of origin, may not serve as a basis for refusal to accept this document, if such errors do not give rise to doubts concerning accuracy of the data specified in this document.

Article 27
Amounts expressed in EUR

1. Amounts in the national currency of the exporting country that correspond to the amounts expressed in EUR, shall be determined by the exporting country and communicated to the importing country.

2. If these amounts exceed corresponding amounts specified by the importing country, the latter shall be required to accept them if the invoice for the products is formulated in the currency of the exporting country.

3. Amounts that must be used in any given national currency, provide an equivalent in this national currency of the amounts expressed in EUR as of the first working day of October of the year preceding the date of the enactment of this Agreement.

4. Amounts expressed in EUR and their equivalent amounts in the national currencies of the Parties shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee upon a request of a Party. Performing such a review, the Joint Committee is to ensure that amounts which are used в national currency are not reduced, as well as to consider appropriateness.

Chapter VI
Administrative cooperation arrangements

Article 28
Mutual assistance

1. The customs bodies of the Parties shall be required to provide each other with sample prints of their seals which are used by their authorized bodies for purposes of issuance of certificates of origin EUR. 1, as well as to provide each other with addresses of the customs bodies which are responsible for verification of these certificates.

2. To ensure proper implementation of this Protocol, the Parties shall provide each other, acting through  competent customs administrations, with assistance in verification of certificates of origin EUR. 1 and authenticity of information provided in these documents.

Article 29
Verification of a certificate of origin

1. Further verification of proof of origin shall be carried out on the ad hoc basis or in cases where customs bodies of the importing country have reasonable doubts concerning authenticity of such documents, the status of origin of the goods originating in the Parties or concerning conformity with other requirements of this Protocol.

2. For purposes of implementation of provisions of paragraph 1, the customs bodies of the importing country shall be required to submit the certificate of origin EUR. 1 and the invoice, if such were provided, or copies of such documents to the customs bodies of the exporting country, indicating, where appropriate, a reason for the request. Any obtained documents and information that may indicate that the information presented in the certificate of origin is untrue, shall be additionally added to the request for verification.

3. Verification shall be carried out by the customs bodies of the exporting country. To meet this end, they have the right to ask for any proof and conduct any examinations of the accounts of the exporter and any other examinations that they deem necessary.

4. If customs bodies of the importing country decide to terminate preferential treatment of the products in question prior to the results of the verification, the importер shall be advised to take the products back on conditions of taking any preventive measures that will be deemed necessary.

5. The customs bodies that requested verification shall be informed of the results of such verification as soon as possible. These results must clearly indicate whether the documents in question are authentic and whether the products in question can be treated as products originating in a Parties and meeting other requirements of this Protocol.

6. If in the case of a reasonable doubt there is no resopnse during ten months from the date of requesting the verification, or if the response does not contain sufficient information needed to establish authenticity of the document in question or of actual origin of the products, the customs bodies that have submitted a request will be required, except in the exceptional circumstances, refuse to grant preferential treatment.

Article 30
Settlement of disputes

In the event of a dispute concerning a procedure for conducting verification under Article 29, and if it is impossible to settle this dispute between the customs bodies that submitted a request for verification, and the customs bodies responsible for such verification, or if they raise the issue of interpretation of this Protocol, the Contracting Parties shall endeavor to resolve their differences by means of direct consultations.

Settlement of disputes between an importer and the customs bodies of the importing country under any circumstances shall be conducted under the legislation of the Party in question.

Article 31
Penalty sanctions 

Penalty sanctions shall apply to any person who prepares or causes to prepare a document that contains untrue information for purposes of obtaining preferential treatment for particular products.

Article 32
Free zones

1. The Parties are required to take all necessary measures to ensure that products, which are in commercial circulation, for which a certificate of origin was issued and which are transported through free zones situated in the territory of the Parties, are not replaced by other products and are not subjected to other operations except regular operations aimed to prevent deterioration of the products.

2. As an exemption from provisions contained in paragraph 1, if products originating in a Party are  imported to a free zone on the basis of a certificate of origin and these products are subjected to transformations or processing, the competent bodies, upon request of the exporter, shall issue a new certificate EUR. 1, if transformation or processing performed conform to provisions of this Protocol.


Chapter VII
Closing provisions

Article 33
Subcommittee for customs issues and issues of origin

Subcommittee for customs issues and issues of origin shall be set up with the Joint Committee for purposes of assisting the committee in its performing its duties and ensuring uninterrupted sharing of information and consultations between experts.

The subcommittee shall consists of representatives of both Parties – experts in customs issues and issues of origin.

Article 34
Amendments to the Protocol

The Joint committee may pass a decision to amend provisions of this Protocol.

Article 35
Goods in transit and goods in storage

Provisions of this Agreement may be applied to goods which are in conformity with the provisions of this Protocol and as of the date of the enactment or beginning of the application are shipped as goods in transit, or are held in the Party foe a temporary storage at a customs licensing warehouse or in a free zone, and must be provided to the customs bodies of the importing country during four months from the date of the issue by the competent body of the exporting country of the certificate EUR. 1, issued with the documents that verify direct transportation of the goods.

 
 

Annex I
to Protocol C

Introductory notes on the list provided in Annex II to the Protocol

Note 1:

The list sets forth the requirements to all products needed to determine if these products can be regarded as such that underwent substantial transformation or processing, as defined в of Article 5 of the Protocol.

Note 2:

2.1. The first two sections of the list contain description of the obtained product. The first section specifies the number of the product group or product code used under the Harmonized system, whereas the second section contains description of goods that is used in this system for a relevant product group or product code. For each paragraph of the first two sections in section 3 or 4 a rule is provided. If in certain instances in paragraphs in the first section "ex" is used, it means that the rules contained in sections 3 or 4 shall apply only to a part of the relevant product group specified in section 2.

2.2. If in section 1 several numbers of product groups are provided, or if in section 2 there is a number of the product group, and the description of the goods in section 2 is general, then the relevant rule in section 3 or 4 shall apply to all products which in accordance with the Harmonized System are classified in the codes of this group or in any of the codes specified in section 1.

2.3. If in the list there are several rules that shall apply to different products within one product group, then every paragraph contains description of the part of the product group to which relevant rules of sections 3 or 4 apply.

2.4. If for the paragraphs of the first two sections a rule is provided in section 3 and in section 4, the exporter may choose as an alternative one of these rules - either a rule provided in section 3, or a rule provided in section 4. If in section 4 there is no rule concerning origin, then the rule provided in section 3 shall apply.

Note 3:

3.1. Provisions of Article 5 of the Protocol which concern products that have acquired a status of originating in a country and are used for production of other products, shall apply whether or not this status was acquired within the limits of a factory where these products are used, or at the other factory in the Parties.

Example:

An engine under product code N 8407, for which a rule  provides that value of materials originating in the third countries that may be included in this engine should not exceed 40 % of the EXW price, and is produced from "other alloy steel by forging" of the product code N 7224.

If such forging was performed in the Party from ingots originating in the third countries, it thus had obtained the status of origin under the rule for the product code N 7224 from the list. This processing may later be considered originating for purposes of determination of the cost of the engines, whether or not this processing was carried out at the same or another factory of a Party. Therefore, the value of ingots originating in the third countries shall not be taken into consideration at the time of adding value of used materials originating in the third countries.

3.2. A rule from the list sets a minimum level of required transformation or processing, and performing transformation or processing in excess of these requirements also grants a status of origin in a Party; and on the contrary, performing the transformation or processing at a lower level may not grant the status of origin in a Party. Therefore, if a rule provides that at the certain level of production there may be used a material originating in the third countries, the use of such a material shall be allowed at an earlier stage of production and shall not be allowed at a later stage.

3.3. Without prejudice to provisions of the note 3.2, if a rule provides that it is allowed to use "materials of any product code", then it is allowed to use also materials that are under the same product code, except for specific limitations that also may be specified in this rule. However, the language "production from materials of any product code, including other materials under product code #..." means that there may be used only materials classified in the same product group as the product that have description that differs from the description of the product, presented in section 2 of the list.

3.4. If a rule from the list provides that the product may be produced from more than one material, it does not mean that any or all materials may be used. Using all materials is not required.

Example:

The rule for fabrics HS 5208 - 5212 provides that one may use natural fabrics, and also, among other materials, - chemical materials. It does not mean that both types of materials must be used; one can use either material or both materials.

3.5. If a rule from the list provides that the product must be produced from the specific material, this condition, obviously, does not prohibit the use of other materials which due to their internal nature do not conform to this rule (see also note 6.2 below concerning textile materials).

Example:

The rule concerning finished food products of product category N 1904, which separately provides for use of cereals and derivatives, does not prohibit use of mineral salts, chemical substances and other additions which are not cereal products.

However, this rule shall not apply to the products, which, although could not be produced from a specific material specified in the list, may have been produced from the material of the same type at the earlier stage of production.

Example:

In the event of clothes articles of group 62, made from nonwoven materials, if for this type of clothes only use of yarn originating from the third countries is permitted, one may not begin with the use of nonwoven clothes, even if nonwoven clothes usually can not be produced from yarn. In such instances the initial material is usually the material that is used at the stage prior to yarn that is at the stage of yarn making.

3.6. If a rule from the list sets forth two percentage indicators concerning maximum value of the used materials originating in the third countries, these indicators may not be added up. In other words, the maximum value of all used materials originating in the third countries, may not at any moment exceed the greater of the two specified percentage indicators. Moreover – one may not exceed specific percentage indicators concerning specific materials to which they shall apply.

Note 4:

4.1. The term "natural fibers" is used in the list for other fibers except man-made or synthetic fibers. The term is limited to stages that precede spinning, including residue, and includes, if otherwise is not specified, fibers that were combed or otherwise processed, but not spun.

4.2. Terms "natural fibers" includes horse hair under product code N 0503, silk under product codes N 5002 and 5003, as well as wool hair, fine or coarse animal hair under product codes N 5101 - 5105, cotton fibers under product codes N 5201 - 5203 and other vegetable textile fibers classified under product codes N 5301 - 5305.

4.3. Terms "textile pulp", "chemical materials" and "paper materials" are used in the list to reflect materials that are classified under groups 50 - 63 and may be used for production of man-made, synthetic or paper fibers or yarn.

4.4. Term "man-made staple fibers" is used in the list to reflect the use of synthetic or man-made wisp, staple fibers or yarn waste under product codes N 5501 - 5507.

Note 5:

5.1. If for a particular product in the list there is a reference to this note, then conditions specified in section 3 shall not apply to any basic textile materials which are used in production of this product, which all taken together provide for no more than 10 percent of the total weight of all used basic textile materials (see also notes 5.3 and 5.4 below).

5.2. However, the tolerance margin specified in note 5.1 shall apply only to complex products produced from two or more basic textile materials.

The materials specified below are basic textile materials:

- silk;

- wool;

- coarse animal hair;

- fine animal hair;

- cotton;

- paper materials and paper;

- flux;

- yarn;

- jute and other textile bast fibers;

- sisal and other textile fibers of the genus Agave;

- coconut, abaca (Manila hemp or Musa textilis Nee), ramie and other vegetable textile fibers;

- synthetic man-made thread;

- man-made thread;

- synthetic and man-made staple fibers made of polypropylene;

- synthetic man-made staple fibers of polyester;

- synthetic man-made staple fibers of polyamide;

- synthetic man-made staple fibers of polyacrylnitrite;

- synthetic man-made staple fibers of polyamide;

- synthetic man-made staple fibers of polytetraphluroethylen;

- synthetic man-made staple fibers of polyphenylensulphide;

- synthetic man-made staple fibers of polyvinylchloride;

- other synthetic man-made staple fibers;

- man-made staple fibers of viscose;

- other man-made staple fibers;

- yarn of polyurethane, with segments of polyester filaments, with or without braided yarn;

- yarn of polyurethane, with segments of polyester filaments, with or without braided yarn;

- products under product code N 5605 - Metallised yarn, including a strip with aluminum cord or a plastic strip, covered with aluminum powder or without such powder, with width not exceeding 5 mm, with layers of transparent or colored adhesive between the two layers of plastic strip;

- other products under product code N 5605.

Example:

The yarn under product code N 5205 made of cotton fibers under product code N 5203 and synthetic staple fibers under product code N 5506, is the composite yarn.

Therefore, synthetic staple fibers originating in the third countries and not meeting the rules concerning origin (which provide for production from chemical materials or textile pulp), may be used within the limit of 10 percent of the weight of the yarn.

Example:

Wool fibers under product code N 5112, made from woolen yarn under product code N 5107 and synthetic yarn with staple fibers under product code N 5509, is the composite fabric. Therefore there may be used the synthetic yarn that is not meeting requirements concerning origin (which provide for production from chemical materials or textile pulp), or the wool yarn that is not meeting requirements concerning origin (providing for production from natural fibers, not combed and not otherwise prepared for spinning), or a combination of these two types on condition that their total weight does not exceed 10 percent of the weight of the fabric.

Example:

Terry textile fabrics under product code N 5802, produced from cotton yarn under product code N 5205 and cotton fabric under product code N 5210, are composite products only in the case where own cotton fabric is the composite fabric that is produced from the yarn classified under two different product groups, or if the used cotton fabrics are composite.

Example:

If a pile textile fabric in question was produced from cotton yarn under product code N 5205 and synthetic fabrics under product code N 5407, then, obviously, two different types of basic textile materials were used, and the terry textile fabric, consequently, is a composite product.

Example:

A pile carpet produced either from man-made yarn or from jute-based cotton yarn, is a composite product, because three basic textile materials were used for its production. Therefore any materials originating in the third countries, may be used at the later stages of production, then specified in the rule, on condition that their total weight does not exceed 10 percent of the weight of textile materials of the carpet. Therefore both the jute basis and / or man-made yarn at this stage of production can be used on condition that requirements concerning weight are observed.

5.3. In the case of products that include «yarn of polyurethane, with segments of polyester filaments, with or without braided yarn", the tolerance margin for such yarn shall be 20 percent.

5.4. In the case of products that include "a strip with aluminum cord or a plastic strip, covered with aluminum powder or without such powder, with width not exceeding 5 mm, with layers of transparent or colored adhesive between the two layers of plastic strip", this tolerance margin will be 30 percent for such a strip.

Note 6:

6.1. In the case of textile products footnoted in the list with a reference to this note, textile materials can be used, except stiffened fabrics and additional stiffened fabrics used as foundation that do not meet requirements specified in the list in section 3 for respective finished product, on condition that they classified under product group other than the product in question, and that their value does not exceed 8 percent of the price of the product on the EXW basis.

6.2. Without prejudice to provisions of the note 6.3, materials which are not classified under product groups 50 - 63, may be used in production of textile products, whether or not they contain textile materials.

Example:

If a rule from the list provides that for a particular textile product group, such as trousers, yarn must be used, it does not mean that the use of metal articles, such as buttons, is not allowed because buttons are not classified under groups 50 - 63. For the same reason it does not prohibit the use of zippers, although zippers usually include textile materials.

6.3. In the event of application of a percentage rule, one should take into account value of materials that are not classified under groups 50 - 63, for purposes of determination of the value of the materials originating in the third countries, which are included in the product.

Note 7:

7.1. For purposes of product codes ex 2707, 2713 - 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403 the term "special processes" includes:

a) vacuum distillation;

b) repeat rectification;

c) cracking;

d) reforming;

e) extraction with solvents;

f) process that involves all following operations: treatment by concentrated sulfuric acid, oleum or sulfur anhydrite; alkaline neutralization; decoloring using natural active soil, activated soil, carbon absorber or bauxite;

g) polymerization;

h) alkalization;

i) isomerization.

7.2. For purposes of product codes N 2710, 2711 and 2712 the terms "special processes" includes:

a) vacuum distillation;

b) repeat rectification;

c) cracking;

d) reforming;

e) solvent extraction;

f) process that involves all following operations: treatment by concentrated sulfuric acid, oleum or sulfur anhydrite; alkaline neutralization; decoloring using natural active soil, activated soil, carbon absorber or bauxite;

g) polymerization;

h) alkalization;

i) isomerization;

j) concerning heavy oil products that belong only to the product code N ex 2710, - de-sulfuring by hydrogen that results in the sulfur content in the treated products that is reduced by approximately 85 percent (ASTM 1266-59 T method);

k) concerning products that belong only to product code N 2710, - other paraffin – removing treatment, except filtration;

l) concerning heavy oil products that belong only to product code N ex 2710, - treatment by hydrogen under pressure of 20 bar and temperature over 250 C using catalysts, except for de-sulfuring, if hydrogen is an active element of the chemical reaction. Further treatment of oils under product code N ex 2710 with hydrogen (for instance, hydrogen processing or decoloring) to mostly improve quality of color or stability, shall not be considered special process;

m) concerning oil products that belong only to product code N ex 2710 – atmospheric sublimation on condition that less than 30 percent of these products by volume, including waste, is sublimated under the temperature of 300 C using the method ASTM D 86;

n) concerning heavy oil products except gas oils and oil fuels that are classified only under product code N ex 2710, - treatment by means of high-frequency electric discharge.

7.3. For purposes of goods under product codes N ex 2707, 2713 - 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, simple operations, such as cleaning, dewatering, removing salt, filtration, coloring, marking, achieving required sulfur content by way of combining products with different sulfur content levels, and any combination of these or similar operations does not lead to acquiring a status of origin.
