MONTEVIDEO PROTOCOL ON MERCOSUR TRADE IN SERVICES
PREAMBLE
The Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of
Uruguay, States Parties to the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR);
reaffirming
that according to the Treaty of Asunción the Common Market implies, among other commitments, the free
circulation of services in the expanded market;
acknowledging
the importance of the liberalization of trade in services for the development of the economies of the States
Parties to MERCOSUR, for the deepening of the Customs Union and the progressive conformation of the Market
Common;
Considering
the need for the least developed countries and regions of MERCOSUR to participate
growth in the services market and to promote trade in services on the basis of reciprocity of
rights and obligations;
Wishing
enshrine in a common instrument the rules and principles for trade in services between States
Parties to MERCOSUR, with a view to expanding trade under conditions of transparency, balance and
progressive liberalization;
Having
into account the General Agreement on Trade in Services ( GATS ) of the World Trade Organization
(WTO), in particular its Article V, and the commitments assumed by the States Parties to the GATS;
They agree to the following:
PART I
Purpose and Scope of Application
Article I. Purpose
1. The purpose of this Protocol is to promote free trade in services in MERCOSUR.
Article II. Area of ​​application
1. This Protocol applies to measures taken by States Parties affecting trade in
services in MERCOSUR, including those related to:
Yo. the provision of a service;
ii. the purchase, payment or use of a service;
iii. access to services offered to the general public by prescription of those States Parties, and the
use of the same, for the provision of a service;
iv. the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of one State Party in the territory of another State
Party for the provision of a service;
2. For the purposes of this Protocol, trade in services is defined as the provision of a service:
a. from the territory of a State Party to the territory of any other State Party;
b. in the territory of a State Party to a consumer of services of any other State Party;
c. by a service provider of a State Party through the commercial presence in the territory of any
another State Party;
d. by a service provider of a State Party through the presence of natural persons of a State
Party in the territory of any other State Party.
3. For the purposes of this Protocol:
a. "Measures taken by States Parties" shall mean measures taken by:
Yo. central, state, provincial, departmental, municipal or local governments and authorities; and
ii. non-governmental institutions exercising powers delegated to them by governments or
authorities mentioned in literal i).
In compliance with its obligations and commitments under this Protocol, each State Party
will take the necessary measures within its power to secure its observance by governments and
state, provincial, departmental, municipal or local authorities and by institutions not
existing governments in their territory;
b. the term "services" includes all services in any sector, except services provided in the exercise
of government faculties;
c. a "service rendered in the exercise of governmental authority" means any service not rendered in
commercial conditions or in competition with one or several service providers.
PART II
General Obligations and Disciplines
Article III. Most favored nation treatment
1. With respect to the measures covered by this Protocol, each State Party shall grant immediately and
unconditionally to the services and service providers of any other State Party a treatment not
less favorable than that granted to similar services and similar service providers of
any other State Party or from third countries.
2. The provisions of this Protocol shall not be construed as preventing a State Party
confers or grants advantages to neighboring countries, whether or not they are States Parties, in order to facilitate exchanges
limited to contiguous border areas of services that are produced and consumed locally.
Article IV. Market access
1. With regard to market access through the modes of provision identified in Article II,
each State Party shall grant the services and service providers of the other State Parties treatment
no less favorable than that provided for in accordance with what is specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments.
States Parties undertake to allow the cross-border movement of capital that is part of
essence of a market access commitment contained in its Schedule of Specific Commitments
regarding cross-border trade, as well as capital transfers to its territory in the case of
market access commitments made with respect to commercial presence.
2. States Parties may not maintain or adopt, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or the
throughout its territory measures with respect to:
a. to the number of service providers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies or providers
services or by requiring an economic needs test;
b. to the total value of assets or service transactions in the form of numerical quotas or through the
requirement of an economic needs test;
c. to the total number of service operations or to the total amount of the production of services, expressed in
designated numerical units, in the form of quotas or by requiring proof of
economic needs, excluding measures that limit inputs for the provision of services.
d. the total number of natural persons that can be employed in a given service sector or that a
service provider may use and that are necessary for the provision of a specific service and are
directly related to it, in the form of numerical contingents or through the requirement of proof
of economic needs;
and. to the specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service provider
services can provide a service; Y
F. to the participation of foreign capital expressed as a maximum percentage limit to the holding of shares
by foreigners or as the total value of individual or aggregate foreign investments.
Article V. National treatment
1. Each State Party shall grant to the services and service providers of any other State Party,
with respect to all measures affecting the provision of services, treatment no less favorable than that
that it dispenses to its own similar services or similar service providers.
2. The specific commitments assumed under this Article do not obligate the States Parties to
offset intrinsic competitive disadvantages resulting from the foreign nature of the services or
relevant service providers.
3. Any State Party may comply with the provisions of paragraph 1 by granting the services and providers of
services of the other States Parties formally identical or formally different treatment to that granted to
its own similar services and similar service providers.
4. A formally identical or formally different treatment will be considered less favorable if it modifies the
conditions of competition in favor of the services or service providers of the State Party in
comparison with similar services or similar service providers of another State Party.
Article VI. additional commitments
The States Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures that affect trade in services,
but that are not subject to consignment in lists, by virtue of Articles IV and V, including those that refer to
to qualifications, standards or licensing issues. Said commitments shall be consigned in
the Schedules of specific commitments of the States Parties.
Article VII. Schedules of specific commitments
1. Each State Party shall specify in a list of specific commitments the sectors, sub-sectors and
activities with respect to which it will assume commitments and, for each corresponding mode of provision,
it will indicate the terms, limitations and conditions regarding market access and national treatment. Every
State Party may also specify additional commitments in accordance with Article VI. Whenever
pertinent, each State Party shall specify deadlines for the implementation of commitments as well as the date of
entry into force of such commitments.
2. Articles IV and V shall not apply to:
a. sectors, sub-sectors, activities, or measures that are not specified in the Schedule of Commitments
specific;
b. the measures specified in its Schedule of Specific Commitments that are inconsistent with Article IV or
Article V.
3. Measures that are non-conforming at the same time with Article IV and with Article V must be listed
in the column relating to Article IV. In this case, registration will be considered as a condition or
restriction also to Article V.
4. The Schedules of specific commitments shall be annexed to this Protocol and shall form an integral part thereof.
Article VIII. Transparency
1. Each State Party shall publish promptly before the date of its entry into force, except in situations of
force majeure, all relevant measuress of general application that refer to this Protocol or
affect its operation. Likewise, each State Party shall publish the international agreements it signs.
with any country and that refer to, or affect, trade in services.
2. When the publication of the information referred to in the previous paragraph is not feasible, it will be made available
otherwise available to the public.
3. Each State Party shall report promptly, and at least annually, to the Trade Commission of the
MERCOSUR, the establishment of new laws, regulations or administrative guidelines or the introduction of
modifications to the existing ones that it considers significantly affect trade in services.
4. Each State Party shall respond promptly to all requests for specific information made to it.
the other States Parties regarding any of their measures of general application or agreements
referred to in paragraph 1. In addition, each State Party shall provide specific information to the
States Parties that request it, through the established service or services, in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article
III of the GATS, on all these matters or on those that are subject to notification under paragraph 3.
5. Each State Party may notify the MERCOSUR Trade Commission of any measure adopted
by another State Party that, in its opinion, affects the operation of this Protocol.
Article IX. Disclosure of confidential information
Nothing in this Protocol shall impose an obligation on any State Party to provide information
confidential information the disclosure of which may constitute an obstacle to compliance with the law or otherwise
contrary to the public interest, or may harm the legitimate business interests of public companies or
private.
Article X. National regulations
1. Each State Party shall ensure that all measures of general application affecting trade in
services are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner.
2. Each State Party shall maintain or establish courts or judicial, arbitral or
administrative procedures that allow, at the request of an affected service provider, the prompt review of the
administrative decisions affecting trade in services and, where justified, the application of
appropriate solutions. When such procedures are not independent from the body in charge of the
administrative decision in question, the State Party shall ensure that they do in fact allow for a review
objective and impartial.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed in the sense that they impose on any State Party the
obligation to establish such courts or procedures when this is incompatible with its structure
constitutional or with the nature of its legal system.
3. When a license, registration, certificate or other type of authorization is required for the provision of a service, the
competent authorities of the State Party in question, within a reasonable period of time from the presentation of
an application:
Yo. when the application is complete, they will decide on it, informing the interested party; either
ii. when the application is not complete, they will inform the interested party about the status without unnecessary delay
of the request, as well as any additional information required under the law of the State Party.
4. In order to ensure that the measures related to technical standards, requirements and procedures in
qualifications, and licensing requirements, do not constitute unnecessary obstacles to the
trade in services, States Parties shall ensure that those requirements and procedures, inter alia:
Yo. are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and ability to provide the service
service;
ii. are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; Y
iii. in the case of licensing procedures, do not in themselves constitute a restriction on the provision of the service
service.
5. Each State Party may establish the appropriate procedures to verify the competence of the
professionals from the other States Parties.
Article XI. Recognition
1. When a State Party recognizes, unilaterally or through an agreement, the education, experience,
licences, registrations or certificates obtained in the territory of another State Party or of any country
that is not part of MERCOSUR:
a. Nothing in this Protocol shall be construed to require that State Party to
recognize education, experience, licences, registrations or certificates obtained in the territory of
another State Party; Y
b. the State Party shall afford any other State Party adequate opportunity to:
Yo. demonstrate that the education, experience, licenses, registrations, and certificates earned in your
territoryor must also be recognized; either,
ii. so that you can enter into an agreement or convention of equivalent effect.
2. Each State Party undertakes to encourage the competent entities in their respective territories, among
others, to those of a governmental nature, as well as professional associations and colleges, in cooperation with
competent entities of the other States Parties, to develop mutually acceptable norms and criteria
for the exercise of relevant activities and professions in the sphere of services, through the
granting of licences, registrations and certificates to service providers and to propose
recommendations to the Common Market Group on mutual recognition.
3. The standards and criteria referred to in paragraph 2 may be developed, among others, based on the
following elements: education, examinations, experience, conduct and ethics, professional development and renewal
of certification, scope of action, local knowledge, consumer protection and nationality requirements,
residence or domicile.
4. Once the recommendation referred to in paragraph 2 has been received, the Common Market Group will examine it within
a reasonable period of time to determine its consistency with this Protocol. Based on this review, each
The State Party undertakes to instruct its respective competent authorities, when necessary,
to implement the provisions of the competent bodies of MERCOSUR within a mutually
agreed.
5. The Common Market Group will examine periodically, and at least once every three years, the
implementation of this Article.
Article XII. Competition defense
In relation to the acts practiced in the provision of services by law service providers
public or private or other entities, whose purpose is to produce or produce effects on the
competition within the scope of MERCOSUR and that affect trade in services between the States Parties,
The provisions of the MERCOSUR Competition Defense Protocol will apply.
Article XIII. General exceptions
Subject to the fact that the measures listed below are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means
of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination when similar conditions prevail between countries, or a
disguised restriction on trade in services, nothing in this Protocol shall be construed in the
sense of preventing a State Party from adopting or applying measures:
a. necessary to protect morality or maintain public order, and may only invoke the exception of
public order when there is an imminent and sufficiently serious threat to one of the interests
fundamentals of society;
b. necessary to protect the life and health of people and animals or to preserve plants;
c. necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Protocol, including those relating to:
Yo. the prevention of misleading and fraudulent practices, or the means to deal with the effects
of breach of service contracts;
ii. the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and dissemination of personal data and
protecting the confidentiality of individual records and accounts;
iii. safety;
d. incompatible with Article V, as expressed in this Protocol, provided that the difference in
treatment is intended to ensure the equitable and effective taxation or collection of direct taxes
with respect to the services or service providers of the other States Parties, including the
measures adopted by a State Party by virtue of its tax regime, in accordance with the provisions of Article
XIV subparagraph d) of the GATS.
and. incompatible with Article III, as expressed in this Protocol, provided that the difference in treatment
results from an agreement intended to avoid double taxation or from provisions intended to avoid double
taxation contained in any other international agreement or convention that is binding on the State
Party applying the measure.
Article XIV. Security Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Protocol shall be construed as meaning that:
a. imposes on a State Party the obligation to supply information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to
the essential interests of your security; either
b. prevents a State Party from adopting measures it deems necessary for the protection of the interests
safety essentials:
Yo . relating to the provision of services intended directly or indirectly to ensure the supply of the
armed forces;
ii. relating to fissionable or fusionable materials or those used for their manufacture;
iii. applied in times of war or in the event of serious international tension; either
c. prevent a State Partythe adoption of measures in compliance with the obligations contracted by him in
under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security.
2. The MERCOSUR Trade Commission will be informed of the measures adopted by virtue of the literals
b) and c) of paragraph 1 as well as its termination.
Article XV. public procurement
1. Articles III, IV and V shall not be applicable to the laws, regulations or prescriptions that govern contracting.
by government agencies for services intended for official purposes and not for commercial resale or
use in the provision of services for commercial sale.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, and recognizing that such laws, regulations or requirements
may have distorting effects on trade in services, the States Parties agree that the
the common disciplines that in terms of government purchases in general will be established in the
MERCOSUR.
Article XVI. grants
1. States Parties recognize that in certain circumstances subsidies may have effects of
distortion of trade in services. The States Parties agree that the common disciplines that
in terms of subsidies, in general, they will be established in MERCOSUR.
2. The mechanism provided for in paragraph 2 of Article XV of the GATS shall apply.
Article XVII. denial of benefits
A State Party may deny the benefits derived from this Protocol to a service provider of another
State Party, prior notification and consultation, when that State Party demonstrates that the
service is being provided by a person from a country that is not a MERCOSUR State Party.
Article XVIII. Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Protocol:
a. "measure" means any measure adopted by a State Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision or administrative provision, or in any other way;
b. "provision of a service" includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a
service;
c. "commercial presence" means any type of commercial or professional establishment, through, among others
means, of the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a legal person, as well as branches and
representative offices located in the territory of a State Party in order to provide a service.
d. "sector" of a service means:
Yo. with reference to a specific commitment, one or more subsectors of that service, or all of them,
as specified in a State Party's Schedule of Specific Commitments.
ii. otherwise, the entirety of that service sector, including all subsectors;
and. "service of another State Party" means a service provided:
Yo. from or in the territory of that other State Party;
ii. in the case of provision of a service through commercial presence or through the presence of people
physical, by a service provider of that other State Party;
F. "service provider" means any person who provides a service. When the service is not provided by
a legal person directly, but through other forms of commercial presence, for example a
branch or a representative office, will nevertheless be granted to the service provider (i.e. to the
legal person), through this presence, the treatment granted to service providers under the
Protocol. This treatment will be granted to the presence through which the service is provided, without it being necessary
grant it to any other part of the provider located outside the territory in which the service is provided.
g. "service consumer" means any person who receives or uses a service;
h. "person" means a natural person or a legal person;
Yo. "natural person of another State Party" means a natural person residing in the territory of that other State
Party or of any other State Party and who, under the law of that other State Party, is a national
of that other State Party or has the right of permanent residence in that other State Party;
j. "legal person" means any legal entity duly constituted and organized under the
legislation that is applicable to it, whether or not it is for profit, whether it is public, private or mixed property and is
organized under any type of company or association.
k. "legal person of another State Party" means a legal person that is constituted or organized with
under the law of that other State Party, which has its headquarters there and develops or plans to develop
substantive business operations in the territory of that State Party or of any other State Party.
PART III
Liberalization Program
Article XIX. Negotiation of specific commitments
1. In compliance with the objectives of this Protocol, the States Parties maintainthey will give successive rounds of
negotiations to be completed within a maximum period of ten years, counted from the entry into force
of this Protocol, the MERCOSUR Services Trade Liberalization Program. the rounds of
Negotiations will be carried out annually and their main objective will be the progressive incorporation of
sectors, subsectors, activities and modes of provision of services to the Liberalization Program of the
Protocol, as well as the reduction or elimination of the adverse effects of the measures on trade
of services, as a way of ensuring effective access to markets. This process will aim to promote
the interests of all participants, on the basis of mutual advantage, and achieve an overall balance of
rights and obligations.
2. The progressive liberalization process will be directed in each round through negotiations
aimed at increasing the level of specific commitments assumed by the States Parties in their Schedules
of specific commitments.
3. In the development of the Liberalization Program, differences in the level of commitments assumed will be admitted.
taking into account the specificities of the different sectors and respecting the objectives indicated in paragraph
Next.
4. The liberalization process shall respect the right of each State Party to regulate and introduce new
regulations within their territories to achieve the objectives of national policies related to the sector
services. Such regulations may regulate, among others, national treatment and market access, whenever
that do not annul or impair the obligations arising from this Protocol and the specific commitments.
Article XX. Modification or suspension of commitments
1. Each State Party may, during the implementation of the Liberalization Program referred to in the Part
III of this Protocol, modify or suspend specific commitments included in its Schedule of Commitments
specific.
This modification or suspension will be applicable only from the date on which it is established and respecting the
principle of non-retroactivity to preserve acquired rights.
2. Each State Party shall have recourse to this regime only in exceptional cases, provided that when it
make, notify the Common Market Group and explain to it the facts, reasons and justifications
for such modification or suspension of commitments. In such cases, the State Party concerned shall hold
consultations with the State or States Parties that consider themselves affected, to reach an understanding
agreed on the specific measure to be applied and the term in which it will be in force.
PART IV
Institutional Provisions
Article XXI. Common Market Council
The Common Market Council will approve the results of the negotiations on commitments
as well as any modification and/or suspension thereof.
Article XXII. Common Market Group
1. The negotiation of services in MERCOSUR is the responsibility of the Common Market Group.
In relation to this Protocol, the Common Market Group will have the following functions:
a. convene and supervise the negotiations provided for in Article XIX of this Protocol. For such purposes, the
The Common Market Group will establish the scope, criteria and instruments for holding negotiations
regarding specific commitments;
b. receive notifications and the results of queries regarding modification and/or suspension of
specific commitments as provided by Article XX;
c. comply with the functions entrusted in Article XI;
d. periodically evaluate the evolution of trade in services in MERCOSUR; Y
and. carry out the other tasks that are entrusted to it by the Council of the Common Market in matters of
service trade.
2. For the purposes of the functions provided for above, the Common Market Group will constitute a body
auxiliary and will regulate its composition and modalities of operation.
Article XXIII. MERCOSUR Trade Commission
1. Without prejudice to the functions referred to in the preceding articles, the application of this Protocol shall be
by the MERCOSUR Trade Commission, which will have the following functions:
a. receive information that, in accordance with Article VIII of this Protocol, is notified to him by the
States Parties;
b. receive information from the States Parties regarding the exceptions provided for in Article XIV.
c. receive information from the States Parties in relation to actions that may configure abuses of position
dominant or practices that distort competition and bring it to the attention of the national bodies of
application of the Competition Defense Protocol;
d. understand the consultations and claims presented by the States Parties in relation to the application,
interpretation or breach of this Protocolo and the commitments they assume in the Lists of
specific commitments, applying the mechanisms and procedures in force in MERCOSUR; Y
and. perform the other tasks entrusted to it by the Common Market Group in matters of
services.
Article XXIV. dispute resolution
Controversies that may arise between the States Parties in relation to the application, interpretation or
failure to comply with the commitments established in this Protocol, will be resolved in accordance with
the procedures and settlement mechanisms in force in MERCOSUR.
PART V
Final Provisions
Article XXV. Annexes
The Annexes to this Protocol form an integral part thereof.
Article XXVI. Revision
1. In order to achieve the object and purpose of this Protocol, it may be revised, taking into account
the evolution and regulation of trade in services in MERCOSUR as well as the progress achieved in
services in the World Trade Organization and other Specialized Forums.
2. In particular, based on the evolution of the operation of the institutional provisions of this
Protocol and the institutional structure of MERCOSUR, Part IV may be modified with a view to its
improvement.
Article XXVII. Validity
1. This Protocol, an integral part of the Treaty of Asunción, will have an indefinite duration and will enter into force
thirty days after the date of deposit of the third instrument of ratification.
2. This Protocol and its ratification instruments shall be deposited with the Government of the Republic
of Paraguay, which will send an authenticated copy of this Protocol to the Governments of the other States
Parties.
3. The Schedules of specific commitments will be incorporated into the national legal systems of
accordance with the procedures established in each State Party.
Article XXVIII. notifications
The Government of the Republic of Paraguay shall notify the governments of the other States Parties of the date of
deposit of the instruments of ratification and the entry into force of this Protocol.
Article XXIX. Accession or complaint
In matters of accession or denunciation, the norms established for this Protocol shall apply as a whole.
by the Treaty of Asunción. Adherence to or denunciation of the Treaty of Asunción or this Protocol,
mean, ipso jure, adherence to or denunciation of this Protocol and the Treaty of Asunción.
Article XXX. Denomination
This Protocol shall be known as the Montevideo Protocol on Trade in Market Services
Southern Common.
Done in the city of Montevideo, Oriental Republic of Uruguay, on the fifteenth day of December of the
year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-seven, in an original in the Spanish and Portuguese languages, both being text
equally authentic.
For the Government of the Argentine Republic
GUIDO DI TELLA
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship
For the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil
LUIZ FELIPE LAMPREIA
Minister of Foreign Affairs
For the Government of the Republic of Paraguay
RUBEN MELGAREJO
Minister of Foreign Affairs
For the Government of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay
CARLOS PEREZ DEL CASTILLO
Minister (i) of Foreign Affairs