PROTOCOL
setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries
Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
for the period 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2012
Article 1
Period of application and fishing opportunities
1. For a period of four years from 1 August 2008, the fishing
opportunities granted under Articles 5 and 6 of the Agreement
shall be as laid down in the table attached to this Protocol. These
opportunities form part of the overall fishing effort shown in
Annex III laid down by the Mauritanian authorities on the basis
of available scientific advice and regularly updated.
2. Paragraph 1 shall apply subject to Articles 4 and 5 of this
Protocol.
3. Under Article 6 of the Agreement, vessels flying the flag of
a Member State of the European Community may fish in Mauritanian
fishing zones only if they are in possession of a fishing
licence issued under this Protocol in accordance with the Annexes
hereto.
Article 2
Financial contribution - Methods of payment
1. The financial contribution under Article 7 of the Agreement
shall be set at EUR 86 million, EUR 76 million, EUR 73 million
and EUR 70 million for the first, second, third and fourth years
respectively. Of those amounts, EUR 11 million, EUR 16 million,
EUR 18 million and EUR 20 million for the first, second,
third and fourth years respectively shall be allocated by Mauritania
to financial support for the implementation of the national
fisheries policy, as provided for in Article 7(1)(b) of the Agreement,
including EUR 1 million per year for support for the Banc
d'Arguin National Park (PNBA).
2. In the event of the overall tonnage of 250 000 tonnes per
year for category 9 (pelagics) being exceeded, the Community
shall pay an additional contribution of EUR 40 per tonne fished.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply subject to Articles 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10
and 13 of this Protocol.
4. The Community shall pay the financial contribution no later
than 31 August 2008 for the first year and no later than 1 August
for the following years.
5. The financial contribution shall be paid into a single account
held by the Islamic Republic of Mauritania's Public Treasury with
the Central Bank of Mauritania, the references of which shall be
communicated by the Ministry.
6. Subject to Article 6 of this Protocol, the allocation of this
contribution and of the support for the PNBA shall be decided
within the framework of the Mauritanian Finance Act and, this
being the case, the Mauritanian State shall have full discretion
regarding the use to which it is put.
Article 3
Scientific cooperation
1. The two Parties undertake to promote responsible fishing in
Mauritanian fishing zones on the basis of the principles of sustainable
management.
2. During the period covered by this Protocol, the two Parties
shall cooperate to develop certain issues relating to the development
of the state of resources in Mauritanian fishing zones; to this
end a Joint Scientific Committee shall meet at least once a year, in
accordance with Article 4(1) of the Agreement. At the request of
one of the Parties and where needed within the framework of this
Protocol, other meetings of this Scientific Committee may also be
convened.
3. Based on the conclusions of the work of the Joint Scientific
Committee and the best available scientific advice, the two Parties
shall consult each other within the Joint Committee provided for
in Article 10 of the Agreement and, where necessary and by
mutual agreement, adopt measures to ensure the sustainable management
of fisheries resources.
4. The remit of the Joint Scientific Committee shall cover in
particular the following activities:
(a) drawing up an annual scientific report on the fisheries covered
by this Agreement;
(b) identifying and implementing an annual programme dealing
with specific scientific issues in order to improve understanding
of the state of resources and changes to ecosystems;
(c) studying, under a procedure agreed by consensus within the
Committee, scientific questions which arise in the course of
implementing this Agreement;
  (d) carrying out, among other things, and as required, exploratory
fishing trips to determine the fishing opportunities and
exploitation options which guarantee the conservation of
resources and their ecosystem.
Article 4
Review of fishing opportunities
1. The fishing opportunities referred to in Article 1 of this Protocol
may be increased by mutual agreement provided that the
conclusions of the Joint Scientific Committee referred to in
Article 4(1) of the Agreement confirm that such an increase will
not endanger the sustainable management of Mauritania's
resources. In this case the financial contribution referred to in
Article 2(1) of this Protocol shall be increased proportionately and
pro rata temporis. However, the total amount of the financial contribution
paid by the European Community shall not be more
than twice the amount indicated in Article 2(1) of this Protocol
and shall remain proportionate to the increase in fishing
opportunities.
2. Conversely, if the Parties agree to adopt measures as referred
to in Article 3(3) of this Protocol resulting in a reduction in the
fishing opportunities provided for in Article 1 of this Protocol, the
financial contribution shall be reduced proportionately and prorata
temporis. Without prejudice to Article 6 of this Protocol, this
financial contribution could be suspended by the European Community
if it is not possible to use any of the fishing opportunities
provided for in this
3. The allocation of the fishing opportunities among different
categories of vessels may also be reviewed by mutual agreement
between the Parties, provided that any changes comply with recommendations
made by the Joint Scientific Committee regarding
the management of stocks liable to be affected by such redistribution.
The Parties shall agree on the corresponding adjustment
of the financial contribution where the redistribution of fishing
opportunities so warrants.
4. The adjustments of fishing opportunities provided for in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be decided by mutual agreement
between the two Parties in the Joint Committee provided for in
Article 10 of the Agreement.
Article 5
Exploratory fishing
1. The Parties may carry out exploratory fishing trips in Mauritanian
fishing zones, subject to an opinion by the Joint Scientific
Committee provided for in Article 4 of the Agreement. To
this end, they shall hold consultations whenever one of the Parties
so requests and determine, on a case-by-case basis, relevant
new resources, conditions and other parameters.
2. Authorisations to carry out exploratory fishing shall be
granted for test purposes for a period of no more than six months
and in accordance with Article 6(2) of the Agreement. They shall
be subject to the payment of a fee.
  3. Where the Parties conclude that the exploratory fishing trips
have produced positive results, while preserving ecosystems and
conserving living marine resources, new fishing opportunities
may be awarded to Community vessels following the consultation
procedure provided for in Article 4 of this Protocol and until
the expiry of the Protocol and in accordance with the allowable
effort. The financial contribution shall be increased in accordance
with Article 4.
4. Exploratory fishing shall be carried out in close collaboration
with the Mauritanian Institute of Oceanographic Research
and Fisheries (IMROP). IMROP shall decide the composition of the
team of researchers and observers to be taken on board. Their
expenses shall be borne by the shipowners. The data produced by
exploratory fishing shall be the subject of a report by IMROP
which shall be communicated to the Ministry.
5. Catches made during exploratory fishing shall be the property
of the shipowner. Catches of species of a non-regulatory size
and species which may not be fished, kept on board or sold under
Mauritanian law shall be prohibited.
6. Unless otherwise provided by mutual agreement between
the two Parties, vessels operating under exploratory fishing
arrangements shall land all their catches in Mauritania.
Article 6
Contribution of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement to
the implementation of Mauritania's sectoral fisheries
policy
1. The financial support under Article 7(1)(b) of the Agreement
shall be set at EUR 11 million, EUR 16 million, EUR 18 million
and EUR 20 million for the first, second, third and fourth
years respectively in accordance with Article 2(1) of this Protocol.
This financial support shall contribute to the development
and implementation of the Strategie Nationale de Developpement
durable du secteur des Peches de Mauritanie (national strategy for
the sustainable development of Mauritania's fisheries sector) with
a view to introducing sustainable and responsible fishing in its
waters in keeping with the strategic objectives of conservation of
fish stocks and better integration of the sector into the national
economy, and in particular to the areas of activity listed in paragraph
3 below, an indicative list of the indicators of which is given
in Annex IV, and to the PNBA.
2. Mauritania shall be responsible for managing the amount
corresponding to the financial support referred to in paragraph 1
above, in the light of objectives identified by mutual agreement
between the two Parties, the programming to attain them and the
indicators enabling such attainment to be assessed.
3. Without prejudice to the objectives identified by the two
Parties and in accordance with the priorities of the Strategie
Nationale de Developpement durable du secteur des Peches de
Mauritanie and with a view to ensuring sustainable and responsible
management of stocks and promoting the development of
the sector, the two Parties agree to focus on:
  The following objectives in the context of fisheries development
and rent optimisation:
- implementation of fisheries development plans (octopus,
prawns, ect.),
- stepping up of fisheries and oceanographic research,
- reinforcement of the surveillance authority,
- control and adjustment of capacities,
- development of new fisheries (sardines, anchovies, etc.).
The following objectives in the context of the increased economic
and social impact of the sector:
- development of port infrastructure and services,
- compliance with standards and promotion of quality, particularly
in terms of improving health and hygiene conditions
in the production of fisheries products and strengthening the
monitoring capacity of the competent Mauritanian
authorities,
- promotion of private investment in the sector, particularly by
upgrading and modernising production equipment, and promotion
of global competitiveness factors and comparative
advantages,
- development of non-industrial maritime fisheries, inland fisheries
and aquaculture.
The following objectives in the context of protection of the
marine environment, habitats and the coastline:
- conservation of the marine environment and aquatic habitats,
- reinforcement of capacity for analysing and combating
marine pollution.
The following objectives in the context of the legal and institutional
framework:
- strengthening of the institutional capacity of the Ministry for
Fisheries and of the bodies reporting to it,
- improvement in the legal framework for the pursuit of fisheries
activities and in the institutional environment of the
sector.
Article 7
Methods of implementing the support for Mauritania's
sectoral fisheries policy
1. Without prejudice to Article 6(3) of this Protocol, the European
Community and the Ministry shall reach agreement, within
  the Joint Committee provided for in Article 10 of the Agreement,
in accordance with the guidelines indicated in Annex IV and from
the entry into force of the Protocol, on:
(a) the annual and multiannual guidelines steering the implementation
of the priorities of Mauritanian fisheries policy, as
identified in Article 6 above and targeted at introducing sustainable
and responsible fishing, and in particular those
referred to in Article 6(3) of this Protocol;
(b) the annual and multiannual objectives to be achieved and the
criteria and indicators to be used to permit an evaluation of
the results achieved, on an annual basis.
2. Any amendment of these guidelines, objectives, criteria and
evaluation indicators shall be approved by the two Parties within
the Joint Committee.
3. In accordance with the objectives and guidelines defined
and implemented under the 2006-08 Protocol, in force until
31 July 2008, a multiannual programme for the sectoral support
provided under this Protocol per calendar year shall be notified to
the European Community not later than 1 March of each year.
For the first year of application of this Protocol, the multiannual
programme and annual allocation by Mauritania of the sectoral
support referred to in Article 6(1) of this Protocol shall be notified
to the European Community at the time when the guidelines,
objectives, criteria and evaluation indicators are approved within
the Joint Committee and not later than 1 March.
Sectoral support shall be the subject of a joint mid-term review of
the attainment of the performance indicators for the current calendar
year in the month of June and a final joint review of the
attainment of those performance indicators in the month of January
of the following year. In addition, Mauritania shall notify, not
later than 30 October of each year, the sectoral budgetary allocation
provided for in the Finance Act for the following year.
4. For the purpose of preparing for those joint reviews, the
Ministry shall send the Commission, not later than one month
before the joint mid-term review and joint final review respectively
are to be held, an interim and final annual report on the
implementation of the results achieved and any difficulties
encountered, and on the corrections and remedies proposed.
The Commission reserves the right to request additional information
on those results from the Mauritanian authorities so as to
launch consultations with the Mauritanian authorities within the
Joint Committee provided for in Article 10 of the Agreement, in
order to adopt corrective measures which allow the given objectives
to be achieved.
  Article 8
Economic integration of Community operators in the
Mauritanian fisheries sector
1. The two Parties undertake to promote the economic integration
of Community operators into the fisheries sector in Mauritania
as a whole. In this context, the two Parties shall together
carry out, in the course of 2008, objective assessments of the constraints
associated with private investment in the fisheries sector
in Mauritania with a view to drawing up guidelines for the promotion
of investment, taking into account the development of
landing infrastructure, bringing up to standard and modernisation
of production tools and promotion of marketing channels
for fisheries products, as well as measures aimed at enhancing
the sector's legal and institutional environment and its
competitiveness.
2. The two Parties agree to set up a joint think-tank to periodically
examine questions relating to the promotion of private
investment in the Mauritanian fisheries sector, and in particular
ways of facilitating the establishment of European private enterprises,
joint enterprises between Mauritanian and European operators
and appropriate forms of private-public partnership. This
think-tank shall be able to define a specific annual action plan and
jointly monitor its implementation, particularly in the context of
the contribution of the Partnership Agreement to the implementation
of Mauritania's sectoral fisheries policy.
3. The two Parties also agree to organise an annual meeting in
the context of a forum aimed at promoting private partnership in
the Mauritanian fisheries sector. This annual forum, to which
European and Mauritanian operators shall be invited, shall be held
in Mauritania.
4. In order to develop the fresh products sector in particular,
by way of an incentive Mauritania shall grant Community operators
landing fish in Mauritanian ports (especially for the purposes
of sales to local industries, adding value to these products in Mauritania
or transporting catches made in Mauritanian fishing zones
by land) a reduction in the amount of fees, in accordance with
Annex I to this Protocol and with the relevant Mauritanian law.
Article 9
Disputes - suspension of application of the Protocol
1. Any dispute between the Parties over the interpretation of
this Protocol and its Annexes or its application shall be the subject
of consultations between the Parties within the Joint Committee
provided for in Article 10 of the Agreement, in a special
meeting if necessary.
  2. Application of the Protocol may be suspended at the initiative
of one of the Parties if the dispute between the two Parties is
deemed to be serious and if the consultations held within the Joint
Committee under paragraph 1 have not resulted in an amicable
settlement.
3. Suspension of application of the Protocol shall require the
interested Party to notify its intention in writing at least three
months before the date on which suspension is due to take effect.
4. By way of derogation from the suspension procedure provided
for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, the Community reserves the
right to suspend application of the Protocol immediately in the
event of failure by Mauritania to comply with commitments made
with regard to implementation of its sectoral fisheries policy. Such
suspension shall immediately be notified to the Mauritanian
authorities.
5. In the event of suspension, the Parties shall continue to consult
with a view to finding an amicable settlement to their dispute.
Once such settlement is reached, application of the Protocol shall
resume and the amount of the financial contribution shall be
reduced proportionately and pro rata temporis according to the
period during which application of the Protocol was suspended.
Article 10
Suspension of application of the Protocol on grounds of
non-payment
Subject to Article 4, if the European Community fails to make the
payments provided for in Article 2, application of this Protocol
may be suspended on the following terms:
(a) The Ministry shall notify the European Commission of the
non-payment. The Commission shall carry out the necessary
checks and, where necessary, transmit the payment within no
more than 30 working days of the date of receipt of the
notification.
(b) If no payment is made and non-payment is not adequately
justified within the period provided for in paragraph (a)
above, the competent Mauritanian authorities shall be
entitled to suspend application of this Protocol. They shall
inform the European Commission of such action forthwith.
(c) Application of the Protocol shall resume as soon as the payments
concerned have been made.
Article 11
National law
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Agreement, the activities
of vessels operating under this Protocol and its Annexes, in
particular landing, transhipment, the use of port services and the
purchase of supplies, or any other activity shall be governed by
the laws and regulations in force in Mauritania.
  Article 12
Duration
This Protocol and the Annexes hereto shall apply for a period of
four years from 1 August 2008, unless notice of termination is
given in accordance with Article 13.
Article 13
Termination
1. In the event of termination of the Protocol, the Party concerned
shall notify the other Party of its intention to withdraw
from the Protocol in writing at least six months before the date
on which such termination would take effect.
  2. Dispatch of the notification referred to in the previous paragraph
shall open consultations by the Parties.
Article 14
Entry into force
1. This Protocol and the Annexes hereto shall enter into force
on the date on which the Parties notify each other of the completion
of the procedures necessary for that purpose.
2. They shall be applicable from 1 August 2008 in place of the
Protocol and the Annexes thereto covering the period 1 July 2006
to 31 July 2008.
