PROTOCOL TO AMEND PARAGRAPH 2 OF ARTICLE
X OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF
ATLANTIC TUNAS (WITH FINAL ACT).
MADRID, 5 JUNE 1992
The Contracting Parties to the International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic
Tunas, adopted in Rio de Janeiro on May 14, 1966,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Paragraph 2 of Article X of the Convention shall be modified as follows:
"2. Each Contracting Party shall contribute annually to the budget of the Commission
  an amount calculated in accordance with a scheme provided for in the Financial Regulations,
  as adopted by the Commission. The Commission, in adopting this scheme, should
  consider inter alia each Contracting Party's fixed basic fees for Commission and Panel
membership, the total round weight of catch and net weight of canned products of Atlantic
tuna and tuna-like fishes and the degree of economic development of the Contracting Parties.
"The scheme of annual contributions in the Financial Regulations shall be established
or modified only through the agreement of all the Contracting Parties present and voting.
The Contracting Parties shall be informed of this ninety days in advance."
Article 2
The original of this Protocol, the English, French and Spanish texts of which are equally
authentic, shall be deposited with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations. It shall be open for signature in Madrid on June 5, 1992
and thereafter in Rome. The Contracting Parties to the Convention that have not signed the
Protocol may nevertheless deposit their instruments of acceptance at any time. The Director-
General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations shall send a
certified copy of this Protocol to each of the Contracting Parties to the Convention.
Article 3
This Protocol shall enter into force for all the Contracting Parties the ninetieth day following
the deposit with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations of the last instrument of approval, ratification or acceptance by threequarters
of the Contracting Parties, and these three-quarters shall include all of the Parties
classified by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as of June 5, 1992,
as developed market economy countries. Any Contracting Party not included in this category
of countries can, within six months following the notification of the adoption of the
Protocol by the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, request the suspension of the entry into force of said Protocol. The provisions set
out in the last sentence of Paragraph 1 of Article XIII of the International Convention for
the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Article 4
The scheme of calculating the amount of the contribution of each Contracting Party
provided by the Financial Regulations, shall be applied from the financial period following
that in which this Protocol enters into force.
In witness whereof, the undersigned, duly authorized representatives of the States listed
below, have signed this Protocol:

