FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF PANAMA AND THE REPUBLIC OF PERU

PREAMBLE

 

The Government of the Republic of Peru, on the one hand, and the Government of the Republic of Panama, on the other hand, determined to:

STRENGTHEN the special bonds of friendship and cooperation between them and promote regional economic integration;

PROMOTE the creation of a broader and safer market for goods and services produced in their respective territories;

PROMOTE comprehensive economic development in order to reduce poverty;

PROMOTE the creation of new employment opportunities and improve working conditions and living standards in their respective territories;

ESTABLISH clear and mutually beneficial rules that govern your commercial exchange;

ENSURE a predictable legal and commercial framework for business and investment;

RECOGNIZE that the promotion and protection of investments of one Party in the territory of the other Party will contribute to increasing the flow of investments and stimulate mutually beneficial commercial activity;

AVOID distortions in their reciprocal trade;

PROMOTE the competitiveness of their companies in global markets;

FACILITATE trade by promoting efficient and transparent customs procedures that ensure predictability for its importers and exporters;

STIMULATE creativity and innovation and promote trade in the innovative sectors of their economies;

PROMOTE transparency in international trade and investment;

PRESERVE its ability to safeguard the public welfare; and

DEVELOP their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakech Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization, as well as other treaties to which they are party,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

 

Chapter 1

Initial Provisions and General Definitions

 

Section A: Initial Provisions

Article 1.1: Establishment of the Free Trade Zone

The Parties to this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the 1994 WTO General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and Article V of the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services , establish a free trade area .

Article 1.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Treaty are the following:

(a) stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;

(b) remove unnecessary obstacles to trade and facilitate the cross-border movement of goods and services between the Parties;

(c) promote conditions of free competition in the free trade zone;

(d) increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

(e) adequately and effectively protect and enforce intellectual property rights in the territory of each Party, taking into account the balance between the rights and obligations derived therefrom; and

(f) create effective procedures for the application and enforcement of this Agreement, for its joint administration, and to prevent and resolve disputes.

Article 1.3: Relationship with other International Agreements

1. The Parties confirm the existing rights and obligations between them under the WTO Agreement and other agreements to which the Parties are parties.

2. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and the agreements referred to in paragraph 1, this Agreement shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.

Article 1.4: Scope of Obligations

Each Party shall ensure the adoption of all necessary measures to comply with the provisions of this Agreement in its territory and at all levels of government.

 

Section B: General Definitions

Article 1.5: Definitions of General Application

For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

The WTO TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights of the WTO 1;

WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement Relating to the Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 of the WTO;

WTO Customs Valuation Agreement means the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the WTO General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 ;

WTO GATS means the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services ;

WTO SPS Agreement means the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures ;

WTO TBT Agreement means the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade ;

WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, dated April 15, 1994;

WTO Agreement on Safeguards means the WTO Agreement on Safeguards ;

WTO Agreement on Subsidies means the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures;

customs duty means any import tax or duty and charge of any kind levied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except any:

(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III.2 of the GATT 1994;

(b) anti-dumping duty or countervailing measure that is applied in accordance with the domestic legislation of a Party and in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and the Agreement on the Application of the Article VI of the GATT 1994 of the WTO; either

(c) duty or other charge related to importation, proportional to the cost of services rendered;

chapter means the first two digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification number;

Commission means the Free Trade Commission established under Article 20.1 (The Free Trade Commission);

government procurement means the process by which a government procures the use of or acquires goods or services, or any combination thereof, for government purposes and not with a view to commercial sale or resale or with a view to use in the production or supply of merchandise or services for commercial sale or resale;

days means calendar days;

company means any entity incorporated or organized under applicable law, whether or not for profit, privately owned or governmental, including corporations, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures, and other forms of association;

GATT 1994 means the WTO General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 ;

measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice;

merchandise means any product, article, or material;

merchandise of a Party means domestic products as understood in the GATT 1994 or those merchandise that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating merchandise of that Party;

originating merchandise means that it qualifies in accordance with the rules of origin established in Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Procedures of Origin);

national means a natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with Annex 1.5 or a permanent resident of a Party;

central level of government means the national level of government;

regional level of government means for:

(a) Peru: regional government in accordance with the Political Constitution of the Republic of Peru and other applicable legislation; and

(b) Panama: "regional level of government" is not applicable;

local level of government means for:

(a) Peru: the provincial and local municipalities;

(b) Panama: the municipalities;

WTO means the World Trade Organization;

Party means the Republic of Peru, on the one hand, and the Republic of Panama, on the other hand, jointly referred to as the Parties;

heading means the first four digits of the Harmonized System tariff classification number;

person means a natural person or a company;

Harmonized System (HS) means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, including its General Rules of Interpretation, Section Notes and Chapter Notes;

subheading means the first six digits of the tariff classification number under the Harmonized System; and

territory means, for a Party, the territory of that Party as set out in Annex 1.5.

 

 

 

Annex 1.5: Country Specific Definitions

For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified in this Agreement:

Natural person having the nationality of a Party means:

(a) with respect to the Republic of Peru, Peruvians by birth, naturalization or option in accordance with the provisions of the Political Constitution of Peru and the internal legislation on the matter; and

(b) with respect to the Republic of Panama, a Panamanian as defined in Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the Political Constitution of the Republic of Panama.

territory 2means:

(a) with respect to the Republic of Peru, the continental territory, the islands, the maritime spaces and the airspace that covers them, under the sovereignty or rights of sovereignty and jurisdiction of Peru, in accordance with its Domestic Law and International Law ; and

(b) with respect to the Republic of Panama, the land, sea and air space under its sovereignty; the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf, over which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction, in accordance with its national legislation and International Law.


 

 

 

Episode 2

Access to Merchandise Markets

Article 2.1: Scope of Application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter applies to a Party's trade in goods.

 

Section A: National Treatment

Article 2.2: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of the other Party, in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, and to that end Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement. and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the measures listed in Annex 2.2 (National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions).

 

Section B: Tariff Elimination

Article 2.3: Tariff Elimination

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on an originating good of the other Party.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall eliminate its customs duties on originating goods of the other Party, in accordance with Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Schedule).

3. The tariff elimination program provided for in this Chapter will not apply to used merchandise, even those that are identified as such in headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System. Used merchandise also includes reconstructed, refurbished, recovered, remanufactured merchandise or any other similar name given to merchandise that, after having been used, has undergone a process to restore its original characteristics or specifications, or to return its functionality. they had when new. 1

4. At the request of either Party, consultations shall be held to consider improving the tariff conditions for market access in accordance with Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program).

5. Notwithstanding Article 20.1 (Free Trade Commission), an agreement between the Parties to improve the tariff conditions of market access for a good shall prevail over any customs tariff or category defined in Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program). for such merchandise, when approved by the Parties in accordance with their applicable legal procedures.

6. For greater certainty, a Party may:

(a) increase a customs duty to the level established in Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Schedule), after a unilateral reduction; either

(b) maintain or increase a customs duty when authorized by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO.

 

Section C: Special Regimes

Article 2.4: Exemption from Customs Duties

1. No Party may adopt a new exemption from customs duties, or extend the application of an exemption from existing customs duties with respect to current beneficiaries, or extend it to new beneficiaries, when the exemption is conditioned, explicitly or implicitly, on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.

2. No Party may condition, explicitly or implicitly, the continuation of any exemption from existing customs duties on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.

Article 2.5: Temporary Admission of Goods

1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary admission free of customs duties, regardless of their origin, for the following goods:

(a) professional equipment, including equipment for scientific research, medical activities, press or television, computer programs, and broadcasting and cinematographic equipment necessary for the exercise of the business activity, trade, or profession of a person who qualifies for temporary entry in accordance with the law of the importing Party;

(b) merchandise intended for display or demonstration at exhibitions, fairs, meetings, or similar events;

(c) commercial samples, advertising films and recordings; and

(d) merchandise admitted for sporting purposes.

2. Each Party, upon request of the person concerned and for reasons that its customs authority considers valid, shall extend the term for temporary admission beyond the period initially set in accordance with national legislation.

3. Neither Party may condition the temporary admission free of customs duties to a good indicated in paragraph 1, to conditions other than that the good:

(a) is used solely by or under the personal supervision of a national or resident of the other Party in the exercise of that person's business, trade, professional or sporting activity;

(b) is not sold or leased while in its territory;

(c) is accompanied by a bond or guarantee in an amount that does not exceed the charges that would be owed in its case for the final entry or importation, refundable at the time of departure of the merchandise;

(d) is capable of identification when exported;

(e) is exported upon the departure of the person referred to in subparagraph (a), or within a period corresponding to the purpose of temporary admission that the Party may establish, or within one year, unless extended;

(f) is admitted in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use; and

(g) is otherwise admissible into the territory of the Party in accordance with its national law.

4. If any of the conditions imposed by a Party under paragraph 3 have not been met, the Party may apply the customs duty and any other charges that would normally be due for the good plus any other charges or penalties established in accordance with its national legislation.

5. Each Party shall adopt and maintain procedures that facilitate the expedited clearance of goods admitted under this Article. To the extent possible, such procedures shall provide that when such merchandise accompanies a national or resident of the other Party that is requesting temporary entry, the merchandise must be released simultaneously with the entry of that national or resident.

6. Each Party shall allow a good temporarily admitted under this Article to be exported through a customs port other than the port through which it was admitted.

7. Each Party shall provide that the importer or other person responsible for a good admitted in accordance with this Article, shall not be liable for the impossibility of exporting the good, upon presenting satisfactory evidence to the importing Party that the good has been destroyed, within of the original term set for temporary admission or any lawful extension.

8. Subject to Chapters 12 (Investment) and 13 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), neither Party may:

(a) prevent a vehicle or container used in international transportation that has entered its territory from the other Party from leaving its territory by any route that is reasonably related to the prompt and economic departure of such vehicle or container;

(b) require a bond or impose any penalty or charge solely because the port of entry of the vehicle or container is different from the port of exit;

(c) condition the release of any obligation, including any bond, that it has applied to the entry of a vehicle or container into its territory, on its departure through a particular port; and

(d) require that the vehicle or carrier that brings a container from the territory of the other Party into its territory be the same vehicle or carrier that brings it into the territory of that other Party.

9. For purposes of paragraph 8, vehicle means a truck, truck tractor, tractor, trailer or trailer unit, locomotive or wagon or other railroad equipment.

Article 2.6: Goods Reimported after Repair or Alteration

1. Neither Party may apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that has been re-entered its territory, after having been temporarily exported from its territory to the territory of the other Party to be repaired or altered, regardless of whether such repairs or alterations could be made in the territory of the Party from which the good was exported for repair or alteration.

2. Neither Party may apply a customs duty to a good that, regardless of its origin, is temporarily admitted from the territory of the other Party to be repaired or altered.

3. For the purposes of this Article, repair or alteration does not include an operation or process that:

(a) destroys the essential characteristics of a good or creates a new or commercially different good; either

(b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good.

Article 2.7: Duty Free Import for Commercial Samples of Insignificant Value and Printed Advertising Materials

Each Party shall authorize the duty-free import of commercial samples of negligible value and printed advertising materials imported from the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin, but may require that:

(a) such samples are imported only for the purpose of soliciting orders for goods or services provided from the territory of the other Party or of a non-Party country; either

(b) such advertising materials are imported in packages that each contain no more than one printed copy and that neither the materials nor the packages form part of a larger consignment.

 

Section D: Non-Tariff Measures

Article 2.8: Import and Export Restrictions

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any non-tariff measure that prohibits or restricts the import of any good of the other Party or the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party. other Party, except as provided in Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, and for this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis.

2. The Parties understand that the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated by paragraph 1 prohibit, in any circumstance where any other type of restriction is prohibited, a Party from adopting or maintaining:

(a) export and import price requirements, except as permitted for the enforcement of antidumping and countervailing duty provisions and commitments;

(b) granting of import licenses conditional on meeting a performance requirement; either

(c) voluntary export restrictions inconsistent with Article VI of the GATT 1994, implemented under the provisions of Article 18 of the SCM Agreement and Article 8.1 of the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement .

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the measures set out in Annex 2.2 (National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions).

4. Neither Party may require that, as a condition of an import commitment or for the importation of a good, a person of the other Party establishes or maintains a contractual or other type of relationship with a distributor in its territory.

5. For the purposes of paragraph 4, distributor means a person of a Party who is responsible for the commercial distribution, agency, concession or representation in the territory of that Party, of goods of the other Party.

Article 2.9: Import and Export Licenses

1. Neither Party shall maintain or adopt a measure that is inconsistent with the WTO Import Licensing Agreement (hereinafter the WTO Import Licensing Agreement ). To this end, the WTO Import Licensing Agreement and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis.

2. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall notify the other Party of any existing import licensing procedures.

3. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any new import licensing procedure and any modification to its existing import licensing procedures, within sixty (60) days prior to its effective date. A notice provided under this Article:

(a) must include the information established in Article 5 of the WTO Import Licensing Agreement ; and

(b) must not prejudge whether the import licensing procedure is compatible with this Agreement.

4. Neither Party may apply an import licensing procedure to a good of the other Party without having provided a notification in accordance with paragraph 2 or 3, as appropriate.

5. With the objective of procuring greater transparency in reciprocal trade, the Party that establishes procedures for the processing of export licenses shall timely notify the other Party.

Article 2.10: Charges and Administrative Formalities

1. Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with Article VIII of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, that all fees and charges of whatever nature (other than customs duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charges levied accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, and antidumping and countervailing duties), taxes on or in connection with imports or exports, are limited to the approximate cost of the services rendered and do not represent indirect protection to the national merchandise nor a tax on imports or exports for fiscal purposes. For this purpose, Article VIII of the GATT of 1994and its interpretative notes are incorporated into and form an integral part of this Treaty, mutatis mutandis.

2. Neither Party shall require consular transactions, including related fees and charges, in connection with the importation of any good of the other Party.

3. Each Party shall make available and maintain, via the Internet, an up-to-date list of fees or charges imposed in connection with imports or exports.

Article 2.11: Export Taxes

Neither Party shall adopt or maintain a tax, levy or other charge on the export of any good to the territory of the other Party.

 

Section E: Other Measures

Article 2.12: State Trading Enterprises

The rights and obligations of the Parties with respect to State trading enterprises shall be governed by Article XVII of the GATT 1994, its interpretative notes and the Understanding Regarding the Interpretation of Article XVII of the GATT 1994, which are incorporated into and form an integral part of this Treaty, mutatis mutandis.

Article 2.13: Customs Valuation

1. The WTO Customs Valuation Agreement and any successor agreement shall govern the customs valuation rules applied by the Parties in their reciprocal trade. To this end, the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement and any successor agreements are incorporated into and made an integral part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. The customs legislation of each Party shall comply with Article VII of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement .

 

Section F: Agriculture

Article 2.14: Scope of Application and Coverage

This Section applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party related to trade in agricultural goods.

Article 2.15: Agricultural Export Subsidies

1. The Parties share the objective of the multilateral elimination of export subsidies for agricultural goods and shall work together towards an agreement in the WTO to eliminate such subsidies and prevent their reintroduction in any form.

2. Neither Party may adopt or maintain any export subsidy on any agricultural good destined for the territory of the other Party.

3. If a Party considers that the other Party has not fulfilled its obligations under this

Treaty, to maintain, introduce or reintroduce an export subsidy, said Party may request consultations with the other Party in accordance with Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) with the objective of taking measures that counteract the effect of said export subsidies. and reach a mutually satisfactory solution.

 

Section G: Institutional Provisions

Article 2.16: Committee on Trade in Goods

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Trade in Goods (hereinafter the Committee), made up of representatives of each Party.

2. The meetings of the Committee, and of any Ad-hoc working group, will be chaired by representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism of Peru and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry of Panama, or their respective successors.

3. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) report to the Commission on the implementation and administration of this Chapter, when applicable;

(c) promote trade in goods between the Parties, including through consultations on the acceleration of tariff elimination under this Agreement, and other matters as appropriate;

(d) address obstacles to trade in goods between the Parties, especially those related to the application of non-tariff measures and, if appropriate, submit these matters to the Commission for its consideration;

(e) provide the Committee for the Strengthening of Commercial Capacities advice and recommendations on technical assistance needs in matters related to this Chapter;

(f) review the conversion to the 2007 Harmonized System nomenclature and its subsequent revisions to ensure that each Party's obligations under this Agreement are not altered, and consult to resolve any conflicts between:

(i) the Harmonized System of 2007 or later nomenclatures and Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program); and

(ii) Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program) and national nomenclatures;

(g) consult and make the best efforts to resolve any difference that may arise between the Parties, on matters related to the classification of merchandise under the Harmonized System;

(h) establish Ad-hoc working groups with specific mandates; and

(i) deal with any other matter related to this Chapter.

4. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will meet at least once a year, on the date and according to the agenda previously agreed by the Parties. The Parties will determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings may be held.

5. The meetings may be held by any means agreed by the Parties. When they are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

6. All decisions of the Committee must be taken by mutual agreement.

7. The Parties establish the Ad-hoc working group on Trade in Agricultural Goods, which will report to the Committee on Trade in Goods. In order to discuss any matter related to market access for agricultural goods, this group shall meet at the request of a Party no later than thirty (30) days after the request is submitted.

 

Section H: Definitions

Article 2.17: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

consumed means

(a) actually consumed; either

(b) processed or manufactured in a way that results in a substantial change in the value, form, or use of a good or in the production of another good;

duty free means duty free;

export license means an administrative procedure that requires the submission of an application or other documents (other than those generally required for customs clearance purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a condition prior to export into the territory of the Party exporter;

import license means an administrative procedure that requires the submission of an application or other documents (other than those generally required for customs clearance purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a condition prior to importation into the territory of the Party importer;

printed advertising materials means those goods classified in Chapter 49 of the Harmonized System including brochures, printed matter, flyers, trade catalogues, yearbooks published by trade associations, tourism promotional materials and posters, used to promote, advertise or advertise a good or service , with the intention of advertising a merchandise or service, and that are distributed free of charge;

goods temporarily admitted for sports purposes means sports equipment for use in sports competitions, events or training in the territory of the Party into which they are admitted;

agricultural goods mean those goods referred to in Article 2 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture ;

commercial samples of insignificant value mean commercial samples valued, individually or in the package sent, at not more than one dollar of the United States of America (US$1) or the equivalent amount in the currency of the other Party, or that are marked , broken, perforated, or otherwise treated in a way that makes them unfit for sale or for any use other than sample purposes;

goods intended for display or demonstration include their components, auxiliary devices and accessories;

Recycled merchandise means merchandise made entirely from merchandise that has reached the end of its useful life and has undergone a production process that results in new merchandise;

advertising films and recordings means recorded visual communication media or audio materials, consisting essentially of images and/or sound, showing the nature or operation of goods or services offered for sale or lease by a person established or residing in the territory of a Party, provided that such materials are suitable for display to potential customers, but not for dissemination to the general public;

performance requirement means a requirement of:

(a) export a certain volume or percentage of goods or services;

(b) replace imported goods with goods or services of the Party that grants the exemption from customs duties or import license;

(c) a person benefiting from an exemption from customs duties or an import license to purchase other goods or services in the territory of the Party that grants the exemption from customs duties or the import license, or grants a preference to goods produced domestically;

(d) that a person who benefits from an exemption from customs duties or an import license produces goods or services in the territory of the Party that grants the exemption from customs duties or an import license, with a certain level or percentage of content domestic; either

(e) relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports or with the amount of foreign currency inflow,

but does not include the requirement that an imported good be:

(f) subsequently exported;

(g) used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently exported;

(h) substituted for an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently exported; either,

(i) substituted by an identical or similar good that is subsequently exported;

export subsidies shall have the meaning assigned to such term in Article 1(e) of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture , including any amendments to such article; and

consular transactions means the requirements that goods of one Party destined for export to the territory of the other Party must first be presented to the supervision of the consul of the importing Party in the territory of the exporting Party, for the purpose of obtaining invoices Consular documents or consular visas for commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, shipper's export declarations, or any other customs document required for or in connection with importation.

 

 

 

Annex 2.2: National Treatment and Import and Export Restrictions

 

Section A: Measures of Peru

Articles 2.2 and 2.8 of this Agreement do not apply to:

(a) the measures adopted by Peru, including their continuation, renewal or modification, regarding the importation of:

(i) clothing and footwear used in accordance with Law No. 28514 of May 12, 2005 and all its amendments;

(ii) used vehicles and used vehicle engines, parts and spare parts in accordance with Legislative Decree No. 843 of August 29, 1996, Emergency Decree No. 079-2000 of September 19, 2000, Emergency Decree No. 050-2008 of December 18, 2008 and all its modifications;

(iii) used tires in accordance with Supreme Decree No. 003-97-SA of June 6, 1997 and all its modifications; and

(iv) used goods, machinery and equipment that use radioactive sources of energy in accordance with Law No. 27757 of May 29, 2002 and all its amendments.

(b) actions authorized by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.

 

Section B: Panama Measures

Articles 2.2 and 2.8 of this Agreement do not apply to:

(a) the measures that regulate the importation of official circulation lottery tickets in accordance with Cabinet Decree No. 19 of June 30, 2004;

(b) import controls on used vehicles in accordance with Law No. 36 of May 17, 1996;

(c) the measures that regulate the importation of used motor vehicles, in accordance with Law No. 45 of October 31, 2007;

(d) video import controls and other games classified in Heading 95.04 that provide cash prizes, in accordance with Law No. 2 of February 10, 1998;

(e) the measures related to the export of wood from their national forests, in accordance with Decree No. 83 of July 10, 2008; and

(f) actions authorized by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.

 

 

 

Chapter 3

Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures

 

Section A: Rules of Origin

Article 3.1: Originating Goods

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a good is originating when:

(a) is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of a Party, as defined in Article 3.2;

(b) is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, from non-originating materials, that comply with the change in tariff classification, regional value content, or other specific rules of origin contained in Annex 3 (Rules of Specific Origin); either

(c) is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, exclusively from originating materials,

and comply with the other provisions of this Chapter.

Article 3.2: Wholly Obtained or Produced Goods

For the purposes of Article 3.1 (a), the following goods shall be considered wholly obtained or wholly produced in the territory of a Party:

(a) plants and plant products harvested or collected in the territory of a Party;

(b) live animals, born and raised in the territory of a Party;

(c) goods obtained from live animals raised in the territory of a Party;

(d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing or aquaculture in the territory of a Party;

(e) fish, crustaceans and other marine species obtained from the sea or the seabed, outside the territory of a Party, by a vessel registered or registered with a Party and flying its flag;

(f) goods produced on board factory ships registered or enrolled in a Party and flying its flag, exclusively from the goods listed in subparagraph (e);

(g) minerals and other inanimate natural resources extracted from the soil, water, seabed or subsoil in the territory of a Party;

(h) goods other than fish, crustaceans and other live marine life, obtained or extracted by a Party from the waters, seabed or subsoil outside the territory of a Party, provided that Party has rights to exploit such waters, seabed or marine subsoil;

(i) waste and scrap derived from:

(i) manufacturing operations conducted in the territory of a Party; either

(ii) used goods collected in the territory of a Party,

provided that said waste or waste is used only for the recovery of raw materials; and

(j) goods produced in a Party exclusively from the materials listed in subparagraphs (a) through (i).

Article 3.3: Regional Value Content

1. The regional content value (hereinafter VCR) of a merchandise will be calculated based on the following method:
VCR = FOB - VMN x 100
FOB

 

where:

RVC: is the regional content value, expressed as a percentage;

FOB: is the free value on board of the merchandise, in accordance with Article 3.35; and

VNM: is the value of non-originating materials.

2. The value of non-originating materials will be:

(a) the CIF value at the time of importation of the material; either

(b) the first determinable price paid or payable for the non-originating materials, in the territory of the Party where the processing or transformation took place. When the producer of a good purchases non-originating materials within that Party, the value of such materials will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material from the supplier's warehouse to the place where where the producer is located.

3. The values ​​referred to above will be determined in accordance with the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement .

Article 3.4: Minimum Operations or Processes

1. The operations or processes that, individually or in combination with each other, do not confer origin to a good are the following:

(a) operations to ensure the preservation of goods in good condition during transport and storage;

(b) grouping or splitting of packages;

(c) packing, unpacking, or repackaging operations for retail sale; either

(d) slaughter of animals.

2. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules of origin contained in Annex 3 (Specific Rules of Origin).

Article 3.5: Intermediate Material

When an intermediate material is used in the production of a good, the non-originating materials contained in said intermediate material will not be taken into account for the purpose of determining the origin of the good.

Article 3.6: Accumulation

1. Goods or materials originating in the territory of a Party, incorporated into a good in the territory of the other Party, shall be considered as originating in the territory of that other Party.

2. A good shall be considered originating, when it is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, by one or more producers, provided that the good meets the requirements established in Article 3.1 and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

3. Materials from Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala or Honduras, incorporated into a good produced in the territory of the exporting Party, shall be considered originating from said Party, provided that there is a current trade agreement between Peru and said countries and they comply with with the specific rules of origin established in this Agreement.

4. In the case of merchandise classified in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, paragraph 3 will apply only when the applied customs duty is zero percent (0%), both for accumulated materials and for final merchandise, in accordance with the tariff elimination program established in this Agreement, as well as in the tariff elimination programs established in the trade agreements of the countries mentioned in paragraph 3 with the importing Party of the final good with which the exporting Party accumulates origin .

5. The materials that are excluded from the tariff elimination program granted by the importing Party to the countries involved in the accumulation, may not be subject to the provisions established in paragraph 3.

6. When each Party has established a preferential trade agreement with the same country or the same group of non-Party countries, the goods or materials of said country or group of non-Party countries, incorporated into the territory of a Party, may be considered as originating in the territory of that Party, provided that the applicable rules of origin for that good or material under this Agreement are complied with.

7. For the application of paragraph 6, each Party must have agreed provisions equivalent to those indicated in said paragraph with the non-Party country or group of countries, as well as the conditions that the Parties consider necessary for the purposes of its application.

Article 3.7: De Minimis

1. A good will be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in its production, which do not comply with the change in tariff classification in accordance with Annex 3 (Specific Rules of Origin), does not exceed ten percent ( 10%) of the FOB value of the merchandise.

2. When the good mentioned in paragraph 1 is subject to a change in tariff classification and regional value content requirement, the value of all non-originating materials shall be included in the calculation of the regional value content of the good.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a good from the textile and clothing sector classified in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, which is not originating because certain fibers or yarns used in the production of the component of the good that determines its classification do not suffer the change in tariff classification established in Annex 3 (Specific Rules of Origin), it will be considered an originating good if the total weight of all these fibers or yarns in that component does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the weight total of that component.

4. In all cases, the merchandise must comply with all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

Article 3.8: Goods and Fungible Materials

1. In order to determine whether a good is originating, any fungible good or material shall be distinguished by:

(a) a physical separation of the goods or materials; either

(b) an inventory management method recognized in the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles of the exporting Party.

2. The inventory management method selected, in accordance with paragraph 1, for a particular good or fungible material, will continue to be used for those goods or materials, during the fiscal year of the person who selected the inventory management method. .

Article 3.9: Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools

1. The accessories, spare parts or tools delivered with the merchandise must be treated as originating if the merchandise is originating and will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials used in the production of the merchandise undergo the corresponding change of classification. tariff, provided that:

(a) the accessories, spare parts or tools are classified with the merchandise and have not been invoiced separately, regardless of whether each is identified separately on the invoice itself; and

(b) the quantities and value of such accessories, spare parts or tools are customary for the merchandise.

2. If a good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the accessories, spare parts or tools described in paragraph 1 shall be considered as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, when calculating the value content. region of the merchandise.

Article 3.10: Games or Assortments of Merchandise

1. If the goods are classified as a set or assortment as a result of the application of Rule 3 of the General Rules of Interpretation of the Harmonized System, the set or assortment will be considered as originating only if each good in the set or assortment is originating. , and both the game or assortment and the merchandise comply with all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods is originating, if the value of all non-originating goods in the set or assortment does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the FOB value of the set or assortment.

Article 3.11: Containers and Packaging Material for Retail Sale

1. When the containers and packaging materials for retail sale are classified with the merchandise, their origin will not be taken into account to determine the origin of the merchandise.

2. When the goods are subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the packaging materials and containers for retail sale will be taken into account for the determination of the origin of the goods, as the case may be.

Article 3.12: Shipping Containers and Packaging Materials

Shipping containers and packing materials will not be taken into account to determine the origin of the merchandise.

Article 3.13: Indirect Materials

1. In order to determine whether a good is originating, indirect materials shall be considered as originating regardless of the place of their production.

2. Indirect materials means items used in the production of a good that are not physically incorporated into or part of the good, including:

(a) fuel, power, catalysts and solvents;

(b) equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;

(c) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and accessories;

(d) tools, dies and molds;

(e) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;

(f) lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production, equipment operation, or building maintenance; and

(g) any other good that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can adequately be shown to be a part of that production.

Article 3.14: Direct Transport

1. For an originating good to maintain said condition, it must be transported directly between the Parties.

2. Direct transportation from the exporting Party to the importing Party shall be considered when:

(a) the good is transported without passing through the territory of a non-Party country; either

(b) the good transits through the territory of one or more non-Parties, with or without transshipment or temporary storage in such non-Parties, provided that:

(i) remains under the control of the customs authorities in the territory of a non-Party country; and

(ii) they do not undergo any operation other than unloading, reloading, repackaging, or any other operation in order to keep them in good condition.

3. Compliance with the provisions established in paragraph 2 shall be evidenced by submitting to the customs authority of the importing Party:

(a) in the case of transit or transhipment, transport documents, such as the air waybill, bill of lading, or multimodal transport documents, certifying the transport from the country of origin to the importing Party, depending on the case; either

(b) in the case of storage, transport documents, such as the air waybill, bill of lading, or multimodal transport documents, certifying the transport from the country of origin to the importing Party, as the case may be and the documents issued by the customs authority of the country where the storage takes place.

 

Section B: Origin Procedures

Article 3.15: Proofs of Origin

1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following documents will be considered proof of origin to certify that the goods qualify as originating in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:

(a) a Certificate of Origin, as indicated in Article 3.16; either

(b) a Declaration of Origin, as indicated in Article 3.17.

2. The proofs of origin referred to in paragraph 1 will be valid for one (1) year from the date of issue.

Article 3.16: Certificate of Origin

1. In order for originating goods to qualify for preferential tariff treatment, at the time of importation, the importer must have in his possession the original of a valid Certificate of Origin issued based on the format established in Annex 3.16, and provide a copy to the customs authority of the importing Party when requested.

2. The exporter of the merchandise must complete and present a Certificate of Origin to the authorized entity, which will be responsible for issuing it before or at the time of the shipment date of the merchandise abroad, as well as in the cases indicated in paragraph 6.

3. The Certificate of Origin will cover one or more merchandise from a single shipment.

4. The exporter of the merchandise that requests a Certificate of Origin must present all the necessary documents that prove the originating character of the merchandise in question, as required by the authorized entity. Likewise, the exporter must undertake to comply with the other requirements applicable to this Chapter.

5. In case of theft, loss or destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the exporter may request in writing to the authorized entity that issued it, a certified copy of the original Certificate of Origin, which will be made on the basis of the invoice. of export or any other proof that would have served as a basis for the issuance of the original Certificate of Origin, which the exporter has in his possession. The duplicate issued in accordance with this paragraph, must have in the observations field the phrase "CERTIFIED COPY of the original Certificate of Origin number............ dated...... ......... ", so that the validity period is counted from the date indicated.

6. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Certificate of Origin, in exceptional cases, may be issued after the date of shipment of the merchandise, provided that:

(a) was not issued before or at the time of shipment due to errors, inadvertent omissions, or any other circumstance that may be considered justified, provided that no more than one (1) year has elapsed since export and the exporter delivers all the documents commercial documents, as well as the export declaration endorsed by the customs authority of the exporting Party; either

(b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the competent authority or authorized entity that the Certificate of Origin initially issued was not accepted at the time of importation for technical reasons. The validity period must be maintained as indicated in the Certificate of Origin that was originally issued.

In these cases, the phrase "CERTIFICATE ISSUED A POSTERIORI" must be indicated in the observations field of the Certificate of Origin, and must also indicate, in the case of the case indicated in subparagraph (b), the number and date of the Certificate of Origin originally issued. .

7. When the exporter of the goods is not the producer, he may request the issuance of a Certificate of Origin based on:

(a) information provided by the producer of the good; either

(b) a declaration of origin delivered by the producer of the goods to the exporter, stating that the goods qualify as originating in the exporting Party.

8. An exporter to whom a Certificate of Origin has been issued shall promptly and in writing notify the competent authority of the importing Party, with a copy to the authorized entity, the competent authority of the exporting Party and the importer, when knowledge that the goods do not qualify as originating.

Article 3.17: Declaration of Origin

1. The Declaration of Origin referred to in Article 3.15.1 (b) may be issued, in accordance with this Article, only by an authorized exporter, as provided in Article 3.18.

2. The Declaration of Origin may be issued only if the goods in question are considered to originate from the exporting Party.

3. When the authorized exporter is not the producer of the good in the exporting Party, a Declaration of Origin for the good may be issued by the authorized exporter on the basis of:

(a) information provided by the producer of the good to the authorized exporter; either

(b) a statement delivered by the producer of the good to the authorized exporter stating that the good qualifies as originating in the exporting Party.

4. An authorized exporter shall be prepared to present at any time, at the request of the competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party, all appropriate documents demonstrating that the good for which the Declaration of Origin was issued qualifies as originating in the exporting Party.

5. The text of the Declaration of Origin will be that provided in Annex 3.17. A Declaration of Origin will be issued by an authorized exporter, typing, stamping or printing on the invoice or any other commercial document that describes the merchandise in sufficient detail to allow its identification. The Declaration of Origin will be considered issued on the date of issuance of said commercial document.

6. A Declaration of Origin must be issued by the authorized exporter before or at the time of the shipment date.

7. An authorized exporter who has issued a Declaration of Origin shall promptly notify the competent authority of the importing Party in writing, with a copy to the competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party. and to the importer, when he is aware that the merchandise does not qualify as originating.

Article 3.18: Authorized Exporter

1. The competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party, may authorize an exporter in that Party to issue declarations of origin as an authorized exporter provided that the exporter:

(a) make frequent shipments of goods originating in the exporting Party;

(b) has sufficient knowledge and ability to issue declarations of origin in an appropriate manner and complies with the conditions set out in the laws and regulations of the exporting Party; and

(c) deliver to the competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party, a written statement that it accepts full responsibility for any statement of origin that identifies it, as if any hand signed.

2. The competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party shall grant the authorized exporter an authorization number, which will appear on the Declaration of Origin. It will not be necessary for the Declaration of Origin to be signed by the authorized exporter.

3. The competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party, shall ensure the proper use of the authorization by the authorized exporter.

4. The competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party, may revoke the authorization at any time. It shall do so in accordance with the laws and regulations of the exporting Party when the authorized exporter fails to comply with the conditions set out in paragraph 1 or otherwise misuses the authorization.

Article 3.19: Notifications

1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall provide the other Party with a record of the names of the authorized entities and accredited officials to issue Certificates of Origin, as well as samples of the signatures and impressions of the seals used by the Party. entity authorized to issue Certificates of Origin.

2. Any change in the registration indicated in paragraph 1 shall be notified in writing to the other Party. The change will become effective fifteen (15) days after notification is received or at a later period indicated in said notification.

3. The competent authority of the exporting Party or, where applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party, shall provide the competent authority of the importing Party with information regarding the composition of the authorization number, as well as the names, addresses, and authorization numbers of the authorized exporters, and the dates on which such authorizations will become effective. Each Party will notify the other Party of any change, including the date such change becomes effective.

Article 3.20: Electronic Certificate of Origin

The Parties may begin to work from the entry into force of this Agreement, in the development of the electronic certification of origin with the objective of implementing it in the medium term.

Article 3.21: Obligations Related to Imports

1. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each Party shall require that an importer, who claims preferential tariff treatment in its territory:

(a) declare in the customs import document, on the basis of a Proof of Origin, that the good qualifies as originating from the other Party;

(b) is in possession of the Proof of Origin at the time the declaration referred to in subparagraph (a) is made;

(c) have in their possession documents certifying that the requirements set forth in Article 3.14 have been met; and

(d) provide the Proof of Origin, as well as all the documentation indicated in subparagraph (c) to the customs authority, when required.

2. When the Proofs of Origin present errors in such a way that they do not raise doubts regarding the accuracy of the information included therein, such as typing errors, they may be accepted by the customs authority of the importing Party.

3. When a Certificate of Origin is not accepted by the customs authority of the importing Party at the time of importation, due to omissions in its completion or errors other than those of form, which do not affect compliance with origin or preference tariff, said customs authority will not deny preferential tariff treatment. In this case, the customs authority of the importing Party will request the importer, once and non-extendable, to present a new Certificate of Origin within a term of fifteen (15) days, counted from the day following the date of receipt of the notification of said omission or error and may authorize the release, after adopting the measures it deems necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest, in accordance with its national legislation.

4. Once the term established in paragraph 3 has concluded, if a new Certificate of Origin has not been presented correctly issued, the importing Party will deny the preferential tariff treatment, and if measures have been adopted to guarantee the fiscal interest, it will proceed to execute them.

5. In the event of presenting a new Certificate of Origin correctly issued and measures have been adopted to guarantee the fiscal interest, the measures will be lifted within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, counted from the day after the Presentation of the request for the release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, which may be extended for up to thirty (30) additional days in exceptional cases.

Article 3.22: Reimbursement of Customs Duties

When an originating good is imported into the territory of a Party, without the importer of the good having requested preferential tariff treatment at the time of importation, the importer may request, no later than one (1) year after the numbering date or acceptance of the customs import declaration, the reimbursement of any duty paid in excess, as a result of not having requested preferential tariff treatment, presenting to the customs authority:

(a) the Proof of Origin, which must comply with the provisions established in Articles 3.16 and 3.17; and

(b) other documentation related to the importation of the good, in accordance with the national legislation of the importing Party.

Article 3.23: Supporting Documents

Documents used to demonstrate that the goods covered by a Proof of Origin are considered originating goods and meet the requirements of this Chapter, may include but are not limited to the following:

(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or producer to obtain the referred goods, contained for example in their accounts or internal accounting;

(b) documents proving the originating status of the materials used;

(c) documents proving the work or processing of the materials;

(d) certificates of origin that prove the originating condition of the materials used; and

(e) in the case of merchandise from the textile and clothing sector, classified in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the exporter must necessarily obtain an affidavit issued by the producer of the originating materials.

Article 3.24: Preservation of Proofs of Origin and Supporting Documents

1. An exporter who requests the issuance of a Certificate of Origin must keep the documents referred to in Article 3.23 for a period of at least five (5) years, counted from the date of its issuance.

2. The authorized entity of the exporting Party that issues the Certificate of Origin shall keep a copy of the Certificate of Origin for a period of at least five (5) years, counted from the date of its issuance.

3. An importer who requests preferential treatment for a merchandise must keep, for a period of at least five (5) years from the date of importation of the merchandise, the documentation related to the importation, including a copy of the Proof of Origin. .

4. An authorized exporter who issues a Declaration of Origin must keep the documents referred to in Article 3.23 for a period of at least five (5) years, counted from the date of issuance.

Article 3.25: Exceptions to the Obligation to Submit Proof of Origin

1. The Parties will not require a Proof of Origin that demonstrates that a good is originating in the case of:

(a) an importation of merchandise whose customs value does not exceed one thousand United States dollars (US$1,000) or its equivalent in national currency or a greater amount established by the Party; either

(b) an importation of goods for which the importing Party has waived the requirement to present Proof of Origin.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to imports, including fractional ones, that are made or are intended to be made with the purpose of evading compliance with the certification requirements of this Chapter.

Article 3.26: Verification Process

1. In order to determine whether a good imported by a Party from the other Party qualifies as an originating good, the competent authority of the importing Party may conduct a verification of origin through:

(a) written requests for information to the exporter or producer;

(b) written questionnaires addressed to the exporter or producer; I

(c) visits to the facilities of an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, with the purpose of observing the facilities and the production process of the merchandise and reviewing the records related to the origin, including accounting books and any type of supporting documents indicated in Article 3.23. The competent authority of the exporting Party may participate in these visits, as an observer.

2. The competent authority of the importing Party must notify the exporter or producer and the importer of the beginning of the verification process, together with the sending of the first questionnaire or written request for information or visit referred to in paragraph 1, in addition, it must send a copy of such notification to the competent authority of the exporting Party.

3. For the purposes of this Article, the competent authority of the importing Party that carries out the verification of origin shall notify by certified mail with acknowledgment of receipt or by any means that certifies receipt of the written requests for information, the questionnaires and visits to exporters or producers.

4. For the purposes of subparagraphs 1 (a) and 1 (b), the exporter or producer must respond to the request for information or questionnaire made by the competent authority of the importing Party, within a period of thirty (30) days. counted from the date of receipt. During said term, the exporter or producer may, for a single time, request in writing to the competent authority of the importing Party the extension of the same, which cannot exceed thirty (30) additional days. The importing Party shall deny preferential tariff treatment for the subject good by failing to respond to such request or questionnaire.

5. When the competent authority of the importing Party has received the response to the written request for information or the questionnaire referred to in subparagraphs 1 (a) and 1 (b), within the corresponding term, and deems that the information provided If the response is insufficient or more information is required to verify the origin of the merchandise subject to verification, you may request said information from the exporter or producer, which must be sent within a period not exceeding thirty (30) days from the the date of receipt of the request for additional information.

6. The importer, within a period of thirty (30) days from the notification of initiation of the verification of origin process, may provide the documents, evidence or statements that he deems pertinent, and may request only once and in writing. an extension to the importing Party, which may not exceed thirty (30) days. If the importer does not provide documentation, it will not be sufficient reason to deny preferential tariff treatment, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 5.

7. For the purposes of subparagraph 1 (c), the competent authority of the importing Party must notify such request in writing, at least thirty (30) days before the verification visit to the exporter or producer. In the event that the exporter or producer does not grant its written consent for the visit within a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notification, the importing Party shall deny preferential tariff treatment to the merchandise in question. The request for the visit shall be communicated to the competent authority of the exporting Party.

8. When the exporter or producer receives a notification in accordance with paragraph 7, he may request for a single time, within fifteen (15) days following the date of receipt of the notification, the postponement of the proposed verification visit. for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days from the date the notification was received, or for a longer period agreed upon by the competent authority of the importing Party and the exporter or producer. For these purposes, the competent authority of the importing Party must communicate the postponement of the visit to the competent authority of the exporting Party.

9. A Party shall not deny preferential tariff treatment based solely on the postponement of the verification visit.

10. The competent authority of the importing Party shall draw up a record of the visit, which will contain the facts verified by it, and if applicable, a list of the information or documentation collected. Said record may be signed by the producer or exporter. In the event that the producer or exporter refuses to sign the record, this fact will be recorded, not affecting the validity of the visit.

11. The competent authority of the importing Party shall, within a period not exceeding three hundred and sixty-five (365) days from the date of receipt of the notification of the initiation of the verification process, notify the exporter or producer of the results of the determination of origin of the merchandise, as well as the factual and legal grounds of the determination.

12. The competent authority of the importing Party shall notify the importer in writing of the result of the origin verification procedure, which must be accompanied by the factual and legal grounds for the determination, respecting the confidentiality of the information provided by the exporter or producer, and a copy shall be sent to the competent authority of the exporting Party.

13. If as a result of an origin verification procedure, in accordance with this Article, the competent authority of the importing Party determines that the good does not qualify as originating, said Party may suspend the preferential tariff treatment to any subsequent importation of identical goods. that have been produced by the same producer, until it is demonstrated before the competent authority of the importing Party that the goods qualify as originating according to the provisions of this Chapter.

14. The suspension of preferential tariff treatment, in accordance with paragraph 13, shall be communicated by the competent authority of the importing Party to the exporter or producer, importer and the competent authority of the exporting Party, stating the factual and legal grounds that justify their determination, and respecting the confidentiality of the information.

Article 3.27: Measures to Guarantee the Fiscal Interest

1. In the event that doubts arise at the time of dispatch of the goods about the authenticity of the Proofs of Origin or about the origin of the merchandise, including the veracity of the information declared in the Proof of Origin, the customs authority may not prevent the clearance of the goods. However, the customs authority may adopt the measures it deems necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest, in accordance with its national legislation.

2. When the importing Party adopts measures to guarantee the fiscal interest, it may request information in accordance with paragraph 3 related to the authenticity of the Proofs of Origin, within a period not exceeding sixty (60) days following the adoption of such. measures. Otherwise, the measures that have been adopted must be lifted within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days following the request for the release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, and may be extended up to thirty (30) additional days in exceptional cases.

3. The competent authority of the importing Party may request, through a written request, information from the authorized entity responsible for issuing the certificate of origin, or from the competent authority of the exporting Party, as appropriate, in order to verify the authenticity of the certificates of origin. In the case of declarations of origin, the competent authority of the importing Party may request, through a written request, information from the competent authority of the exporting Party or, when applicable, the authorized entity of the exporting Party.

In both scenarios, the competent authority or authorized entity of the exporting Party, as appropriate, will have a period of sixty (60) days following the date of receipt of the request, to provide the requested information.

4. In the event that the competent authority of the importing Party does not receive the information and documentation requested within the established term or that the exporting Party does not recognize the authenticity of the Proofs of Origin, preferential tariff treatment may be denied to the goods covered by the Proofs of Origin subject to review and execute the measures that have been adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest.

5. In the event that the competent authority or authorized entity of the exporting Party, as appropriate, recognizes the authenticity of the Proofs of Origin, the importing Party shall proceed to issue a determination accepting the preferential tariff treatment, and lift the measures that have been adopted. in order to guarantee the tax interest within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days following the request for release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, and may be extended for up to thirty (30) additional days in exceptional cases.

6. If there are doubts about the origin of the good, including the veracity of the information declared in the proof of origin, the competent authority of the importing Party shall initiate an origin verification process in accordance with Article 3.26 within a period not greater than sixty (60) days after they have adopted measures in order to guarantee the fiscal interest. Otherwise, the corresponding preferential tariff treatment will be accepted and the measures that have been adopted to guarantee the fiscal interest will be lifted, within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days following the request for release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, and may be extended up to thirty (30) additional days in exceptional cases.

7. If the competent authority of the importing Party does not issue a determination of origin within the period mentioned in Article 3.26.11, the corresponding preferential tariff treatment will be accepted and the measures that have been adopted and that guaranteed the fiscal interest will be lifted. , within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days following the request for release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, and may be extended up to thirty (30) additional days in exceptional cases.

8. If as a result of the conclusion of the verification of origin in accordance with Article 3.26 it is determined:

(a) the originating character of the merchandise, the importing Party shall proceed to accept the request for preferential tariff treatment and lift the measures it has adopted to guarantee fiscal interest within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days following the request for release of the measures by the importer to the customs authority of the importing Party, which may be extended up to thirty (30) additional days in exceptional cases; either

(b) the non-originating character of the good, the importing Party will deny the request for preferential tariff treatment and will proceed to execute the measures it has adopted in order to guarantee the fiscal interest.

Article 3.28: Sanctions

Each Party will maintain or adopt criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations related to the provisions of this Chapter, in accordance with its national legislation.

Article 3.29: Review and Appeal Resources

Each Party shall ensure, with respect to its administrative acts related to the determination of origin, that importers, exporters or producers have access to:

(a) a level of administrative review independent of the official or agency that issued the administrative act; and

(b) a level of judicial review of the administrative act.

Article 3.30: Confidentiality

1. Each Party shall maintain, in accordance with its national legislation, the confidentiality of the information provided in the framework of an origin verification process.

2. Said information must not be disclosed without the express consent of the person delivering it, except in the case that it is required in the context of a judicial or administrative process.

3. Any violation of the confidentiality of the information shall be dealt with in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

Article 3.31: Billing by a Third Country

In the case of an importation of originating goods in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the invoice presented at the time of importation may be issued by a person located in the territory of a non-Party country. In this case, the full legal name of the operator of the non-Party country that issued the invoice must be indicated in the observations box of the Certificate of Origin or in the case that the goods are covered by a Declaration of Origin, this information must be indicated in the same.

Article 3.32: Uniform Regulations

1. The Parties may establish, through their respective national laws and regulations, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or on any other date that the Parties agree, the Uniform Regulations regarding the interpretation, application and administration of this Chapter. .

2. Once the Uniform Regulations are in force, each Party will put into force any modification or addition to them, no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the respective agreement between the Parties, or in any other term that they agree.

Article 3.33: Rules of Origin Committee

1. The Parties establish a Rules of Origin Committee (hereinafter the Committee), made up of representatives of each Party.

2. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) report to the Commission on the implementation and administration of this Chapter, when applicable;

(c) cooperate in the effective, uniform and consistent administration of this Chapter, and encourage cooperation in this regard;

(d) review and recommend to the Commission any modification to Annex 3 (Specific Rules of Origin), including when amendments are made to the Harmonized System;

(e) propose to the Parties, through the Commission, modifications to this Chapter. The modification proposals will be presented at the request of one or both Parties, who must present the proposals with the technical support and the corresponding studies; and

(f) deal with any other matter related to this Chapter.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will meet at least one (1) time a year, on the date and according to the agenda previously agreed by the Parties. The Parties will determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings may be held.

4. The meetings may be held by any means agreed by the Parties. When they are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

5. All decisions of the Committee must be taken by mutual agreement.

Article 3.34: Re-export Certificate

1. The Parties recognize that a merchandise that meets the conditions of originating merchandise, in accordance with the agreements or commercial treaties in force between Peru and Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala or Honduras, that is re-exported from the Free Zone of Colón (Panama) will not lose its originating merchandise status for the mere fact of having been transported, stored or transhipped in said free zone.

2. Merchandise from the Colon Free Zone must be accompanied by a Re-export Certificate proving the origin and control over the merchandise issued by the customs authorities of Panama and validated by the administrative authority of the Colon Free Zone. This document will certify that the goods remained under customs control and did not experience changes, nor did they undergo further processing or any other type of operation other than those necessary to keep them in good condition, in accordance with the commercial agreements or treaties mentioned in paragraph 1.

3. Imports of merchandise covered by a Re-export Certificate that qualify as originating, in accordance with the commercial agreements or treaties mentioned in paragraph 1, will not lose the tariff preference granted by the importing Party for the mere fact of having been transported, stored or transshipped in the Colon Free Zone.

4. For the purposes of applying paragraph 3, the importing Party may require, in accordance with the commercial agreements or treaties mentioned in paragraph 1, the presentation of a Proof of Origin (for example, a Certificate of Origin) issued by one of the exporting countries mentioned in paragraph 1, which will benefit from the preferential tariff treatment granted by the importing Party.

5. The Re-export Certificate that certifies the origin of the merchandise referred to in this Article, can only be applied to the merchandise that qualify as originating based on the Proof of Origin issued in accordance with the commercial agreements or treaties mentioned in Article paragraph 1.

6. An invoice related to an originating good exported in accordance with an agreement or commercial treaty mentioned in paragraph 1, may be issued by a logistics operator established in the Colon Free Zone, as long as said agreement or treaty allows billing in third countries.

7. After two (2) years from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will regulate, through the corresponding authorities of each Party, the recognition of the Re-export Certificate for originating merchandise, in accordance with their respective agreements signed with third countries, which accounts for the deposit and control of said merchandise in the cases of transit or transshipment of the same in the Colon Free Zone.

Article 3.35: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

aquaculture means the cultivation or raising of aquatic species, including, among others: fish, molluscs, crustaceans, other invertebrates and plants, encompassing their complete or partial life cycle, from seeds such as eggs, immature fish, fingerlings and larvae. It is carried out in a selected and controlled medium, in natural or artificial water environments, both in marine, fresh or brackish waters. The activities of population or sowing, and repopulation or replanting, cultivation, as well as the research activities and the processing of the products coming from said activity are included;

competent authority means for:

(a) Panama: the National Customs Authority; and

(b) Peru: the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism, or its successors.

CIF means the value of the imported merchandise, including insurance and freight costs to the port or place of entry in the importing country, regardless of the means of transportation;

shipping containers and packing materials means goods used to protect a good during its transportation and does not include the containers and materials in which the good is packaged for retail sale;

authorized entity means for:

(a) Panama: the Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and

(b) Peru: the entity designated by the competent authority to issue Certificates of Origin, in accordance with national legislation. In the case of Peru, the competent authority is in charge of issuing certificates of origin and can delegate their issuance to authorized entities,

or their successors.

exporter means a person located in the territory of a Party from which the good is exported;

FOB means the value of the merchandise free on board, including the cost of transportation to the port or place of final shipment, regardless of the means of transportation;

importer means a person located in the territory of a Party into which the good is imported;

material means a good that is used in the production of another good, including any component, ingredient, raw material, part or piece;

intermediate material means an originating material that is produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;

merchandise means any product, article, or material;

fungible goods or materials means goods or materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical and cannot be distinguished from one another by simple visual examination;

identical goods means identical goods, as defined in the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement ;

non-originating good or non-originating material means a good or material that is not originating in accordance with this Chapter;

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles means recognized consensus or substantial support authorized and adopted in the territory of a Party with respect to the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities, the disclosure of information and the preparation of financial statements. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles may encompass broad guidance of general application, as well as detailed standards, practices, and procedures;

production means the growing, extracting, harvesting, fishing, raising, trapping, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or assembling of a good; and

producer means a person who is involved in the production of a good in the territory of a Party.

 

 

Annex 3.16: Certificate of Origin in pdf format

 

Annex X: Declaration of Origin in pdf format

 

 

Chapter 4

Trade Facilitation and Customs Procedures

Article 4.1: Publication

1. Each Party shall publish, including on the Internet, its customs legislation, regulations, and procedures.

2. Each Party shall designate or maintain one or more consultation points to address concerns of persons interested in customs matters, and shall make available on the Internet information regarding the procedures that must be followed to formulate such consultations.

3. To the extent possible, each Party shall publish in advance any regulation of general application on customs matters that it proposes to adopt, and shall provide interested persons the opportunity to comment prior to their adoption.

4. Each Party shall endeavor to ensure that its customs laws, regulations, and procedures are transparent, facilitate trade, and are non-discriminatory.

5. Information regarding fees and charges related to the provision of services that affect foreign trade provided by a Party must be published, including on the Internet.

Article 4.2: Dispatch of Goods

1. In order to facilitate trade between the Parties, each Party shall adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures for the efficient clearance of goods.

2. Pursuant to paragraph 1, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that:

(a) provide that the clearance of merchandise be made within a period no longer than that required to ensure compliance with their customs legislation, and to the extent possible, that the merchandise be cleared within forty-eight (48) hours following your arrival; and

(b) allow the goods to be dispatched at the point of arrival, without mandatory transfer to warehouses or other facilities, except when the customs authority needs to exercise additional controls or for infrastructure reasons.

Article 4.3: Automation

1. Each Party shall endeavor to use information technology that makes the procedures for the clearance of goods expeditious and efficient. When choosing the information technology to be used for such purpose, each Party:

(a) will make efforts to use internationally recognized norms, standards and practices;

(b) make electronic systems accessible to users of its customs;

(c) will allow the submission and electronic processing of information and data before the arrival of the merchandise, in order to allow its clearance in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.2;

(d) will use electronic and/or automated systems for risk analysis and management;

(e) work on the development of compatible electronic systems between the customs authorities of the Parties, in order to facilitate the exchange of international trade data between them; and

(f) work to develop the set of common data elements and processes in accordance with the World Customs Organization (hereinafter WCO) Customs Data Model, and related WCO recommendations and guidelines.

2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain, to the extent possible, procedures that allow expeditious control of the means of transporting goods leaving or entering its territory.

Article 4.4: Risk Administration or Management

1. Each Party shall endeavor to adopt or maintain risk administration or management systems that allow its customs authority to focus its inspection activities on high-risk merchandise, and that simplify the clearance and movement of low-risk merchandise, respecting the nature confidentiality of the information obtained through such activities.

2. When applying risk administration or management, each Party shall inspect imported goods based on appropriate selectivity criteria, avoiding physical inspection of all the goods entering its territory, and to the extent possible, with the help of non-intrusive inspection instruments.

Article 4.5: Transit of Goods

Each Party shall grant free transit to the goods of the other Party, in accordance with Article V of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes.

Article 4.6: Express Delivery Shipments

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain special customs procedures for express delivery shipments, while maintaining appropriate control and selection systems in accordance with their nature.

2. The procedures referred to in paragraph 1 shall:

(a) provide for separate and expedited customs procedures for express delivery shipments;

(b) provide for the submission and processing of information necessary for the clearance of an express delivery shipment, prior to the arrival of such shipment;

(c) allow the presentation of a single cargo manifest that covers all the merchandise contained in a shipment transported by an express delivery service, through electronic means;

(d) provide for the dispatch of less risky and/or valuable merchandise with a minimum of documentation;

(e) under normal circumstances, provide for the clearance of express delivery shipments within six (6) hours of presentation of the necessary customs documents, provided the shipment has arrived; and

(f) under normal circumstances, provide that tariffs will not be set, for express delivery shipments of correspondence, documents, newspapers and periodical publications, for non-commercial purposes.

Article 4.7: Authorized Economic Operator

The Parties will promote the implementation of Authorized Economic Operators in accordance with the WCO Regulatory Framework to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade (known as the SAFE Regulatory Framework), to facilitate the clearance of their goods. Its obligations, requirements and formalities will be established in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

Article 4.8: Single Window for Foreign Trade

The Parties will promote the creation of a Single Window for Foreign Trade for the expediting and facilitation of trade. To the extent possible, the Parties will seek interconnection between their Foreign Trade Single Windows.

Article 4.9: Review and Appeal

Each Party shall ensure, with respect to customs administrative acts, that natural or legal persons subject to such acts have access to:

(a) a level of administrative review, which is independent of the official or office that issued such act; and

(b) at least one level of judicial review.

Article 4.10: Sanctions

Each Party shall adopt or maintain measures that allow the imposition of administrative sanctions and, when appropriate, criminal sanctions, for the violation of customs legislation and regulations, including those that govern tariff classification, customs valuation, origin, and requests for preferencial treatment.

Article 4.11: Advance Rulings

1. Each Party shall issue a written advance ruling, prior to the importation of a good into its territory, when an importer in its territory, or an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party 1has requested it in writing, regarding:

(a) the tariff classification;

(b) the application of customs valuation criteria for a particular case, in accordance with the application of the provisions contained in the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement 2;

(c) whether a good is originating in accordance with Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures);
(d) whether a good reimported into the territory of a Party after having been exported to the territory of another Party for repair or alteration is eligible for duty-free treatment under Article 2.6 (Goods Reimported after Repair or Alteration); and

(e) other matters that the Parties agree.

2. Each Party shall issue the advance ruling within one hundred fifty (150) days following the submission of the application, provided that the applicant has submitted all the information that the Party requires, including, if requested, a sample of the merchandise for which the applicant is requesting the advance ruling. When issuing the advance ruling, the Party shall take into account the facts and circumstances that the applicant has presented.

3. Each Party shall provide that advance rulings take effect from the date of their issuance, or another date specified in the ruling provided that the facts or circumstances on which the ruling is based have not changed.

4. The Party issuing the advance ruling may modify or revoke it after notifying the applicant, when the criteria, facts, circumstances, laws, regulations or standards that served as the basis change, or when it has been based on incorrect or false information. In the event that the aforementioned modification or revocation is based on a change in the criteria, facts, circumstances, laws, regulations or norms that served as a basis, said modification or revocation may be applied from the date on which said criteria, facts, circumstances, laws, regulations or norms take effect. In the event of incorrect or false information, said modification or revocation may be applied from the date of issuance of the aforementioned advance resolution.

5. Subject to the confidentiality requirements under its national law, each Party may make its advance rulings publicly available.

6. If an applicant provides false information or omits relevant facts or circumstances related to the advance ruling, or does not act in accordance with the terms and conditions thereof, the Parties may apply the measures that are appropriate, including civil, criminal and administrative procedures in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

Article 4.12: Committee on Trade Facilitation and Customs Procedures

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Trade Facilitation and Customs Procedures (hereinafter the Committee), made up of representatives of each Party.

2. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter and Chapter 5 (Cooperation and Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters);

(b) report to the Commission on the implementation and administration of the Chapters referred to in subparagraph (a), when applicable;

(c) promptly address the issues that a Party proposes regarding the development, adoption, application or execution of the provisions of the Chapters referred to in subparagraph (a);

(d) promote the joint cooperation of the Parties in the development, application, execution and improvement of all matters concerning the Chapters referred to in subparagraph (a), including, in particular, customs procedures, customs valuation, tariff regimes, customs nomenclature, customs cooperation, matters related to free zones, mutual administrative assistance in customs matters, as well as providing a forum for consultation and discussion for such issues;

(e) at the request of a Party, resolve consultations on any matter that arises under the Chapters referred to in subparagraph (a), within a period of thirty (30) days; and

(f) deal with any other matter related to the Chapters referred to in subparagraph (a).

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will meet at least one (1) time a year, on the date and according to the agenda previously agreed by the Parties. The Parties will determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings may be held.

4. The meetings may be held by any means agreed by the Parties. When they are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting. The first meeting of the Committee shall be held no later than one (1) year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

5. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will be permanent and will develop its work rules.

6. All decisions of the Committee must be taken by mutual agreement.

 

 

Chapter 5

Cooperation and Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters

Article 5.1: Scope

1. The Parties, through their competent authorities, must provide mutual administrative and technical assistance, in accordance with the terms established in this Chapter for the proper application of customs legislation; for the prevention, investigation and sanction against illegal customs and customs infractions; and for the facilitation of customs procedures. Likewise, the Parties, through their competent authorities, shall provide cooperation and mutual assistance in customs matters in general, including the provision of statistics and other similar information that is available, in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

2. Pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and subject to their national legislation, the Parties, within the scope of competence and available resources of their respective competent authorities, shall cooperate and provide mutual assistance to:

(a) facilitate and expedite the flow of goods and people between the two countries;

(b) prevent, investigate and punish illegal customs and customs violations; and

(c) promote mutual understanding of the customs legislation, procedures and techniques of each of the Parties.

3. When a Party becomes aware of any illegal activity related to its customs legislation or regulations, said Party may request that the other Party provide specific information and documentation in relation to certain customs and/or commercial operations that are carried out in whole or in part. in their territory.

4. The assistance, as provided for in this Chapter, will include, among others, at the initiative of one Party or at the request of the other Party, all the appropriate information that ensures compliance with customs legislation and the correct determination of the customs duties and other taxes. However, the assistance will not cover requests for the arrest or detention of persons, confiscation or detention of property or return of duties, taxes, fines or any other money on behalf of the other Party, activities that will be governed by the International Agreements. corresponding.

5. This Chapter is intended only for mutual administrative assistance between the Parties in customs matters. The provisions of this Chapter do not grant the right to any private person to obtain, suppress or exclude any evidence or prevent the execution of a request.

6. Compliance with what is agreed in this Chapter must be without prejudice to cooperation or assistance between the Parties based on other international agreements, including mutual assistance in criminal matters. If mutual assistance is to be provided under other international agreements in force between the Parties, the requested Party shall indicate the name of the agreement and the relevant authorities involved.

Article 5.2: Implementation

In order to ensure the proper implementation of this Chapter, each competent authority must adopt the necessary measures to do so, and strengthen cooperation and assistance in the following aspects:

(a) encourage the exchange of customs laws, regulations and procedures;

(b) exchange information on measures to simplify customs procedures and facilitate trade and the movement of means of transport, in accordance with the national legislation of the Parties;

(c) report on restrictions and/or prohibitions on imports or exports;

(d) maintain constant consultations on issues of implementation of customs procedures and trade facilitation;

(e) periodically review its customs procedures; and

(f) implement other measures they deem necessary.

Article 5.3: Communication of Information

1. Upon request, the requested Party shall provide all information on applicable customs legislation, regulations and procedures, concerning investigations related to a possible customs offense or customs infraction occurring in the territory of the requesting Party.

2. The competent authorities shall communicate, ex officio and without delay, any available information on:

(a) new techniques for compliance with customs legislation;

(b) new trends, means or methods used in the commission of customs offenses and customs offenses, and those used to combat them;

(c) new procedures, methods and techniques for customs facilitation; and

(d) other matters of mutual interest.

3. In serious cases involving substantial damage to the economy, public health, public safety or other vital interest of one of the Parties, the competent authority of the other Party shall provide the information indicated in paragraph 1 without delay and on its own initiative. .

4. Upon request, the requested Party shall provide information, in accordance with its national legislation, on the operations that have been carried out in its customs territory under the import regime of the goods exported from the territory of the requesting administration, which will include, if the procedure required for the clearance of the goods.

5. Likewise, at the request of a Party and to the extent of its possibilities and available resources, the requested Party may provide information, in accordance with its national legislation, related to:

(a) information on persons known to the requesting Party to have committed or are involved in the commission of a customs offense or offence;

(b) information on the goods that are destined for the customs territory of the requesting Party, are sent in transit or are destined for storage for subsequent transit to said territory; either

(c) information on the means of transportation allegedly used in the commission of offenses in the territory of the requesting Party.

Article 5.4: Verification

1. Upon request, the requested Party shall send the requesting Party information about:

(a) the authenticity of official documents produced to support the customs declaration made to the requesting Party;

(b) whether the goods exported from the territory of the requesting Party have been lawfully imported into the territory of the requested Party; and

(c) if the goods imported into the territory of the requesting Party come from or have been legally exported from the territory of the requested Party.

2. Likewise, the requested Party must provide information, in accordance with its national legislation, related to:

(a) the determination of the customs duties of the goods, and in particular, information on the determination of the customs value;

(b) means of transport and destination of the goods transported, indicating the references that allow the identification of said goods;

(c) controls carried out on goods that are in transit to the territory of one of the Parties from a third country; either

(d) smuggling and customs fraud carried out by its importers and/or exporters.

Article 5.5: Cooperation and Technical Assistance

Where it does not contravene their national legislation, regulations and practices, the competent authorities shall cooperate in customs matters, including:

(a) the exchange of customs experts when mutually beneficial, in order to promote understanding of the customs legislation, procedures and techniques of each of the Parties;

(b) training, particularly for the development of specialized skills of its customs officers;

(c) the exchange of professional, scientific and technical information related to customs legislation, regulations and customs procedures;

(d) the exchange of information about new technologies, methods and procedures in the application of customs legislation; and

(e) cooperation in the areas of research, development and testing of new customs procedures.

Article 5.6: Applications

1. Requests for assistance under this Chapter must be addressed directly to the requested Party by the requesting Party, in writing or by electronic means, and attaching the necessary documents. The requested Party may request written confirmation of electronic requests.

2. When a request is urgent, it can also be done orally. Such request must be confirmed in writing or electronically as soon as possible. As long as the written confirmation has not been received, the fulfillment of the request may be suspended.

3. Requests made pursuant to paragraph 1 must include the following details:

(a) the administrative unit, name, signature and position of the official making the request;

(b) the information required and the reason for the request;

(c) a brief description of the subject, the legal elements and the nature of the customs procedure;

(d) the names, addresses, identification documents or any other information that is known and relevant to the persons to whom the request relates; and

(e) all the necessary information available to identify the goods or the customs declaration related to the request.

4. The information referred to in this Chapter will be communicated to the officials specially designated for this purpose by each competent authority. To this end, each Party shall provide a list of designated officials to the competent authority of the other Party.

5. The requesting Party must be able to provide the same assistance required, if requested.

Article 5.7: Execution of Requests

1. A request for assistance must be dealt with as soon as possible, taking into consideration the available resources of the requested Party. The complete response to the request for assistance must be provided within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written request.

2. Upon request, the requested Party will carry out an investigation, in accordance with its national legislation, to obtain information related to illegal acts or customs violations in international trade operations that occurred in the territory of any of the Parties, and will provide the requesting Party with the results of said investigation and all related information that it deems pertinent.

3. If the requested information is available in electronic version, the requested Party may provide it by electronic means to the requesting Party, unless the requesting Party has requested otherwise.

4. If a request made by any of the competent authorities requires compliance with a certain procedure, it must be followed in accordance with the national legislation and administrative provisions of the requested Party.

5. If the requested Party does not have the requested information, it shall, within the limits of its national legislation and available resources, exhaust the possibilities and make all possible efforts, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1.

Article 5.8: Files, Documents and Other Materials

1. Upon request, the requested Party may certify the copies of the requested documents, in case it cannot provide the originals when its national legislation prevents it.

2. Any information to be exchanged under this Chapter may be accompanied by additional information that is relevant to interpret or use it.

Article 5.9: Use of Information

The information, documents and other materials received under this Chapter will be used only for the purposes established in this Chapter, and subject to the restrictions that may be established by the requested Party, consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

Article 5.10: Confidentiality

1. The information, documents and other materials obtained by the requesting Party in the course of mutual assistance under this Chapter shall be treated confidentially, and in this case, shall be accorded the same protection with respect to confidentiality as applies to the same type of information, documents, and other materials in the territory of the requesting Party.

2. Said information will be used or disclosed solely for the purposes established in this Chapter, including in the cases in which it is required in the framework of administrative, judicial or investigative processes carried out by the competent authority or whoever corresponds. The information may be used or disclosed for other purposes or by other authorities, only in the event that the requested Party expressly authorizes it in writing.

Article 5.11: Costs

1. The competent authorities will waive any claim for reimbursement of costs incurred in the execution of the requests provided for in this Chapter, except for the expenses and subsidies paid to the experts, which will be assumed by the requesting Party.

2. If expenses of a considerable or extraordinary nature are necessary to execute the request, the competent authorities will be consulted to determine the terms and conditions according to which the request will be executed, as well as the way in which the expenses will be assumed.

Article 5.12: Exception from the Obligation to Provide Assistance

1. In cases where, in the opinion of the requested Party, the assistance required under this Agreement infringes its national sovereignty, public order, security or other substantial national interests, or violates legally protected trade secrets in its territory, such assistance may be refused or may be provided subject to certain conditions.

2. If the requesting Party is unable to comply with a similar request that the requested Party may request, it shall note that fact in its request. The requested Party may refuse to grant assistance.

3. The requested Party may postpone assistance on the basis that it will interfere with an ongoing investigation, judicial proceeding or proceeding. In such case, the requested Party shall consult with the requesting Party to determine whether the assistance can be granted under the terms and conditions indicated by the requested Party.

4. When assistance is denied or postponed, the reasons for the denial and postponement will be provided.

Article 5.13: Compliance Verification Process and Dispute Resolution

1. The competent authorities must communicate directly and identify the points of contact in order to discuss issues regarding the administration, implementation and compliance of this Chapter. For such purposes, the Technical Committee for Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters is established, which will be made up of two (2) representatives of each of the competent authorities, appointed by their respective higher bodies and will meet in ordinary session at least two (2) times a year and in extraordinary session as many times as necessary, at the request of any of the Parties.

2. The Technical Committee will have, among others, the following functions:

(a) ensure effective compliance with the provisions of this Chapter;

(b) prepare the analyzes and reports for the knowledge and approval of the higher bodies of the competent authorities;

(c) propose to the higher bodies of the competent authorities more detailed agreements, within the framework of this Agreement, to facilitate its implementation and compliance;

(d) propose to the higher bodies of the competent authorities mechanisms and procedures to facilitate the implementation and compliance of this Agreement, with the vision of strengthening the bilateral customs policy; and

(e) the others that the higher bodies of the competent authorities by mutual agreement entrust to it.

3. For the purposes of applying the dispute resolution mechanism, if a direct solution is not found in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, the higher bodies of the competent authorities must resolve the issues arising from the interpretation, implementation and compliance with the Chapter through comprehensive consultations, in order to find a mutually satisfactory solution, within a period of thirty (30) days, for the benefit of the fiscal interest.

Article 5.14: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

competent authority means:

(a) in the case of Panama, the National Customs Authority and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, according to their powers; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the National Superintendence of Tax Administration (SUNAT) and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism (MINCETUR), according to their powers,

or their successors;

unlawful or customs offense means any breach or attempted breach of the customs legislation of each Party;

information means documents, reports or other communications in any format, including electronic, as well as certified or authenticated copies thereof;

customs legislation means any legal provision administered, applied or imposed by the competent authorities of each Party and/or that regulates the exit, entry or transit of merchandise in all or part of its territory;

Requested Party means the competent authority from which cooperation or assistance is requested; and

Requesting Party means the competent authority requesting cooperation or assistance.

 

 

Chapter 6

Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

Article 6.1: Scope of Application

This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures that could directly or indirectly affect trade between the Parties, including food safety, the exchange of animals, products and by-products of animal origin, plants, products and by-products of vegetable origin of in accordance with the SPS Agreement of the WTO, the Codex Alimentarius Commission , the World Organization for Animal Health (hereinafter OIE) and the International Plant Protection Convention (hereinafter IPPC).

Article 6.2: Objectives

The objectives of this Chapter are: to protect the life and health of people, animals and preserve plants in the territories of the Parties, facilitate and increase trade between the Parties, addressing and solving problems that arise as a result of the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, collaborate in greater implementation of the WTO SPS Agreement and create a Committee to transparently address issues related to sanitary and phytosanitary measures and promote the constant improvement of the sanitary and phytosanitary situation of the Parties.

Article 6.3: Reaffirmation of the WTO SPS Agreement

The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations under the WTO SPS Agreement .

Article 6.4: Rights and Obligations of the Parties

1. The Parties may adopt, maintain or apply their sanitary or phytosanitary measures to achieve an adequate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection provided that they are based on scientific principles.

2. The Parties may establish, apply or maintain sanitary or phytosanitary measures with a higher level of protection than that which would be achieved by the application of a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that there is a scientific justification for it. .

3. The Parties shall ensure that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures do not constitute a disguised restriction on trade or create unnecessary obstacles to it.

Article 6.5: Equivalence

1. The recognition of equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures may be given considering the standards, guidelines and recommendations established by the competent international organizations and the decisions adopted by the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO on the matter.

2. A Party shall accept as equivalent the sanitary or phytosanitary measures of the other Party, even when they differ from its own, provided that they are shown to achieve the appropriate level of protection of the other Party, in which case reasonable access for inspections shall be provided. , tests and other necessary procedures.

3. The Parties in the Committee established in Article 6.11 shall define the mechanisms to evaluate and, if applicable, accept the equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

Article 6.6: Risk Assessment and Determination of the Appropriate Level of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Protection

1. The sanitary and phytosanitary measures applied by the Parties shall be based on an evaluation appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks for the life and health of people and animals or for the preservation of plants, including products and by-products. , taking into account the relevant standards, guidelines and recommendations of the competent international organizations.

2. The establishment of adequate levels of protection will take into account the objective of protecting human, animal and plant health, while facilitating trade by avoiding arbitrary or unjustified distinctions that could become disguised restrictions.

3. The Parties will grant each other the necessary facilities for the evaluation, when required, of the sanitary and phytosanitary services, based on the guidelines and recommendations of international organizations or other procedures that the Parties adopt by mutual agreement.

4. In this regard, the Parties agree to instruct the Committee established in Article 6.11 to determine the actions and procedures to speed up the risk assessment process in sanitary and phytosanitary matters.

Article 6.7: Adaptation to Regional Conditions with Inclusion of Pest or Disease Free Areas and Areas of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence

1. In assessing the sanitary or phytosanitary characteristics of a region, the Parties shall take into account, among other things, the level of prevalence of specific diseases or pests, the existence of eradication or control programs, and appropriate criteria or guidelines that can be drawn up by the competent international organizations.

2. The Parties shall recognize pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low pest or disease prevalence in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement , OIE and IPPC recommendations and/or guidelines.

3. In determining said zones, the Parties shall consider factors such as geographic location, ecosystems, epidemiological surveillance, and the effectiveness of sanitary and phytosanitary controls, among other technically and scientifically justified considerations, which provide the necessary evidence to demonstrate objectively to the other Party that such areas are and are likely to continue to be pest or disease free areas or areas of low prevalence. To this end, reasonable access will be given, upon request to the other Party, for inspection, testing and other relevant procedures.

4. The Parties acknowledge the recommendations expressed in the standards on compartmentalization established by the OIE.

5. The Committee established in Article 6.11 will develop an appropriate procedure for the recognition of pest- or disease-free areas and areas of low prevalence, taking into account international standards, guidelines or recommendations.

6. If a Party does not recognize the determination of pest or disease free areas or areas of low pest or disease prevalence made by the other Party, it shall justify the technical and scientific reasons for such refusal in a timely manner.

Article 6.8: Inspection, Control and Approval

The Parties shall establish the inspection, control and approval procedures taking into account Article 8 and Annex C of the WTO SPS Agreement .

Article 6.9: Transparency

1. The Parties shall transparently apply sanitary and phytosanitary measures. For these purposes, the Parties shall notify each other of such measures in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the WTO SPS Agreement .

2. Additionally, the Parties will notify each other:

(a) the application of emergency measures or modification of the measures already in force within a period not exceeding three (3) days, in accordance with the provisions of Annex B of the WTO SPS Agreement, as well as alert situations regarding the control of foods traded between the Parties, in which a risk to human health is detected, associated with its consumption, in accordance with the corresponding sanitary standard of the Codex Alimentarius in force at the time ;

(b) situations of non-compliance with measures detected in the certifications of export products subject to the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, including as much information as possible, as well as the reasons for their rejection;

(c) cases of exotic pests or diseases or of unusual occurrence; and

(d) updated information at the request of a Party, of the requirements that apply to the importation of specific products, and report on the status of the processes and measures in process, with respect to requests for access to animal, plant, and forestry products. , fishing and others related to the WTO SPS Agreement by the exporting Party.

3. Likewise, the Parties shall make their best efforts to improve mutual understanding of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and their application, and shall exchange information on matters related to the development and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, which affect or may affect trade between the Parties, with a view to minimizing their negative effects on trade.

4. Notifications shall be made in writing to the contact points established in accordance with the WTO SPS Agreement . Written notification shall be understood to mean notifications by postal mail, fax or email.

Article 6.10: Cooperation and Technical Assistance

1. The Parties agree to cooperate and provide each other with the necessary technical assistance for the application of this Chapter.

2. Through the Committee established in Article 6.11, the Parties will develop a work program, including the identification of cooperation and technical assistance needs to establish and/or strengthen the capacity of the Parties in human, animal, and plant health. and food security of common interest.

Article 6.11: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (hereinafter the Committee), made up of representatives of each Party with responsibilities in this matter, in accordance with Annex 6.11 (Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures), as a forum for ensure and monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter, as well as to address and try to resolve problems that arise in the trade of merchandise subject to the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

2. The Committee may establish working groups on sanitary and phytosanitary matters that it deems pertinent.

3. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) report to the Commission on the implementation and administration of this Chapter, when applicable;

(c) serve as a forum to consult, discuss and attempt to resolve problems related to the development or application of sanitary or phytosanitary measures that affect or may affect trade between the Parties;

(d) contribute to the facilitation of trade through timely attention to queries on problems related to the application of this Chapter;

(e) improve any present or future relationship between the offices responsible for the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the Parties;

(f) contribute to mutual understanding of the Parties' sanitary and phytosanitary measures, their implementation processes, and related internal regulations;

(g) detect and promote cooperation, technical assistance, training, and exchange of information on sanitary and phytosanitary measures;

(h) establish the procedures for the recognition of zones, areas or compartments free of pests or diseases;

(i) define the mechanisms or procedures for the recognition of equivalence of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as well as determine the procedures and deadlines for risk assessments in an agile and transparent manner;

(j) consult on the position of the Parties on issues to be discussed in the meetings of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO, the Codex Alimentarius committees and other forums of which the Parties are part; and

(k) deal with any other matter related to this Chapter.

4. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will meet at least one (1) time a year, on the date and according to the agenda previously agreed by the Parties. The Parties will determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings may be held.

5. The meetings may be held by any means agreed by the Parties. When they are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting. The first meeting of the Committee shall be held no later than one (1) year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will be permanent and will develop its work rules.

7. All decisions of the Committee must be taken by mutual agreement.

Article 6.12: Settlement of Disputes

Once the consultation procedure in accordance with Article 6.11.3 (c) has been exhausted, the Party that is not satisfied with the result of said consultations may resort to the dispute resolution procedure established in Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution). .

Article 6.13: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions and glossaries of Annex A of the SPS Agreement of the WTO and of international reference organizations shall apply .

 

Annex 6.11: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

The Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures will be made up of representatives of:

(a) in the case of Panama, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MICI), the Ministry of Health (MINSA), the Ministry of Agricultural Development (MIDA) and the Panamanian Food Safety Authority (AUPSA); and

(b) in the case of Peru, the National Agrarian Health Service (SENASA), the General Directorate of Environmental Health (DIGESA), the Fisheries Technological Institute (ITP) and the Vice Ministry of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism,

or their successors.

 

 

Chapter 7

Technical Barriers to Trade

Article 7.1: Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to the preparation, adoption and application of all standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, including those related to metrology, of each Party, which may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, this Chapter does not apply to:

(a) sanitary and phytosanitary measures, which will be covered by Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures); and

(b) the purchase specifications established by government institutions for the production or consumption needs of government institutions, which will be governed by Chapter 10 (Government Procurement).

Article 7.2: Objectives

The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate and increase trade in goods by identifying, avoiding and eliminating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties that may arise as a result of the preparation, adoption and application of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures, including those related to metrology, and the promotion of joint cooperation between the Parties, within the terms of the OTC Agreement of the WTO.

Article 7.3: Reaffirmation of the WTO TBT Agreement

The Parties reaffirm their existing rights and obligations with respect to each other under the WTO TBT Agreement , which are incorporated into this Chapter, mutatis mutandis.

Article 7.4: Trade Facilitation

1. The Parties will intensify their joint work in the field of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, with a view to facilitating trade between the Parties. In particular, the Parties will seek to identify, develop and promote trade facilitation initiatives in relation to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, which are appropriate for certain issues or sectors in particular, taking into consideration the respective experience of the Parties. in other appropriate bilateral, regional or multilateral agreements.

2. The initiatives referred to in paragraph 1 may include cooperation on regulatory matters, such as convergence or harmonization with international standards, reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity, recognition and acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures and the use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment entities, as well as cooperation through mutual recognition agreements.

3. When a Party detains at the port of entry a good originating in the territory of the other Party by virtue of having perceived non-compliance with a technical regulation, it must immediately notify the importer of the reasons for the detention.

Article 7.5: Use of International Standards

1. Each Party shall use the relevant international standards, guides and recommendations as provided in Articles 2.4 and 5.4 of the WTO TBT Agreement , as the basis for its technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures.

2. In determining whether there is an international standard, guide or recommendation within the meaning of Article 2, Article 5 and Annex 3 of the WTO TBT Agreement , each Party shall apply the principles set out in the Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade (hereinafter WTO TBT Committee) since January 1, 1995, G/TBT/1/Rev.9, September 08, 2008 issued by the WTO TBT Committee.

3. Each Party shall encourage its national standards bodies to cooperate with the relevant national standards bodies of the other Party in international standardization activities. Such cooperation may be effected through the activities of the Parties in regional and international standardization bodies of which the Parties are members.

Article 7.6: Technical Regulations

1. Each Party shall favorably consider the possibility of accepting as equivalent the technical regulations of the other Party, even when they differ from their own, provided they are satisfied that they adequately meet the legitimate objectives of their own technical regulations.

2. When a Party does not accept a technical regulation of the other Party, as equivalent to one of its own, it shall, at the request of the other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

3. At the request of a Party that has an interest in developing a technical regulation similar to the technical regulation of the other Party and to minimize duplication of expenses, the other Party shall provide any relevant information, studies or other documents available, on which has supported the development of that technical regulation, except for confidential information.

Article 7.7: Conformity Assessment

1. The Parties recognize that a wide range of mechanisms exist to facilitate the acceptance in the territory of one Party of the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, for example:

(a) the importing Party's reliance on a supplier's declaration of conformity;

(b) voluntary agreements between conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the Parties;

(c) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity assessment procedures with respect to specific regulations, carried out by bodies located in the territory of the other Party;

(d) accreditation procedures to qualify conformity assessment bodies;

(e) the designation of conformity assessment bodies; and

(f) the recognition by a Party of the results of the conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party.

The Parties will intensify the exchange of information in relation to these and other similar mechanisms, to facilitate the acceptance of results of conformity assessment procedures.

2. In the event that a Party does not accept the results of a conformity assessment procedure carried out in the territory of the other Party, the latter shall, at the request of that other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

3. Each Party shall accredit, authorize or otherwise recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party under terms no less favorable than those granted to conformity assessment bodies in its territory. If a Party accredits, authorizes or otherwise recognizes a body that assesses the conformity of a specific standard or technical regulation in its territory and refuses to accredit, authorize or otherwise recognize a body that assesses the conformity of that same standard or technical regulation in the territory of the other Party, it shall, at the request of that other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

4. The Parties may enter into negotiations aimed at concluding mutual recognition agreements for the results of their respective conformity assessment procedures, following the principles of the WTO TBT Agreement . In the event that a Party does not agree to start said negotiations, it shall, at the request of that other Party, explain the reasons for its decision.

Article 7.8: Transparency

1. Each Party shall electronically notify the other Party through the contact points established under Article 10 of the WTO TBT Agreement , at the same time as it submits its notification to the WTO central registry of notifications in accordance with the WTO TBT Agreement :

(a) its draft technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures; and

(b) the technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures adopted to address urgent safety, health, environmental protection or national security problems that arise or threaten to arise under the terms of the WTO TBT Agreement .

2. Each Party shall publish on the website of the competent national authority those technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures that are consistent with the technical content of any relevant international standard. This publication will remain available to the public while the aforementioned technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures are in force.

3. Each Party shall grant a period of at least sixty (60) days from the date of the notification indicated in subparagraph 1 (a) for the other Party and interested persons to make written comments on the proposal. A Party will give favorable consideration to reasonable requests for an extension of the period established for comments.

4. Each Party shall publish or make available to the public, either in print or electronically, its responses to significant comments it receives from interested persons or from the other Party pursuant to paragraph 3, no later than the date on which the final version of the technical regulation or the conformity assessment procedure is published.

5. The notification of draft technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures shall include an electronic link to, or a copy of, the full text of the notified document.

6. A Party shall, at the request of the other Party, provide information about the objective and basis of the technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that such Party has adopted or proposes to adopt.

7. The Parties agree that the period between the publication and the entry into force of the technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures shall not be less than six (6) months, unless it is not feasible to meet their legitimate objectives with that period. . The Parties will give favorable consideration to reasonable requests for extension of time.

8. The Parties shall ensure that all adopted and current technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures are publicly available on a free official Internet page, in such a way that they are easily located and accessible.

9. Each Party shall implement the provisions of paragraph 4 as soon as possible and in no event later than three (3) years from the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 7.9: Technical Cooperation

1. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall favorably consider any sector-specific proposals that the requesting Party makes to encourage further cooperation under this Chapter.

2. The Parties agree to cooperate and provide technical assistance in the field of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, including metrology, with a view to facilitating access to their markets. In particular, the Parties shall consider the following activities, among others:

(a) promote the application of this Chapter;

(b) favor the application of the WTO TBT Agreement ;

(c) strengthen the capacities of their respective bodies for standardization, technical regulations, conformity assessment, metrology, and information and notification systems under the scope of the WTO TBT Agreement , including training of human resources; and

(d) increase participation in international organizations, including those of a regional nature, related to standardization, technical regulation, conformity assessment, and metrology.

Article 7.10: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

1. The Parties establish a Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade (hereinafter the Committee), made up of representatives of each Party in accordance with Annex 7.10 (Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade).

2. The functions of the Committee will include:

(a) monitor the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) report to the Commission on the implementation and administration of this Chapter, when applicable;

(c) promptly address matters that a Party proposes regarding the development, adoption, application, or enforcement of standards, technical regulations, or conformity assessment procedures;

(d) promote the joint cooperation of the Parties in the development and improvement of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, including metrology;

(e) as appropriate, facilitate sectoral cooperation between governmental and non-governmental bodies on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures, including metrology, in the territories of the Parties;

(f) exchange information about the work carried out in non-governmental, regional and multilateral forums involved in activities related to standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures;

(g) at the request of a Party, resolve queries on any matter arising under this Chapter;

(h) review this Chapter in light of any developments under the WTO TBT Agreement , and decisions or recommendations of the WTO TBT Committee, and make suggestions for possible amendments to this Chapter;

(i) take any other action that the Parties consider will assist them in the implementation of this Chapter and the WTO TBT Agreement and in the facilitation of trade between the Parties;

(j) recommend to the Commission the establishment of working groups to deal with specific matters related to this Chapter and the WTO TBT Agreement ; and

(k) deal with any other matter related to this Chapter.

3. The Parties shall make all efforts to reach a mutually satisfactory solution, regarding the consultations referred to in subparagraph 2 (g), within a period of thirty (30) days.

4. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with subparagraph 2 (g), such consultations shall supersede those provided for in Article 18.4 (Consultations).

5. The representatives of each Party in accordance with Annex 7.10 (Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade), shall be responsible for coordinating with the relevant bodies and persons in their territory, as well as ensuring that said bodies and persons are convened.

6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will meet at least one (1) time a year, on the date and according to the agenda previously agreed by the Parties. The Parties will determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings may be held.

7. The meetings may be held by any means agreed by the Parties. When they are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting. The first meeting of the Committee shall be held no later than one (1) year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

8. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will be permanent and will develop its work rules.

9. All decisions of the Committee must be taken by mutual agreement.

Article 7.11: Exchange of Information

1. Any information or explanation that is provided at the request of a Party in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, must be provided in print or electronically within a period of thirty (30) days, which may be extended with the prior justification of the reporting Party. .

2. Regarding the exchange of information, in accordance with Article 10 of the WTO TBT Agreement , the Parties must apply the recommendations indicated in the document Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the WTO TBT Committee since January 1, 1995, G/TBT/1/Rev.9, September 8, 2008, Section V (Information Exchange Procedure) issued by the WTO TBT Committee.

Article 7.12: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms and definitions of Annex 1 of the WTO TBT Agreement shall apply .

 

 

Annex 7.10: Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade

Pursuant to Article 7.10, the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade will be coordinated by:

(a) in the case of Panama, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry through the National Directorate of Administration of International Trade Agreements and Trade Defense; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism,

or their successors.

 

 

C hapter 8

Commercial Defense

 

Section A: Bilateral Safeguard Measures

Article 8.1: Imposition of a Bilateral Safeguard Measure

1. During the transition period, if as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this Agreement, a good originating in one of the Parties is being imported into the territory of the other Party, in quantities that have increased in such amount in absolute terms or in relation to domestic production and under conditions such that they constitute a substantial cause of serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry that produces a similar or directly competitive good, the importing Party may adopt a bilateral safeguard measure described in paragraph 2.

2. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, a Party may, to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury or threat of serious injury and facilitate adjustment:

(a) suspend the future reduction of any rate of duty established in this Agreement for the good; either

(b) increase the rate of duty on the good to a level not to exceed the lesser of:

(i) the most-favored-nation (MFN) rate of duty applied at the time the measure is applied; either

(ii) the base duty rate as established in Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program) 1

3. The adoption of a bilateral safeguard measure provided for in this Section will not affect the goods that, on the effective date of the measure, are:

(a) actually shipped as stated in the transport documents, provided that they are intended for final consumption or final importation within a period not to exceed twenty (20) days from the end of unloading in the territory of the importing Party ; either

(b) in the territory of the importing Party pending clearance, provided that the clearance is carried out within a period not to exceed twenty (20) days, counted from the adoption of the measure. Excluded from this provision are goods that, being in free zones, are going to be entered into the territory of the importing Party.

Article 8.2: Standards for a Bilateral Safeguard Measure

1. No Party may maintain a bilateral safeguard measure:

(a) except to the extent and for the period necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment;

(b) for a period exceeding two (2) years; except that this period is extended for one (1) additional year, if the competent authority determines, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 8.3, that the measure is still necessary to avoid or remedy serious injury and facilitate readjustment and that there is evidence that the domestic industry is in the readjustment process; either

(c) after the expiration of the transition period.

2. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a bilateral safeguard measure is greater than one (1) year, the Party applying the measure shall progressively liberalize it, at regular intervals, during the period of application. .

3. A Party may not apply a bilateral safeguard measure more than once against the same good until a period equal to the duration of the previous bilateral safeguard measure, including any extension, has elapsed, starting from the termination of the measure. previous bilateral safeguard, provided that the period of non-application is at least one (1) year.

4. Upon termination of the bilateral safeguard measure, the Party that has adopted it must apply the tariff rate according to its tariff reduction list included in Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program).

Article 8.3: Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements

1. A Party may only apply a bilateral safeguard measure after an investigation by the Party's competent authority in accordance with Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards ; and to this end, Articles 3 and 4.2(c) of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into and made an integral part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

2. In the investigation described in paragraph 1, the Party shall comply with the requirements of Articles 4.2 (a) and 4.2 (b) of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards ; and to this end, Articles 4.2(a) and 4.2(b) of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into and made an integral part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.

3. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities complete this type of investigation within the deadlines established in its national legislation.

Article 8.4 Provisional Bilateral Safeguard Measures
1. In critical circumstances, in which any delay entails damage that is difficult to repair, a Party may apply a provisional bilateral safeguard measure based on a preliminary determination of the existence of clear evidence demonstrating that the increase in imports from the other Party has caused or is threatening to cause serious injury to the domestic industry.

2. The duration of the provisional bilateral safeguard shall not exceed two hundred (200) days, it shall adopt any of the forms set forth in Article 8.1.2 and shall comply with the pertinent requirements of Articles 8.1 and 8.3. The guarantees or funds received by way of provisional measures will be released or reimbursed promptly, when the investigation does not determine that the increase in imports has caused or threatened to cause serious damage to the domestic industry. The duration of any provisional bilateral safeguard measure will be counted as part of the duration of a definitive bilateral safeguard measure.

Article 8.5: Notification and Consultation

1. A Party shall promptly notify the other Party in writing when:

(a) initiate a bilateral safeguard procedure in accordance with this Section;

(b) apply a provisional bilateral safeguard measure; and

(c) takes the final decision to apply or extend a bilateral safeguard measure.

2. A Party shall provide the other Party with a copy of the public version of the report of its competent investigating authority, required in accordance with Article 8.3.1.

3. At the request of a Party whose good is subject to a bilateral safeguard procedure in accordance with this Chapter, the Party conducting the procedure shall initiate consultations with the requesting Party to review the notifications under paragraph 1 or any public notification or report. issued by the competent investigating authority in relation to said procedure.

Article 8.6: Compensation

1. No later than thirty (30) days after it applies a bilateral safeguard measure, a Party shall provide an opportunity for the other Party to consult with it regarding appropriate trade liberalization compensation in the form of concessions that have substantially equivalent in trade, or equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected as a result of the measure.

2. If the Parties fail to agree on compensation within thirty (30) days after initiating consultations, the exporting Party may suspend the application of substantially equivalent concessions to the trade of the Party applying the bilateral safeguard measure. .

3. The exporting Party shall notify the Party applying the bilateral safeguard measure in writing at least thirty (30) days before suspending the concessions pursuant to paragraph 2.

4. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph 1 and the right to suspend concessions under paragraph 2 shall terminate on the date the bilateral safeguard measure terminates.

Article 8.7: Definitions

For the purposes of this Section:

threat of serious harm means the clear imminence of serious harm on the basis of facts and not simply on allegations, conjectures or remote possibilities;

competent investigating authority means:

(a) in the case of Panama, the General Directorate of Trade Defense of the National Directorate of Administration of International Trade Agreements and Trade Defense of the Office of International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the Vice Ministry of Foreign Trade of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism,

or their successors;

substantial cause means a cause that is important and not less than any other cause;

serious injury means a significant overall impairment of the position of a domestic industry; and

transition period means the five (5) year period beginning on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except for any good for which Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Schedule) of the Party applying the safeguard measure establishes that it eliminates its tariffs for the merchandise in a period of five (5) years or more, where transition period means the period of tariff reduction of the merchandise established in Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program) plus an additional period of two (2) years.

Section B: Global Safeguard Measures

Article 8.8: Global Safeguard Measures

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards .

2. This Agreement does not confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with respect to actions taken pursuant to Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards , except that the Party imposing a global safeguard measure may exclude imports of a good originating from the other Party, if such imports are not a substantial cause of serious injury or threat of serious injury.

3. Neither Party shall apply with respect to the same good and during the same period:

(a) a bilateral safeguard measure under Section A; and

(b) a measure under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards .

4. For the purposes of this Section, competent investigating authority means for:

(a) in the case of Panama, the General Directorate of Trade Defense of the National Directorate of Administration of International Trade Agreements and Trade Defense of the Office of International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the National Institute for the Defense of Competition and the Protection of Intellectual Property,

or their successors.

5. Except as provided in paragraph 3, Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution) shall not apply to this Section.

 

Section C: Antidumping and Countervailing Duties

Article 8.9: Antidumping and Countervailing Duties

1. Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article VI of the GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on the Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 , and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures , with regarding the application of antidumping and countervailing duties.

2. Except as provided in paragraph 3, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to impose any right or obligation on the Parties with respect to anti-dumping and countervailing duties.

3. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 6.5 of the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.4 of the WTO Agreement on Subsidies , and in accordance with Article 6.9 of the WTO Anti-Dumping Agreement and Article 12.8 of the Subsidies Agreementof the WTO, the competent investigating authority shall make full and meaningful disclosure of all the essential facts and considerations that serve as the basis for the decision on the application of definitive measures. In this regard, the competent investigating authority must send the interested parties a written report containing said information, and will allow the interested parties sufficient time to present their comments and replies in writing and orally to this report.

4. For the purposes of this Section, competent investigating authority means:

(a) in the case of Panama, the General Directorate of Trade Defense of the National Directorate of Administration of International Trade Agreements and Trade Defense of the Office of International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the National Institute for the Defense of Competition and the Protection of Intellectual Property,

or their successors.

5. Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution) shall not apply to this Section.

 

Section D: Cooperation

Article 8.10: Cooperation

The Parties agree to establish a cooperation mechanism between their investigating authorities. Cooperation between the Parties may include, among others, the following activities:

(a) exchange of non-confidential information available on trade defense investigations that have been carried out with respect to imports originating in or coming from third countries, other than the Parties;

(b) technical assistance in trade defense matters; and

(c) exchange of information in order to improve understanding of this Chapter and of the trade defense regimes of the Parties.

 

 

Chapter 9

Intellectual property

 

Article 9.1: Basic Principles

1. The Parties recognize that the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should contribute to the generation of knowledge, the promotion of innovation, the transfer and dissemination of technology, and cultural progress, for the reciprocal benefit of producers and users. of technological and cultural knowledge, favoring the development of social and economic well-being and the balance of rights and obligations.

2. The Parties recognize the need to maintain a balance between the rights of data subjects and the interests of the public in general, in particular, in education, research, public health and access to information within the framework of exceptions. and limitations established in the national legislation of each Party.

3. The Parties, when formulating or modifying their laws and regulations, may adopt the necessary measures to protect the public health and nutrition of the population, or to promote the public interest in sectors of vital importance for their socioeconomic and technological development, provided that these measures are compatible with the provisions of this Chapter.

4. The Parties recognize that the transfer of technology contributes to the strengthening of national capacities that make it possible to establish a solid and viable technological base.

5. The Parties, when interpreting and implementing the provisions of this Chapter, shall observe the principles established in the Declaration Concerning the Agreement on TRIPS and Public Health, adopted on November 14, 2001 at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the WTO.

6. The Parties will contribute to the implementation of and respect for the Decision of the General Council of the WTO of August 30, 2003 on paragraph 6 of the Declaration Concerning the Agreement on TRIPS and Public Health, and the Protocol by which amendment to the TRIPS Agreement, signed in Geneva on December 6, 2005. Likewise, they recognize the importance of promoting the gradual implementation of Resolution WHA61.21, Global strategy and action plan on public health, innovation and intellectual property, adopted by the 61st World Health Assembly, on May 24, 2008.

7. The Parties shall ensure that the interpretation and implementation of the rights and obligations assumed under this Chapter shall be consistent with paragraphs 1 through 6.

Article 9.2: General Provisions

1. Each Party shall apply the provisions of this Chapter and may, but is not required to, provide in its national legislation for broader protection than that required by this Chapter, provided that such protection does not infringe the provisions of this Chapter.

2. The Parties reaffirm the rights and obligations provided for in the WTO TRIPS Agreement , in the Convention on Biological Diversity, and in any other multilateral agreement on intellectual property or in treaties administered by the World Intellectual Property Organization (in hereinafter WIPO) of which the Parties are part. In this sense, no provision of this Chapter shall be detrimental to the provisions of said multilateral treaties.

3. Each Party, when formulating or modifying its laws and regulations, may make use of the exceptions and flexibilities allowed by the multilateral treaties related to the protection of intellectual property to which the Parties are party.

4. A Party shall accord to the nationals of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it accords to its own nationals. Exceptions to this obligation must be in accordance with the relevant provisions referred to in Articles 3 and 5 of the WTO TRIPS Agreement .

5. With respect to the protection and enforcement of the intellectual property rights referred to in this Chapter, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity that a Party grants to the nationals of any other country shall be granted immediately and without conditions to the nationals of the other part. Exceptions to this obligation must be in accordance with the pertinent provisions referred to in Articles 4 and 5 of the WTO TRIPS Agreement .

6. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from adopting the necessary measures to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by their holders, or the resort to practices that unreasonably limit trade, or result in detriment to international transfer of technology. Likewise, no provision of this Chapter shall be construed as a reduction of the protections that the Parties agree or have agreed to for the benefit of the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, nor shall it prevent the Parties from adopting or maintaining measures for this purpose.

Article 9.3: Trademarks

1. The Parties shall protect trademarks in accordance with the WTO TRIPS Agreement .

2. Article 6 bis of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to goods or services that are not identical or similar to those identified by a well-known trademark, as long as the use of such trademark in relation to those goods or services indicates a connection between those goods or services and the owner of the trademark, and provided that the interests of the owner of the trademark could be injured by such use. For greater certainty, the Parties may also apply this protection to unregistered well-known marks, as long as the national legislation of each Party so allows.

3. To determine if a mark is well-known 1, neither Party shall require that the reputation of the mark extends beyond the sector of the public that normally deals with the relevant goods or services. For greater certainty, the sector of the public that normally deals with the relevant goods or services is determined in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

4. Each Party shall provide a system for the registration of marks, which shall provide:

(a) the written notification to the applicant indicating the reasons for the refusal to register the trademark. If national legislation allows it, notifications may be made by electronic means;

(b) an opportunity for interested parties to oppose an application for trademark registration or request the nullity of the trademark after it has been registered;

(c) that the decisions in the registration and nullity procedures are motivated and in writing; and

(d) the opportunity for the interested parties to challenge administratively or judicially, as established by the national legislation of each Party, the decisions issued in the trademark registration and nullity proceedings.

5. Each Party shall provide that applications for registration, publications of said applications and registrations indicate the products and services by their names, grouped according to the classes of the classification established by the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Products and Services for the Registration of Trademarks (1979), as revised and amended (hereinafter Nice Classification).

Products or services may not be considered as similar to each other, solely because, in some registry or publication, they appear in the same class of the Nice Classification. In the same way, each Party shall establish that the products or services may not be considered different from each other solely because, in any registry or publication, they appear in different classes of the Nice Classification .

Article 9.4: Geographical Indications

1. Geographical indications are those that identify a product as originating in the territory of a Party, or of a region or locality of that territory, when a certain quality, reputation or other characteristic of the product is fundamentally attributable to its geographical origin, and may include the factors natural or human.

2. Each Party shall establish in its national legislation mechanisms for the registration and protection of geographical indications, including appellations of origin.

3. Nothing in this Article shall prevent the Parties from maintaining or adopting in their national legislation measures relating to homonymous geographical indications.

4. The names that appear in Section A of Annex 9.4 are protected geographical indications in Peru, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of the WTO TRIPS Agreement . Subject to the requirements and procedures for their protection, provided in the national laws and regulations of Panama and, in a manner that is consistent with the WTO TRIPS Agreement , these names will be protected as geographical indications in the territory of Panama.

5. The name that appears in Section B of Annex 9.4 is a protected geographical indication in Panama, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 22 of the WTO TRIPS Agreement . Subject to the requirements and procedures for its protection provided in the national laws and regulations of Peru and, in a manner that is consistent with the WTO TRIPS Agreement , this name will be protected as a geographical indication in the territory of Peru.

6. The geographical indications of a Party to which protection is granted in the territory of the other Party shall be notified to the Party concerned, once the respective procedure is concluded, through the contact points established in Article 19.1. (Points of Contact) and will enjoy the protection established in paragraphs 7 and 8.

7. The Parties will protect the geographical indications, including appellations of origin, of the other Party registered and/or protected in their respective territories in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5 and 6. Consequently, the Parties will not allow the import, manufacture or sale of products under said geographical indications, including appellations of origin, unless such products have been produced and certified in the country of origin, in accordance with the national legislation applicable to those products.

8. The use of geographical indications, including appellations of origin, recognized and protected in the territory of a Party in relation to any type of product coming from the territory of said Party, is reserved exclusively for authorized producers, manufacturers and artisans who have their production or manufacturing establishments in the locality or region of the Party designated or evoked by said geographical indication.

9. The Parties may grant the agreed protection to other geographical indications, including appellations of origin, protected in the Parties. To this end, the Party concerned shall notify the other Party regarding said protection, after which the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 shall be followed.

Article 9.5: Traditional Knowledge

1. Each Party, in accordance with its national law, recognizes the right of indigenous and local communities 2on their traditional knowledge, and reiterates its commitment to respect, preserve and maintain the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities in the territories of the Parties.

2. The Parties may protect the rights referred to in this Article against acts that constitute cases of unfair competition, in accordance with the provisions of their national legislation.

3. The Republic of Panama declares, within the traditional knowledge protected in its national legislation, the following products:

(to)

MOLA KUNA PANAMA;

(b)

NAHUA;

(c)

CHACARA;

(d)

BEADED;

(and)

NGOBE AND BUGLÉ HAT;

(F)

WOODCARVING;

(g)

TAGUA;

(h)

HOSIG DÍ or JIW'A (BASKET);

(Yo)

HAMMOCK KUNAS PANAMA; and

(j)

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS KUNAS PANAMA.

4. The Parties express their interest in fostering and promoting discussions related to the protection of genetic resources, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions that take place in the WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, in the TRIPS Council of the WTO, as well as in any other relevant forum dealing with such matters.

Article 9.6: Measures Related to the Protection of Biodiversity and Traditional Knowledge

1. The Parties recognize the importance and value of their biological diversity and its components. Each Party exercises sovereignty over its biological and genetic resources and their derived products, and consequently determines the conditions of their access, in accordance with the principles and provisions contained in relevant national and international regulations.

2. The Parties recognize the importance and value of the knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities, as well as their past, present and future contribution to the conservation and sustainable use of biological and genetic resources and their products. derivatives, and in general, the contribution of the traditional knowledge of such communities to the culture and economic and social development of nations.

3. Each Party, in accordance with its national legislation, reiterates its commitment to respect, preserve and maintain the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities in the territory of each Party.

4. Access to biological and genetic resources and their derivative products shall be conditional on the prior informed consent of the Party that is the country of origin, on mutually agreed terms. Likewise, access to the traditional knowledge of indigenous and local communities associated with said resources will be conditioned to the prior informed consent of the holders or possessors, as appropriate, of said knowledge, in mutually agreed terms. Both cases will be subject to the provisions of the national legislation of each Party.

5. The Parties shall promote measures to ensure a fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the use of biological and genetic resources and derived products and the traditional knowledge of indigenous and local communities.

6. Each Party shall promote political, legal and administrative measures, in order to ensure full compliance with the conditions of access to biological and genetic resources of biodiversity.

7. Any intellectual property right that is generated from the use of biological and genetic resources and their derived products, and/or traditional knowledge of indigenous and local communities, of which a Party is the country of origin, must observe compliance of specific national and international standards on the matter.

8. The Parties will require that in patent applications developed from biological, genetic resources and/or associated traditional knowledge, of which they are the country of origin, legal access to said resources or knowledge is demonstrated, as well as the disclosure of the origin of the resource and/or traditional knowledge accessed, in case the national legislation of the Party so requires.

9. The Parties may, through their competent national authorities, exchange information related to biodiversity and/or traditional knowledge and documented information related to biological and genetic resources and their derivatives, or if applicable, the traditional knowledge of their indigenous and local communities, in order to provide support in the evaluation of patents.

10. The Parties agree to collaborate, at the request of any of them, in the provision of public information available to them for the investigation and monitoring of illegal access to genetic resources and/or traditional knowledge, innovations and practices in their territories.

Article 9.7: Copyright and Related Rights

1. The Parties recognize the existing rights and obligations under the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works; of the Rome Convention on the Protection of Artists, Interpreters or Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations; the WIPO Copyright Treaty, and the WIPO Performance and Phonograms Treaty.

2. In accordance with the international conventions indicated in paragraph 1 and with its national legislation, each Party shall grant adequate and effective protection to authors of literary and artistic works and performers, and to producers of phonograms and organizations of broadcasting, in its artistic interpretations and performances, phonograms and broadcasts, respectively.

3. Regardless of the economic rights of the author, and even after the transfer of these rights, the author will retain, at least, the right to claim paternity of the work and to oppose any distortion, mutilation or other modification of the itself, or any attack on it, which causes damage to their honor or reputation.

4. The rights recognized to the author in accordance with paragraph 3, will be maintained after his death, at least until the extinction of his patrimonial rights, and exercised by the persons or institutions to which the national legislation of the country in which claim protection recognize rights.

5. The rights granted under paragraphs 3 and 4 shall be granted, mutatis mutandis, to performers in respect of their live performances or fixed performances.

6. Each Party shall ensure that a broadcasting organization in its territory shall have at least the exclusive right to authorize the following acts: fixation, reproduction and retransmission of its broadcasts.

7. The Parties may establish in their national legislation limitations and exceptions to the rights established in this Article only in certain cases that do not violate the normal exploitation of the work, nor cause unjustified prejudice to the legitimate interests of the rights holder.

8. The Parties recognize the importance of copyright and related rights collective management societies, in order to ensure effective management of the rights entrusted to them, and an equitable distribution of the remuneration collected, which is proportional to the use of works, performances and phonograms, within a framework of transparency, in accordance with the national legislation of each Party. The societies or associations that collectively manage copyright and related rights will be subject to the authorization and inspection and surveillance of the State.

Article 9.8: Observance

1. Without prejudice to the rights and obligations established under the WTO TRIPS Agreement , in particular Part III, the Parties may develop in their national legislation, measures, procedures and resources necessary to ensure compliance with intellectual property rights. .

2. The Parties shall adopt procedures that allow the holder of the right, who has valid reasons to suspect that the import, export, or transit of counterfeit trademark merchandise or pirated merchandise that infringes copyright is being prepared 3, submit to the competent authorities, a request or complaint, according to the national legislation of each Party, in order for the customs authorities to suspend the clearance of such merchandise.

3. Each Party shall provide that the competent authorities have the power to require the holder of the right that initiates the procedure referred to in paragraph 2, to provide a bond or equivalent guarantee sufficient to protect the respondent and the competent authorities and to prevent abuse. The bond or equivalent guarantee shall not unduly deter access to such procedures.

4. When its competent authorities determine that the goods are counterfeit or pirated, the Party shall grant its competent authorities the power to inform the holder of the right, the name and address of the consignor, the importer and the consignee, as well as the quantity of the goods in question.

5. Each Party shall provide that the competent authorities are empowered to initiate border measures ex officio, without the need for a formal request from the right holder or a third party, when there are reasons to believe or suspect that the goods being imported, exported or in transit are counterfeit or pirated.

Article 9.9: Cooperation and Science and Technology

1. The Parties will exchange information and material in education and dissemination projects regarding the use of intellectual property rights, in accordance with their national laws, regulations and policies, with a view to:

(a) improve and strengthen intellectual property administrative systems to promote efficient registration of intellectual property rights;

(b) stimulate the creation and development of intellectual property within the territory of the Parties, particularly small inventors and creators, as well as micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises;

(c) promote dialogue and cooperation in relation to science, technology, entrepreneurship and innovation; and

(d) other matters of mutual interest regarding intellectual property rights.

2. The Parties recognize the importance of promoting research, technological development, entrepreneurship and innovation, as well as the importance of disseminating technological information and creating and strengthening their technological capacities; to this end, they will cooperate in said areas taking into consideration their resources.

3. The Parties will promote the establishment of incentives for research, innovation, entrepreneurship, transfer and diffusion of technology between the Parties, directed, among others, at companies, universities, research centers and technology centers.

4. Cooperation activities in science and technology may take, among others, the following forms:

(a) participation in joint education, research, technological development and innovation projects;

(b) visits and exchanges of scientists and technical experts, as well as public, academic or private specialists;

(c) joint organization of scientific seminars, congresses, workshops and symposia, as well as participation of experts in these activities;

(d) promotion of scientific networks and training of researchers;

(e) concerted actions for the dissemination of results and the exchange of experiences regarding joint science and technology projects and for their coordination;

(f) exchange and loan of equipment and materials, including sharing of advanced equipment;

(g) exchange of information on procedures, laws, regulations, and programs related to cooperative activities carried out pursuant to this Agreement, including information on science and technology policy; and

(h) any other modality agreed by the Parties.

5. Likewise, the Parties may carry out cooperative activities regarding the exchange of:

(a) information and experience on the legislative processes and legal frameworks related to intellectual property rights and relevant regulations for protection and enforcement;

(b) experiences on the enforcement of intellectual property rights;

(c) personnel and their training in the offices related to intellectual property rights;

(d) information and institutional cooperation on intellectual property policies and developments;

(e) information and experience on policies and practices to promote the development of the handicrafts sector;

(f) experience in intellectual property management and knowledge management in higher education institutions and research centers; and

(g) training and qualification of the personnel of the institutions related to public health, in particular, in the regulatory aspect of inspection, surveillance and control of medicines and medical supplies.

6. The Parties will cooperate, on mutually agreed terms, in the exchange of information and materials on:

(a) actions to prevent illegal access to genetic resources and traditional knowledge; and

(b) internal procedures regarding the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the use of genetic resources and traditional knowledge, as well as prior informed consent, as appropriate.

Likewise, the Parties may, through their national authorities, cooperate in the training of officials in the matters referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b).

7. The Parties may carry out cooperation activities with respect to:

(a) training of personnel of the governing institutions related to the promotion of crafts, in order to promote the development of policies and management of crafts to improve capacities and potentialities;

(b) internship programs, scholarships, professional training, among others, for civil servants, artisans, professionals, technicians, and specialists in the field of handicrafts;

(c) training and qualification between artisans and artisan organizations of both countries, in artisan lines of mutual interest;

(d) joint research programs on topics of mutual interest;

(e) exchange of information or experiences, to the extent possible, on how to market and position handicrafts in the national and international market;

(f) technical training from artisan to artisan with the available resources, achieving maximum use in the different branches of the registered activity and improving the production and marketing of their products, especially the quality, presentation, and finish of their products; and

(g) promote technical assistance and training for the implementation of innovation and technology transfer in handicrafts.

The specific cooperation plan will be drawn up jointly between:

(a) the General Directorate of National Crafts of the Ministry of Commerce and Industries, on behalf of Panama; and

(b) the National Directorate of Handicrafts of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism, on behalf of Peru.

Said entities will define the activities of the cooperation plan, the financing and its implementation.

8. Each Party designates the following as contact entities responsible for compliance with the objectives of this Article, and for facilitating the development of collaboration and cooperation projects in research, innovation and technological development:

(a) in the case of Panama, the National Secretariat for Science, Technology and Innovation (SENACYT) and the National Authority for Government Innovation (AIG); and

(b) in the case of Peru, the National Council of Science, Technology and Technological Innovation (CONCYTEC),

or their successors.

 

 

Annex 9.4: Geographical Indications

 

Section A: Geographical Indications of Peru

1. Pisco (DO)

2. Giant White Corn Cusco (DO)

3. Chulucanas (DO)

4. Pallar de Ica (DO)

5. Villa Rica Coffee (DO)

6. Loche de Lambayeque (DO)

7. Cafe Machu Picchu -Huadquiña (DO)

 

Section B: Geographical Indication of Panama

1. DRY (Indication of Origin)

 

 

Chapter 10

Public Procurement

 

Article 10.1: Scope of Application

Chapter Application

1. This Chapter applies to any measure adopted by a Party relating to covered government procurement.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, covered public procurement means a public procurement of goods, services, or both:

(a) not procured with a view to commercial sale or resale, or with a view to use in the production or supply of goods or services for commercial sale or resale;

(b) made through any contractual means, including purchase, lease, with or without an option to buy; and public works concession contracts;

(c) for which the value, as estimated in accordance with paragraph 4, is equal to or exceeds the corresponding threshold value set forth in Schedule 10.1 (Coverage Schedule);

(d) that is carried out by a procuring entity; and

(e) that is not expressly excluded from coverage.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) non-contractual agreements or any form of assistance that a Party, including its contracting entities, grants, including cooperation agreements, donations, loans, subsidies, capital transfers, guarantees and fiscal incentives;

(b) the contracting or acquisition of fiscal agency services or deposit services, settlement and administration services for regulated financial institutions, or services related to the sale, redemption and distribution of public debt, including loans and government bonds and others securities. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not apply to public procurement of banking, financial or specialized services referred to the following activities:

(i) public debt; either

(ii) public debt management;

(c) procurement financed by donations, loans, or other forms of international assistance;

(d) the hiring of public employees and measures related to employment;

(e) procurements made by a State entity or company to another government entity or company of that Party;

(f) the acquisition or lease of land, existing real estate or other immovable property or rights thereon;

(g) purchases made under exceptionally favorable conditions that only occur for a very short period, such as extraordinary sales made by companies that are not normally suppliers or the sale of assets of companies in liquidation or under receivership. For the purposes of this subparagraph, the provisions of Article 10.10.3 shall apply; and

(h) contracts made with the specific purpose of providing assistance abroad.

Assessment

4. When estimating the value of a procurement for the purpose of determining whether it is a covered procurement, a procuring entity:

(a) shall not divide a procurement into separate procurements, or use a particular method to estimate the value of the procurement for the purpose of circumventing the application of this Chapter;

(b) shall take into account all forms of remuneration, including bonuses, quotas, fees, commissions, interest, other income streams that could be stipulated in the public contracting, and when the public contracting stipulates the possibility of option clauses, the total maximum value of public procurement, including optional purchases; and

(c) shall, where procurement is to be carried out in multiple parts, and results in the award of contracts at the same time or in a given period to one or more suppliers, base its calculation on the maximum total value of the procurement during the entire period of its validity.

5. No contracting entity may prepare, design, structure or divide a public contract, in order to evade the obligations of this Chapter.

6. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from developing new procurement policies, procedures, or contractual means, provided they are consistent with this Chapter.

Article 10.2: Security and General Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any action or refraining from disclosing any information deemed necessary for the protection of its essential interests for national security or national defence.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures:

(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(c) necessary to protect intellectual property; either

(d) relating to the goods or services of disabled persons, charitable institutions or prison labor,

provided that such measures are not applied in a discriminatory manner or constitute a disguised restriction on trade.

3. The Parties understand that subparagraph 2 (b) includes environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

Article 10.3: General Principles

National Treatment and Non-Discrimination

1. With respect to any measure covered by this Chapter, each Party shall immediately and unconditionally accord to the goods and services of the other Party, and to the suppliers of the other Party who offer such goods or services, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment. favor granted by said Party to its own goods, services and suppliers.

2. With respect to any measure covered by this Chapter, a Party may not:

(a) treat a locally established supplier less favorably than another locally established supplier, by reason of its degree of foreign affiliation or ownership; either

(b) discriminate against a locally established supplier on the basis that the goods or services offered by said supplier for a particular public procurement are goods or services of the other Party.

Use of Electronic Media

3. When covered public procurement is carried out through electronic means, a procuring entity must:

(a) ensure that public procurement is carried out using information technology systems and software, including those related to authentication and encryption of information, that are generally accessible and compatible with other information technology systems and generally accessible computer programs; and

(b) maintain mechanisms that ensure the integrity of requests to participate and offers, including determining the moment of receipt and preventing inappropriate access.

Execution of Public Procurement

4. A procuring entity shall conduct covered procurement in a transparent and impartial manner so that:

(a) is consistent with this Chapter;

(b) avoid conflicts of interest; and

(c) prevent corrupt practices.

Rules of origin

5. Each Party shall apply to covered public procurement of goods or services imported from or supplied by the other Party, the rules of origin that it applies in the normal course of trade in such goods or services.

Special Compensatory Conditions

6. A procuring entity shall not seek, consider, impose or use special compensatory conditions at any stage of a covered procurement.

Non-Specific Measures for Public Procurement

7. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to: customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on or related to importation; the method of collection of said duties and charges; other import regulations or formalities; nor to measures affecting trade in services, other than measures governing covered government procurement.

Article 10.4: Use of Electronic Means in Public Procurement

1. The Parties recognize the need and importance of the use of electronic means for the dissemination of information related to covered public procurement.

2. In order to facilitate business opportunities for suppliers of the other Party under this Chapter, each Party will maintain or make best efforts to adopt a single electronic point of entry in order to allow access to complete information on opportunities. in terms of public procurement in its territory, as well as on the measures related to procurement, especially those indicated in Articles 10.5, 10.6.1, 10.6.3, 10.8.1, 10.8.7 and 10.13.2.

Article 10.5: Publication of Information on Public Procurement

Each part:

(a) timely publish all regulations of general application with respect to covered public procurement, and any amendments to such regulations, in an electronic medium listed in Annex 10.1 (Coverage Annex); and

(b) at the request of the other Party, provide an explanation regarding said information.

Article 10.6: Publication of Notices

Notice of Future Hiring

1. For each covered procurement, a procuring entity shall publish in a timely manner a notice inviting suppliers to bid, or where appropriate, a request to participate in the procurement, except in the circumstances described in Article 10.10.2. Said notice will be published in an electronic medium listed in Annex 10.1 (Coverage Annex).

2. Each notice of future hiring must include:

(a) the description of the future public procurement;

(b) the procurement method to be used;

(c) any conditions that suppliers must satisfy in order to participate in public procurement;

(d) the name of the procuring entity issuing the notice;

(e) the address and/or point of contact where suppliers can obtain all relevant documentation related to public procurement;

(f) where applicable, the address and final date for the submission of applications to participate in public procurement;

(g) the address and final date for the presentation of offers;

(h) the delivery dates of the goods or services to be contracted or the duration of the contract; and

(i) an indication that public procurement is covered by this Chapter.

Notice on Hiring Plans

3. Each Party shall encourage its procuring entities to publish in an electronic medium listed in Annex 10.1 (Coverage Annex), as soon as possible in each fiscal year, a notice regarding its future procurement plans. Such notices must include the object or category of goods and services to be contracted and the estimated period in which the public contracting will take place.

Article 10.7: Conditions of Participation

1. When a Party requires suppliers to comply with registration, qualification or any other requirements or conditions for participation in a public procurement, the procuring entity shall publish a notice inviting suppliers to apply for such participation. The procuring entity will publish the notice sufficiently in advance so that interested suppliers have sufficient time to prepare and submit their requests and for the procuring entity to evaluate and make its determinations based on such requests.

2. When establishing the conditions of participation, a contracting entity:

(a) shall limit these conditions to those that are essential to ensure that the supplier possesses the legal and financial capacities, and the commercial and technical skills, to comply with the technical requirements and specifications of public procurement on the basis of commercial activities of the supplier carried out both inside and outside the territory of the Party of the procuring entity;

(b) base its decision solely on the conditions that the procuring entity has specified in advance in the procurement notices or documents;

(c) shall not impose as a condition that, for a supplier to participate in a public procurement or be awarded a contract, that the supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts by a procuring entity of the Party in question;

(d) may require relevant prior experience when essential to meet the requirements of public procurement; and

(e) will allow all national suppliers and suppliers of the other Party that have satisfied the conditions for participation to be recognized as qualified and can participate in public procurement.

3. When there is evidence that justifies it, a Party, including its procuring entities, may exclude a supplier from a public procurement for reasons such as:

(a) bankruptcy;

(b) false statements;

(c) significant or persistent deficiencies in the fulfillment of any substantive requirement or obligation derived from one or more previous contracts;

(d) final sentences for felonies or other serious violations;

(e) lack of professional ethics or acts or omissions that call into question the business integrity of the provider; either

(f) non-payment of taxes.

4. The procuring entities shall not adopt or apply a registration system or qualification procedure with the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to the participation of suppliers of the other Party in their respective public procurements.

5. The process of, and the time required for, the registration and qualification of suppliers shall not be used to exclude suppliers of the other Party from being considered for a particular public procurement.

6. A procuring entity shall promptly inform any supplier that has applied for qualification of its decision with respect to that application. When a procuring entity rejects a request for qualification or ceases to recognize a supplier as one that meets the conditions for participation, the procuring entity shall promptly inform the supplier, and upon request, provide a timely written explanation of the reasons for the qualification. the entity's decision.

Article 10.8: Information on Future Contracts

Procurement Documents

1. A procuring entity will timely provide suppliers interested in participating in a public procurement, procurement documents that include all the necessary information that allows them to prepare and submit adequate offers, in accordance with Annex 10.8.1 (Procurement Documents). These documents will be published in an electronic medium listed in Annex 10.1 (Coverage Annex).

Technical specifications

2. A procuring entity shall not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specification or require any conformity assessment procedure that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between the Parties.

3. When establishing any technical specification for the goods or services to be procured, a procuring entity shall, when applicable:

(a) state the technical specification in terms of performance and functional requirements, rather than descriptive or design characteristics; and

(b) base the technical specification on international standards, where applicable, or otherwise on national technical regulations, recognized national standards or building codes.

4. A procuring entity shall not prescribe technical specifications that require or refer to a specific brand or trade name, patent, copyright, design, type, specific origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or intelligible way of describe the requirements of public procurement, and provided that, in such cases, expressions such as "or equivalent" are also included in the procurement documents.

5. A procuring entity shall not solicit or accept, in a manner that may have the effect of preventing competition, advice that could be used in preparing or adopting any technical specification for a specific public procurement from any person who may have a commercial interest in that public contracting.

6. For greater certainty, this Article is not intended to prevent a procuring entity from preparing, adopting, or applying technical specifications to promote the conservation of natural resources or protect the environment.

Modifications

7. When, in the course of a covered procurement, a procuring entity modifies the criteria or technical requirements established in a notice or procurement document provided to participating suppliers, or modifies a notice or procurement document, it shall transmit such modifications. written:

(a) to all participating providers at the time the information is changed, if the identification of such providers is known, and in all other cases, in the same manner as the original information was transmitted; and

(b) in sufficient time to allow suppliers to amend and resubmit their amended bids, as appropriate.

Article 10.9: Deadlines

1. A procuring entity shall provide suppliers with sufficient time to submit applications to participate in a public procurement and to prepare and submit suitable offers, taking into account the nature and complexity of the public procurement. A contracting entity will grant a period of not less than forty (40) days from the date on which the notice of future contracting is published and the final date for the presentation of offers.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a contracting entity may establish a period of less than forty (40) days, but in no case less than ten (10) days, in the following circumstances:

(a) where the procuring entity has published a separate notice containing a description of the procurement, approximate deadlines for submission of bids or, where appropriate, conditions for participation in a procurement, and the address where related documentation could be obtained upon contracting, with at least forty (40) days and no more than twelve (12) months in advance;

(b) in the case of a new, second or subsequent publication of notices for public procurement of a recurring nature;

(c) when an urgent situation duly justified by a contracting entity makes it impracticable to comply with the period stipulated in paragraph 1; either

(d) when the procuring entity acquires merchandise or commercial services.

3. A Party may establish that a procuring entity may reduce the period for submitting offers established in paragraph 1 by five (5) days for each of the following circumstances:

(a) when the notice of future recruitment is published by electronic means;

(b) when all procurement documents that are made available to the public by electronic means are published from the date of publication of the future procurement notice; and

(c) when offers can be received through electronic means by the contracting entity.

The use of this paragraph, in conjunction with paragraph 2, may not result in the reduction of the bidding deadlines established in paragraph 1 to less than ten (10) days from the date of publication of the notice of future contracting.

Article 10.10: Procurement Procedures

Open Bidding

1. A procuring entity shall award its contracts through open bidding procedures, except where Article 10.10.2 is applicable.

Other Contracting Procedures

2. As long as this provision is not used to prevent competition between suppliers or in a manner that discriminates against suppliers of the other Party, or protects domestic suppliers, a procuring entity may use other procurement procedures only in the following circumstances:

(a) provided that the requirements of the procurement documents are not substantially modified, when:

(i) no offer was submitted or no supplier has requested to participate;

(ii) no bid that met the essential requirements set forth in the bidding documents was submitted;

(iii) no provider complied with the conditions of participation; either

(iv) there has been collusion in the submission of bids;

(b) where the goods or services can be supplied only by a particular supplier and there is no reasonable alternative or substitute good or service due to any of the following reasons:

(i) the requirement is for the realization of a work of art;

(ii) the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive intellectual property rights; either

(iii) due to the absence of competition for technical reasons, as in the case of contracting services intuitu personae;

(c) for additional supplies or services from the initial supplier of goods or services that were not included in the initial procurement, when the change of supplier of those additional goods or services:

(i) cannot be done for economic or technical reasons such as interchangeability requirements or compatibility with existing equipment, software, services or facilities that are the subject of the initial contract; and

(ii) would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of costs to the procuring entity,

In the case of construction services, the total value of the contracts awarded for said additional services will not exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the initial contract, as long as said services have been contemplated in the objectives contained in the contract documents and have become necessary to complete the work due to unforeseen reasons;

(d) to the extent strictly necessary, when for reasons of extreme urgency caused by unforeseen events for the procuring entity, the goods or services cannot be obtained on time through open or selective public bidding, and the use of such procedures could result in serious harm to the contracting entity;

(e) for acquisitions of merchandise made in a commodity market;

(f) when a procuring entity purchases a prototype or limited quantity first good or contracts for a service that is developed upon request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for original research, experiment, study, or development; either

(g) when a contract is awarded to the winner of a design competition, provided that:

(i) the contest has been organized in a manner that is consistent with the principles of this Chapter, in particular with respect to the publication of the notice of future public procurement; and

(ii) the participants are qualified or evaluated by a jury or independent body with a view to entering into a design contract that is awarded to a winner.

3. A procuring entity shall maintain records or prepare a written report for each contract awarded in accordance with paragraph 2, consistent with Article 10.13.3. When a Party prepares written reports in accordance with this paragraph, they shall include the name of the procuring entity, the value and nature of the contracted goods or services, and a justification indicating the circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 2 that justify the use of other recruitment procedures. When a Party maintains records, these shall indicate the circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 2 that justify the use of other procurement procedures.

Article 10.11: Electronic Auctions

When a contracting entity wants to carry out a covered public procurement using an electronic auction, the contracting entity will provide each participant, before the electronic auction starts, the following information:

(a) the automatic evaluation method, including the mathematical formula, which is based on the evaluation criteria established in the procurement documents and which will be used in the automatic classification or reclassification during the auction;

(b) the results of any initial evaluation of the elements of your offer when the contract is awarded on the basis of the most advantageous offer; and

(c) any other pertinent information about the conduct of the auction.

Article 10.12: Opening of Bids and Award of Contracts

Treatment of Offers

1. A contracting entity will receive and process all offers under procedures that guarantee the equality and impartiality of the public contracting process, and the confidentiality of the offers.

2. Where a procuring entity provides suppliers the opportunity to correct any inadvertent errors of form between the bid opening period and contract award, the procuring entity shall provide the same opportunity to all participating suppliers.

Contract Award

3. A contracting entity will require that, in order to be considered for an award, the offer:

(a) is submitted in writing, by a provider that meets all the conditions of participation; and

(b) at the time of opening, it must be in accordance with the essential requirements specified in the notices and contract documents.

4. Unless a procuring entity determines that the award of a contract is against the public interest, the procuring entity shall award the contract to the provider that the procuring entity has determined meets the conditions for participation and is fully capable of performing the contract. the contract and, whose offer is considered the most advantageous based solely on the requirements and the evaluation criteria specified in the notices and contract documents, or when the price is the only evaluation criterion, the one with the lowest price.

5. When a contracting entity receives an offer whose price is abnormally lower than the prices of the other offers submitted, the entity may verify with the supplier if it complies with the participation conditions and if it has the capacity to comply with the provisions of the contract. contract.

6. A procuring entity may not cancel a public contract or terminate or modify a contract that has been awarded in order to evade this Chapter.

Article 10.13: Transparency of Information on Public Procurement

Information to be Provided to Suppliers

1. A procuring entity shall promptly inform participating providers of its decision to award a contract, and upon request, shall do so in writing. Subject to the provisions of Article 10.14, a procuring entity shall, upon request, provide the supplier whose bid has not been chosen, the reasons for such decision and the relative advantages of the winning bid.

Publication of Award Information

2. As soon as possible after an award, a procuring entity shall publish in an electronic medium listed in Annex 10.1 (Coverage Annex), a notice that includes, at a minimum, the following information about the contract award:

(a) the name of the procuring entity;

(b) a description of the contracted goods or services;

(c) the date of the award;

(d) the name of the supplier to whom the contract was awarded; and

(e) the value of the contract.

Registry mantenance

3. A procuring entity shall maintain reports or records of the procurement procedures related to covered procurements, including the reports indicated in Article 10.10.3, and shall maintain such reports or records for a period of at least three (3) years after the date of award of a contract.

Article 10.14: Disclosure of Information

Delivery of Information to the other Party

1. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall promptly provide the information necessary to determine whether a public procurement has been carried out fairly, impartially and in accordance with this Chapter. This information will include information about the features and relative advantages of the winning bid.

Non-Disclosure of Information

2. No Party, including its contracting entities, authorities or review bodies, may disclose information that the person who provided it has designated as confidential, in accordance with its national law, except with the authorization of that person.

3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no Party, including its procuring entities, shall provide any particular supplier with information that may prejudice fair competition between suppliers.

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party, including its procuring entities, authorities and review bodies, to disclose confidential information under this Chapter if such disclosure would:

(a) impede compliance with the law;

(b) prejudice fair competition between suppliers;

(c) harm the legitimate business interests of individuals, including the protection of intellectual property; either

(d) be otherwise contrary to the public interest.

Article 10.15: National Review Procedures for the Filing of Appeals

1. Each Party shall ensure that its procuring entities give impartial and timely consideration to any claim that its suppliers have regarding an allegation of non-compliance with this Chapter that arises in the context of a covered government procurement in which they have or have had an interest. . Each Party shall encourage its suppliers to seek clarification from their procuring entities through consultation with a view to facilitating the resolution of any such complaint.

2. Each Party shall provide an administrative or judicial review procedure that is timely, effective, transparent and non-discriminatory, in accordance with the principle of due process, through which a supplier may file an appeal alleging a breach of this Chapter that arises in the context of covered procurement in which the supplier has or has had an interest.

3. Each Party shall establish or designate at least one impartial administrative or judicial authority, independent of its procuring entities, to receive and review a challenge filed by a supplier within a covered public procurement, and issue the relevant resolutions and recommendations.

4. When an entity other than the authority referred to in paragraph 3 initially reviews a challenge, the Party shall ensure that the supplier can appeal the initial decision before an impartial administrative or judicial authority, which is independent of the procuring entity whose contracting is the object of challenge.

5. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures that establish:

(a) quick provisional measures to preserve the supplier's ability to participate in public procurement, which are applied by the procuring entity or by the impartial authority referred to in paragraph 3. Such measures may have the effect of suspending the procurement process. The procedures may provide for the possibility that prevailing unfavorable consequences for the interests concerned, including the public interest, will be taken into account when deciding whether to apply those measures. The reason why such measures are not adopted shall be recorded in writing; and

(b) when a review body has determined the existence of a breach referred to in paragraph 2, corrective measures or compensation for the loss or damage suffered, in accordance with the national legislation of each Party.

Article 10.16: Modifications and Rectifications to the Coverage

1. When a Party modifies its procurement coverage under this Chapter, the Party:

(a) notify the other Party in writing; and

(b) include in the notification a proposal for appropriate compensatory adjustments to the other Party to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that existing prior to the modification.

2. Notwithstanding subparagraph 1(b), a Party need not provide compensatory adjustments when:

(a) the modification in question is a minor amendment or a rectification of a purely formal nature; either

(b) the proposed amendment covers an entity over which the Party has effectively eliminated control or influence.

3. If the other Party does not agree that:

(a) a proposed adjustment within the scope of subparagraph 1(b) is adequate to maintain a comparable level of mutually agreed coverage;

(b) the proposed modification is a minor amendment or rectification within the scope of subparagraph 2(a); either

(c) the proposed modification covers a procuring entity over which the Party has effectively eliminated its control or influence under subparagraph 2(b),

You must object in writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice referred to in paragraph 1 or agreement to the proposed change or modification will be deemed to have been reached even for purposes of Chapter 15 (Dispute Resolution).

4. When the Parties agree on the proposed modification, rectification or amendment, including when a Party has not objected within thirty (30) days under the scope of paragraph 3, the Parties shall give effect to the agreement by immediately modifying the Annex 10.1 (Coverage Schedule) through the Commission.

Article 10.17: Integrity in Public Procurement Practices

Each Party shall establish or maintain procedures to declare ineligible to participate in the Party's procurement, either indefinitely or for a set period, suppliers that the Party determines have engaged in illegal or fraudulent procurement-related activities. Upon request by the other Party, the Party receiving the request will identify providers determined to be ineligible under these procedures and, where appropriate, will exchange information regarding these providers or fraudulent or illegal activity.

Article 10.18: Additional Negotiations

At the request of a Party, the other Party may consider additional negotiations for the purpose of expanding the scope and coverage of this Chapter. If, as a consequence of these negotiations, the Parties agree to modify the Annexes of this Chapter, the result will be presented to the Public Procurement Committee established in Article 10.21 for its implementation.

Article 10.19: Participation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

1. The Parties recognize the importance of the participation of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises in public procurement.

2. The Parties also recognize the importance of business alliances between suppliers of each Party, and in particular of micro, small and medium-sized companies, including joint participation in bidding procedures.

Article 10.20: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognize the importance of cooperation as a way to achieve a better understanding of their respective public procurement systems, as well as better access to their respective markets, particularly for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.

2. The Parties will make their best efforts to cooperate on issues such as:

(a) exchange of experiences and information, including regulatory framework, best practices and statistics;

(b) development and use of electronic means of information in public procurement systems;

(c) training and technical assistance to providers on access to the public procurement market; and

(d) institutional strengthening for compliance with this Chapter, including training for public officials.

Artículo 10.21: Comité de Contratación Pública

1. Las Partes establecen un Comité de Contratación Pública (en adelante el Comité), integrado por representantes de cada Parte.

2. Las funciones del Comité incluirán:

(a) monitorear la implementación y administración de este Capítulo, incluyendo su aprovechamiento y recomendará a la Comisión las actividades que correspondan;

(b) reportar a la Comisión sobre la implementación y administración de este Capítulo, cuando corresponda;

(c) evaluar y dar seguimiento a las actividades de cooperación;

(d) considerar la realización de negociaciones adicionales con el objetivo de ampliar la cobertura de este Capítulo; y

(e) tratar cualquier otro asunto relacionado con este Capítulo.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will meet at least one (1) time a year, on the date and according to the agenda previously agreed by the Parties. The Parties will determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings may be held.

4. The meetings may be held by any means agreed by the Parties. When they are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting. The first meeting of the Committee shall be held no later than one (1) year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

5. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will be permanent and will develop its work rules.

6. All decisions of the Committee must be taken by mutual agreement.

Article 10.22: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

notice of future procurement means a notice published by the procuring entity inviting interested suppliers to submit a request to participate, an offer, or both;

conditions of participation means any registration, qualification or other prerequisites to participate in a public procurement;

special compensatory conditions means any condition or commitment that promotes local development or improves the balance of payments accounts of a Party, such as local content requirements, technology licences, investment requirements, countertrade or similar requirements;

contracting entity means an entity listed in Schedule 10.1 (Coverage Schedule);

written or in writing means any expression in words, numbers or other symbols, which can be read, reproduced and subsequently communicated. It may include information transmitted and stored electronically;

technical specification means a procurement requirement that:

(a) establish the characteristics of the goods or services to be contracted, including quality, performance, safety and dimensions, or the processes and methods for their production or provision; either

(b) establish terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements, as they apply to a good or service;

open bidding means a procurement method in which all interested suppliers can submit a bid;

commercial goods or services means goods or services of a kind that are generally sold or offered for sale in the commercial market to, and are normally purchased by, non-governmental purchasers for non-governmental purposes;

standard means a document approved by a recognized body, which provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for goods, or services or related processes and production methods, compliance with which is not mandatory. It may also include or refer exclusively to terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements as they apply to a product, service, process or production method;

supplier means a person who provides or may provide goods or services to a procuring entity;

services includes construction services, unless otherwise specified;

construction service means a service whose purpose is the performance by any means of civil or construction works, based on Division 51 of the provisional version of the United Nations Central Product Classification (CPC); and

electronic auction means an iterative process in which suppliers use electronic means to submit new prices or new values ​​for quantifiable elements of the offer other than price, or both, that are linked to the evaluation criteria, and that results in an classification or reclassification of offers.

 

 

Annex 10.8.1: Procurement Documents

In accordance with the provisions of Article 10.8.1, and unless this information has been included in the procurement notice, the procurement documents must include at least a complete description of the following:

(a) public procurement, including the nature and quantity of goods or services to be procured, or, if the quantity is not known, the estimated quantity and any requirements that must be met, including technical specifications, quality assessment certificates, conformity, plans, drawings or instruction manuals;

(b) any supplier conditions of participation, including a list of information and documents that suppliers are required to submit in connection with those conditions;

(c) all evaluation criteria to be considered in awarding a contract and, unless price is the sole criterion, the relative importance of such criteria;

(d) when the contracting entity carries out public procurement through electronic means, the requirements regarding authentication and cryptographic coding, or other requirements related to the submission of information through electronic means;

(e) when a procuring entity conducts an electronic auction, the rules under which the auction will be conducted, including the identification of bid elements related to the evaluation criteria;

(f) when there is a public opening of the offers, the date, time and place of said opening, and when applicable, the persons authorized to witness the act;

(g) any other terms or conditions, including payment terms and any limitations on the manner in which bids may be submitted, for example, on paper or by electronic means; and

(h) any date for the delivery of the goods or for the supply of the services or the duration of the contract.

 

 

Chapter 11

Competition Policy

Article 11.1: Objectives

The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that the benefits of trade liberalization under this Agreement are not undermined by anti-competitive practices, as well as to promote cooperation between the Parties regarding the application of their respective competition laws.

Article 11.2: Legislation and Competition Authorities

1. Each Party shall adopt or maintain national competition legislation that fully and effectively addresses anti-competitive practices, in order to promote economic efficiency and consumer welfare.

2. Each Party shall establish or maintain an authority responsible for the application of its respective competition law.

3. Each Party will maintain its autonomy to develop and apply its respective competition legislation.

4. Each Party shall ensure that their respective national competition authorities act in accordance with the principles of transparency, non-discrimination and due process, in the application of their respective competition laws.

Article 11.3: Cooperation

1. The Parties recognize the importance of cooperation and coordination between their respective national competition authorities to promote the effective enforcement of their respective competition laws.

2. Accordingly, the Parties shall cooperate in matters related to the application of competition policy and legislation, including notification, information exchange and consultation, in accordance with Articles 11.4, 11.5 and 11.6, respectively.

3. The Parties, through their competition authorities or competent competition authorities, may sign cooperation agreements or conventions in order to strengthen cooperation in matters related to competition.

Article 11.4: Notifications

1. The competition authority of a Party shall notify the competition authority of the other Party about any enforcement activity of its competition law, if it considers that this may affect important interests of the other Party.

2. As long as it is not contrary to the national legislation of the Parties, nor does it affect any ongoing investigation, the notification will be made at an early stage of the administrative procedure. The competition authority of the Party that carries out the enforcement activity of its competition law may take into account the observations received from the other Party in its determinations.

Article 11.5: Exchange of Information

1. The Parties recognize the value of transparency in competition policy.

2. In order to facilitate the effective application of their respective competition laws, the Parties may exchange information at the request of one of them, provided that this is not contrary to their national laws and does not affect any ongoing investigation.

Article 11.6: Consultations

To foster understanding between the Parties or to address specific issues arising under this Chapter, each Party shall, at the request of the other Party, initiate consultations. The requesting Party shall indicate how the matter affects trade between the Parties. The requested Party shall give the highest consideration to the concerns of the other Party.

Article 11.7: Settlement of Disputes

Neither Party may resort to the dispute resolution procedures established in Chapter 12 (Investment) and Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution), with respect to any matter derived from this Chapter.

 

 

Chapter 12

Investment

 

Section A: Substantive Obligations

Article 12.1: Scope of Application and Coverage 1

1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) investors of the other Party;

(b) covered investments; and

(c) with respect to Articles 12.6 and 12.8, to all investments in the territory of the Party.

2. The obligations of a Party under this Section shall apply to a state enterprise or other person when it exercises a regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority delegated to it by that Party, such as the authority to expropriate, grant licences, approve business transactions or impose fees, rates or other charges.

3. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not bind a Party in relation to any act or fact that took place before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose an obligation on a Party to privatize any investment it owns or controls, or to prevent a Party from designating a monopoly.

5. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall oblige a Party to protect investments made with capital or assets derived from illegal activities, and shall not be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures aimed at preserving public order, by performance of their duties to maintain or restore international peace and security or the protection of their own essential security interests.

6. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter of this Agreement, the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

7. The requirement of a Party that a service provider of the other Party post a bond or other form of financial guarantee as a condition for providing a cross-border service does not, in itself, make this Chapter applicable to the measures adopted or maintained by the Party in respect of the cross-border supply of the service. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Party with respect to a financial bond or guarantee, to the extent that such financial bond or guarantee constitutes a covered investment.

8. This Chapter shall not apply to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party if such measure is covered by Chapter 14 (Financial Services).

Article 12.2: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall grant to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition. of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to the investments of its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition. of investments in its territory.

Article 12.3: Most Favored Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investors of a non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to investments of investors of a non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments in its territory.

3. For greater certainty, the treatment with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation and sale or other form of disposition of investments, referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, does not include dispute resolution procedures, such as that provided for in Section B, which are established in international treaties, including trade or investment agreements.

Article 12.4: Minimum Treatment Level 2

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment, as well as full protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes that the minimum level of treatment for aliens, under customary international law, is the minimum level of treatment that may be accorded to covered investments. The concepts of "fair and equitable treatment" and "full protection and security" do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that required by that standard and do not create significant additional rights. The obligation in paragraph 1 to provide:

(a) "fair and equitable treatment" includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal, civil or administrative proceedings, in accordance with the principle of due process incorporated in the main legal systems of the world; and

(b) "full protection and security" requires each Party to provide the level of police protection that is required by customary international law.

3. The determination that another provision of this Agreement or of a different international agreement has been violated does not establish that this Article has been violated.

Article 12.5: Senior Executives and Boards of Directors

1. No Party may require an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment to appoint natural persons of a particular nationality to senior management positions.

2. A Party may require that a majority of the members of the boards of directors or any committee thereof, of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment, be of a particular nationality or resident in the Party's territory, provided that the requirement does not significantly impair the investor's ability to exercise control over its investment.

Article 12.6: Performance Requirements

1. No Party may, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, impose or make comply with any requirement or enforce any obligation or commitment of 3:

(a) export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(c) buy, use or give preference to goods produced in its territory, or buy goods from persons in its territory;

(d) relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment;

(e) restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to the earnings generated in foreign currency;

(f) transfer a particular technology, production process or other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory, except when the requirement is imposed or the obligation or commitment is enforced by a judicial or administrative court or a competition authority , to remedy a practice that has been determined after judicial or administrative proceedings to be anticompetitive under the competition laws of Part 4; either

(g) provide exclusively from the territory of a Party the goods produced by the investment or the services it provides for a specific regional market or the world market.

2. A measure that requires an investment to use a technology to comply with general regulations applicable to health, safety or the environment, shall not be considered inconsistent with subparagraph 1 (f).

3. Subparagraph 1 (f) does not apply when a Party authorizes the use of an intellectual property right in accordance with Article 31 5of the WTO TRIPS Agreement or to measures requiring the disclosure of proprietary information that fall within the scope of, and are consistent with, Article 39 of the WTO TRIPS Agreement 6.

4. For greater certainty, nothing in paragraph 1 shall be construed to prevent a Party, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation, or sale or other disposition of a covered investment or an investment of a investor from a country that is not a Party, in its territory, that imposes or enforces a requirement or enforces an obligation or commitment to train workers in its territory.

5. No Party may condition the receipt of an advantage, or the continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, sale, or other disposition of an investment in its territory by an investor. of a Party or a country that is not a Party, upon compliance with any of the following requirements:

(a) achieve a certain degree or percentage of national content;

(b) buy, use or grant preferences to goods produced in its territory or to buy goods from persons in its territory;

(c) relate, in any way, the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports, or to the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; either

(d) restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way such sales to the volume or value of its exports or to earnings generated in foreign currency.

6. Nothing in paragraph 5 shall be construed as preventing a Party from conditioning the receipt of an advantage, or the continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with an investment in its territory by an investor of a Party or of a country that is not a Party, to the fulfillment of a requirement that it locate production, provide services, train or employ workers, build or expand particular facilities or carry out research and development, in its territory.

7. Paragraphs 1 and 5 shall not apply to any requirement other than the commitment, obligation or requirements set forth in those paragraphs.

8. The provisions of:

(a) subparagraphs 1 (a), (b) and (c), and 5 (a) and (b) shall not apply to the requirements for qualification of goods or services with respect to export promotion programs and foreign aid programs; and

(b) Subparagraphs 5 (a) and (b) shall not apply to requirements imposed by an importing Party with respect to the content of goods necessary to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.

9. Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner and provided that such measures do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in subparagraphs 1 (b), (c) and (f) and 5(a) and (b) shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including those of an environmental nature:

(a) necessary to ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; either

(c) related to the preservation of living or non-living non-renewable natural resources.

10. Subparagraphs 1 (b), (c), (f) and (g), and 5 (a) and (b) do not apply to public procurement.

11. This Article does not exclude the application of any commitment, obligation or requirement between private parties, when a Party did not impose or require the commitment, obligation or requirement.

Article 12.7: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 12.2, 12.3, 12.5 and 12.6 shall not apply to:

(a) any non-conforming measure existing or maintained by a Party in:

(i) the central or regional level of government, as stipulated by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; either

(ii) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that such modification does not diminish the degree of conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 12.2, 12.3 , 12.5 and 12.6.

2. Articles 12.2, 12.3, 12.5 and 12.6 shall not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains, in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities, as indicated in its Schedule to Annex II.

3. Articles 12.2 and 12.3 do not apply to any measure adopted under the exceptions under Articles 3, 4 and 5 of the WTO TRIPS Agreement .

4. Neither Party may require, pursuant to any measure adopted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and included in its Schedule in Annex II, an investor of the other Party, by reason of its nationality, to sells or otherwise disposes of an investment existing at the time the measure takes effect.

5. The provisions of Articles 12.2, 12.3 and 12.5 shall not apply to:

(a) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-backed loans, guarantees, and insurance; either

(b) public procurement.

Article 12.8: Environmental Measures

1. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to promote investment by weakening or reducing the protections provided in their national environmental legislation. Accordingly, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that it will not waive or repeal, or offer to waive or repeal, such legislation in a manner that weakens or reduces the protection afforded by that legislation, as a means of encouraging the establishment, acquisition, expansion, or retention of an investment in its territory.

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this Chapter that it considers appropriate to ensure that investments in its territory are made taking into account concerns in environmental matter.

Article 12.9: Treatment in Case of Dispute

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 12.7.5 (a), each Party shall grant to the investors of the other Party and to the covered investments, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to any measure that it adopts or maintains in relation to losses suffered by investments in its territory as a result of armed conflicts or civil strife.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to existing measures related to subsidies or donations that may be inconsistent with Article 12.2, except for Article 12.7.5(a).

Article 12.10: Expropriation and Compensation 7

1. Neither Party shall nationalize or expropriate a covered investment, either directly or indirectly, through measures equivalent to expropriation or nationalization ("expropriation"), unless it is:

(a) for reasons of public utility 8, in the case of Panama; and

(b) for reasons of public necessity or national security, in the case of Peru,

in accordance with due process, in a non-discriminatory manner and through the payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.

2. The compensation will be paid without delay and will be fully payable and freely transferable. Such compensation will be equal to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation took place ("expropriation date"), and will not reflect any change in value because the intent to expropriate was first known. prior to the expropriation date.

3. If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the compensation referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be less than the fair market value on the date of expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency, accumulated from the date of expropriation to the date of payment.

4. If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely usable, the compensation referred to in paragraph 1 - converted to the currency of payment, at the market exchange rate in force on the date of payment - shall not be less than:

(a) the fair market value on the date of expropriation, converted into a freely usable currency, at the prevailing market exchange rate on that date, plus;

(b) interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that freely usable currency, accrued from the date of expropriation to the date of payment.

5. The affected investor shall have the right, under the national legislation of the Party expropriating, to a review of his case by a judicial or other independent authority of said Party, and to the valuation of his investment in accordance with the principles established in this Article.

6. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property rights to the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is compatible with Chapter 9 (Intellectual Property).

Article 12.11: Transfers

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers related to a covered investment to be made freely and without delay, within and to its territory. Such transfers include:

(a) capital contributions;

(b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administration expenses, technical assistance and other charges, returns in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;

(c) products derived from the sale or total or partial liquidation of the covered investment;

(d) payments made pursuant to a contract entered into by the investor, or the covered investment, including a loan agreement;

(e) payments made pursuant to paragraph 1 of Articles 12.9 and 12.10; and

(f) payments arising from the application of Section B.

2. Each Party shall allow transfers related to a covered investment to be made in freely usable currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of the transfer.

3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer of money or in kind through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its laws relating to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights 9;

(b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) criminal offences;

(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law enforcement or financial regulatory authorities; and

(e) guarantee compliance with awards or sentences issued in judicial or administrative proceedings.

Article 12.12: Denial of Benefits

A Party may deny the benefits of this Agreement to:

(a) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and to investments of such investor if a person of a non-Party owns or controls the enterprise and the latter does not carry on substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of that other Party and the investments of such investor if the enterprise does not carry on substantial business activities in the territory of any Party, other than the refusing Party, and a person of the denying Party owns or controls the business.

Article 12.13: Special Formalities and Information Requirements

1. Nothing in Article 12.2 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities connected with a covered investment, such as a requirement that investors be residents of the Party or that covered investments are constituted in accordance with the legislation or regulation of the Party, provided that such formalities do not significantly impair the protection granted by a Party to investors of the other Party and to investments covered in accordance with this Agreement.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 12.2 and 12.3, a Party may require an investor of the other Party or its covered investment to provide information regarding that investment, exclusively for informational or statistical purposes. The Party shall protect confidential information from any disclosure that could negatively affect the competitive situation of the investor or of the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing a Party from obtaining or disclosing information regarding the fair and good faith application of its domestic law.

Article 12.14: Subrogation

1. If a Party or a designated agency of the Party makes a payment to any of its investors under a guarantee, insurance contract or any other form of compensation granted with respect to an investment of an investor of that Party, the other Party shall recognize the subrogation or transfer of any right or claim of said investment. The subrogated or transferred right or claim shall not be greater than the investor's original right or claim.

2. When a Party or a designated agency of the Party has made a payment to an investor of that Party and has assumed the investor's rights and claims, that investor may not, unless authorized to act on the Party's behalf or of the designated agency of the Party that has made the payment, claim said rights and claims against the other Party.

 

Section B: Investor-State Dispute Settlement

Article 12.15: Consultations and Negotiation

1. In the event of an investment dispute, the disputing parties must first attempt to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may include the use of non-binding third party procedures. The consultation and negotiation procedure will begin with the request sent to the address designated in Annex 12.15. Said request shall be sent to the defendant before the notification of intent, referred to in Article 12.16, and must include the information indicated in subparagraphs 12.16.2 (a), (b) and (c).

2. The consultations will be carried out for a minimum period of six (6) months and may include face-to-face meetings in the defendant's capital.

Article 12.16: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. After the minimum term referred to in Article 12.15.2 has elapsed, in the event that a disputing party considers that a dispute relating to an investment cannot be resolved through consultation and negotiation:

(a) the claimant, at its own expense, may submit to arbitration a claim alleging:

(i) that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A, other than an obligation under Article 12.8; and

(ii) that the claimant has suffered loss or damage by reason of or as a result of such breach.

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the claimant, may, in accordance with this Section, submit a claim to arbitration alleging:

(i) that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A, other than an obligation under Article 12.8; and

(ii) that the business has suffered loss or damage by virtue of, or as a result of, such breach.

2. At least ninety (90) days before a claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section, the claimant shall give the respondent a written notice of its intention to submit the claim to arbitration ("notice of intent"). The notification will specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and, if the claim is brought on behalf of a company, the name, address and place of incorporation of the company;

(b) for each claim, the provision of Section A that is alleged to have been violated and any other applicable provision;

(c) the issues of fact and law on which each claim is based, including the measures at issue; and

(d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

3. The claimant must also submit, along with its notice of intent, evidence establishing that it is an investor of the other Party.

4. Provided that at least six (6) months have elapsed since the events that give rise to the claim took place, and provided that the claimant has complied with the conditions indicated in Article 12.18, the claimant may submit the claim to the one referred to in paragraph 1:

(a) in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the respondent and the Party to the claimant are parties to the ICSID Convention;

(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that the respondent or the claimant's Party is a party to the ICSID Convention;

(c) in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; either

(d) if the disputing parties agree, before an ad hoc arbitration institution, or before any other arbitration institution or under any other arbitration rules.

5. A claim shall be deemed to be submitted to arbitration under this Section when the claimant's notice or request for arbitration ("notice of arbitration"):

(a) referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention, is received by the Secretary General;

(b) referred to in Article 2 of Annex C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, is received by the Secretary-General;

(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together with the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, is received by the respondent; either

(d) referred to by any other arbitration institution or under any arbitration rules selected under subparagraph 4 (d), is received by the respondent.

When, after the submission of a claim to arbitration, an additional claim is submitted under the same arbitration proceeding, it shall be considered submitted to arbitration under this Section on the date of its receipt under the applicable arbitration rules and the time limitation shall apply. established in Article

6. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 4, and in effect on the date of the claim or claims submitted to arbitration under this Section, shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified or supplemented by this Treaty.

7. The responsibility between the disputing parties for the assumption of expenses, including, when applicable, the ordering of costs in accordance with Article 12.21, derived from their participation in the arbitration must be established:

(a) by the arbitral institution before which the claim has been submitted to arbitration, in accordance with its rules of procedure; either

(b) in accordance with the rules of procedure agreed by the disputing parties, when applicable.

8. The claimant shall deliver together with the notice of arbitration referred to in paragraph 5:

(a) the name of the arbitrator appointed by the claimant; either

(b) the written consent of the claimant for the Secretary General to appoint such an arbitrator.

Article 12.17: Consent of each Party to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to submit a claim to arbitration, in accordance with this Section and in accordance with this Agreement.

2. The consent referred to in paragraph 1 and the submission of the claim to arbitration in accordance with this Section shall comply with the requirements indicated in:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, which require the written consent of the parties to the dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention, which requires a "written agreement"; and

(c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention, which requires an "agreement."

Article 12.18: Conditions and Limitations to the Consent of each Party

1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section if more than three (3) years have elapsed from the date the claimant knew or should have known of the alleged violation pursuant to Article 12.16. .1, and knowledge that the claimant, for claims brought under Article 12.16.1(a), or the company, for claims brought under Article 12.16.1(b), suffered loss or damage.

2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration, in accordance with the procedures provided in this Agreement; and

(b) the notice of arbitration referred to in Article 12.16.5 is accompanied by:

(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 12.16.1(a), of the claimant's written waiver; and, when the claim is made for the loss or damage of its participation in a company of the defendant Party that is a legal person that the investor directly or indirectly owns or controls, at the time of the notification, of the written resignation of the plaintiff and company's written resignation; and

(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 12.16.1(b), of the written waivers of the claimant and the company,

of any right to initiate before any judicial or administrative court under the law of any Party, or other dispute resolution procedures, any action with respect to any measure that is alleged to have constituted a violation referred to in Article 12.16.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph 2 (b), the claimant, for claims brought under Article 12.16.1 (a), and the claimant or company, for claims brought under Article 12.16.1 (b) , may initiate or continue a precautionary measure, which does not involve the payment of monetary damages, before a judicial or administrative court of the defendant, provided that such measure is filed with the sole purpose of preserving the rights and interests of the plaintiff or the company while continue the arbitration process 10.

4. The resignation of a company set forth in subparagraph 2(b)(i) or 2(b)(ii) shall not be required only where it is alleged that the defendant deprived the claimant of control of the company.

5. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section if the claimant (in the case of claims submitted under Article 12.16.1(a)) or the claimant or the company (in the case of claims submitted under Article 12.16 .1(b)), have previously submitted the same alleged violation to a defendant's administrative or judicial tribunal, or to any other binding dispute resolution procedure.

6. For greater certainty, if the claimant chooses to submit a claim described under this Section to an administrative or judicial court of the respondent or to any other binding dispute resolution mechanism, that choice will be final and the claimant may not submit the same claim. under this Section.

7. Failure to comply with any of the preconditions described in paragraphs 1 to 6 will void the consent given by the Parties in Article 12.17.

Article 12.19: Procedure Regarding Prudential Measures

1. When an investor submits a claim to arbitration under this Section and the respondent invokes Article 12.11.3, or Article 21.5 (Measures to Safeguard the Balance of Payments) as a defense, the tribunal established pursuant to Article 12.20 request, at the respondent's request, a written report from the Parties, or from each Party, on the issue of whether and to what extent the indicated provisions are a valid defense to the investor's claim. The court may not proceed until it receives the report(s) in accordance with this paragraph, except as provided in paragraph 2.

2. When within ninety (90) days of having requested it, the court has not received the report(s), the court may proceed to resolve the matter.

Article 12.20: Selection of Arbitrators

1. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the court will be made up of three (3) arbitrators, one (1) arbitrator appointed by each of the disputing parties and the third, who will be the president, will be appointed by agreement of the parties. disputing parties.

2. The Secretary General shall serve as appointing authority for arbitrators in arbitration proceedings pursuant to this Section.

3. The referees must:

(a) have experience or specialized knowledge in public international law, international investment rules, or in the resolution of disputes derived from international investment agreements;

(b) not depend on any of the Parties or the claimant, nor be linked to or receive instructions from any of them.

4. When a tribunal other than the one established under Article 12.26 is not integrated within a period of ninety (90) days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration in accordance with this Section, the Secretary General, at the request of any of the disputing parties, shall appoint, after consulting them, the arbitrator or arbitrators that have not yet been appointed. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the president of the tribunal shall not be a national of either Party.

5. For the purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator on grounds other than nationality:

(a) the respondent accepts the appointment of each of the members of the tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

(b) the claimant referred to in Article 12.16.1(a) may submit a claim under this Section to arbitration, or pursue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only at condition that the plaintiff consents in writing to the appointment of each of the members of the tribunal; and

(c) the claimant referred to in Article 12.16.1(b) may submit a claim to arbitration under this Section, or pursue a claim under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only at condition that the plaintiff and the company express their consent in writing on the appointment of each of the members of the court.

Article 12.21: Conduct of Arbitration

1. The disputing parties may agree on the legal seat where any arbitration is to be held in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules in accordance with Article 12.16.4. In the absence of agreement between the disputing parties, the court will determine said place in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules, provided that the place is in the territory of a State that is party to the New York Convention.

2. The tribunal shall be empowered to accept and consider amicus curiae written submissions from a person or entity that is a non-disputing party. Any non-disputing party wishing to make written submissions to a court (the applicant) may request the court's permission, in accordance with Exhibit 12.21.

3. Without prejudice to the power of the court to hear other objections as preliminary questions, such as an objection that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the court, a court shall hear and decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that As a matter of law, the claim submitted is not a claim in respect of which an award in favor of the claimant can be rendered in accordance with Article 12.27.

(a) Such objection shall be filed with the court as soon as possible after the constitution of the court, and in no event later than the date the court sets for the respondent to file its answer to the claim (or in the case of a modification of the notice of arbitration, referred to in Article 12.16.5, the date that the tribunal sets for the respondent to file its response to the modification).

(b) Upon receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the court shall suspend any proceedings on the merits of the dispute, establish a schedule for consideration of the objection that is consistent with any schedule it has established for consideration of any other preliminary issue and will issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds thereof.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall assume as true the allegations of fact advanced by the claimant in support of any claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereto), and , in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also consider any other relevant fact that is not in dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection with respect to jurisdiction or any substantive argument, simply because it has or has not raised an objection under this paragraph, or makes use of the expedited procedure set forth in paragraph 4.

4. If the respondent so requests, within forty-five (45) days from the date of constitution of the tribunal, the tribunal shall decide, in an expeditious manner, on an objection in accordance with paragraph 3 and any other objection that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the court. The court will suspend any action on the merits of the litigation and will issue a decision or award on said objection, stating the grounds thereof, no later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the date of the request. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the court may take an additional thirty (30) days to issue the decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing has been requested, the court may, by showing extraordinary cause,

5. When the court decides a respondent's objection under paragraph 3 or 4, it may, if warranted, award the successful disputing party reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in filing the objection or oppose it. In determining whether such award is justified, the tribunal will consider whether the claimant's claim or respondent's objection was frivolous, and will give the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

6. The defendant will not oppose as a defense, counterclaim or compensatory right or for any other reason that the plaintiff has received or will receive compensation or other compensation for all or part of the alleged damages, in accordance with an insurance or guarantee contract.

7. The court may recommend a provisional measure of protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or in order to ensure the full exercise of the jurisdiction of the court, including an order to preserve evidence in the possession or under the control of the court. control of a disputing party or to protect the jurisdiction of the court. The court may not order the seizure or prevent the application of a measure that is alleged to be a violation mentioned in Article 12.16.

8. In any arbitration conducted pursuant to this Section, at the request of any of the disputing parties, the tribunal, before rendering a decision or award on liability, shall communicate its proposed decision or award to the disputing parties and to the Party of the claimant. . Within sixty (60) days after such proposed decision or award is communicated, the disputing parties may submit written comments to the tribunal regarding any aspect of their proposed decision or award. The court will consider said comments and issue its decision or award no later than forty-five (45) days after the expiration of the sixty (60) day term for submitting comments. This paragraph shall not apply to any arbitration in which an appeal is available under paragraph 9.

9. If a different multilateral treaty enters into force between the Parties, in which an appellate body is established for the purpose of reviewing the awards rendered by tribunals constituted in accordance with international trade or investment agreements to hear investment disputes, the Parties shall endeavor to reach an agreement that will cause such appellate body to review awards rendered in accordance with Article 12.27 in arbitrations commenced after the multilateral treaty enters into force between the Parties.

Article 12.22: Transparency in Arbitration Proceedings

1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 4, the respondent upon receipt of the following documents shall make them available to the non-disputing party and the public:

(a) the notice of intent referred to in Article 12.16.2;

(b) the notice of arbitration referred to in Article 12.16.5;

(c) the pleadings, statements of claim and explanatory notes submitted to the tribunal by a disputing party and any written submissions submitted pursuant to Article 12.21 and Article 12.26;

(d) the orders, awards and decisions of the court; and

(e) the minutes or transcripts of court hearings, when available.

2. The court will hold hearings open to the public and will determine, in consultation with the disputing parties, the pertinent logistical arrangements. However, any disputing party that intends to use information classified as protected information in a hearing must so inform the court. The court will make appropriate arrangements to protect the information from disclosure.

3. Nothing in this Section requires a respondent to make available protected information or to provide or allow access to information that it may retain in accordance with Article 21.2 (Essential Security) and Article 21.4 (Disclosure of Information).

4. Any protected information that is submitted to the court will be protected from disclosure in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) pursuant to subparagraph (d), neither the disputing parties nor the tribunal shall disclose to the complaining Party or to the public any protected information, where the disputing party providing the information clearly so designates in accordance with subparagraph (b);

(b) any disputing party claiming that certain information constitutes protected information shall clearly designate it at the time it is submitted to the court;

(c) a disputing party shall, at the same time that it files a document that contains information claimed to be protected information, file a redacted version of the document that does not contain the information. Only the redacted version will be provided to the non-disputing parties and will be made public in accordance with paragraph 1; and

(d) the court shall rule on any objections to the designation of the alleged information as protected information. If the court determines that such information was not properly designated, the disputing party that submitted the information may:

(i) remove all or part of the presentation containing such information; either

(ii) agree to resubmit completed and redacted documents with amended designations in accordance with the court's determination and subparagraph (c).

In any event, the other disputing party shall, where necessary, resubmit complete and redacted documents, which omit the information withdrawn pursuant to subparagraph (d)(i) by the disputing party that first submitted the information, or redesignate the information in a manner consistent with the designation made pursuant to subparagraph (d)(ii) of the disputing party that first submitted the information.

5. Nothing in this Section requires the respondent to deny the public access to information that, according to its national law, must be disclosed.

Article 12.23: Applicable Law

1. Subject to paragraph 2, when a claim is brought under Article 12.16.1(a) or 12.16.1(b), the tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and the rules of international law. predominantly and, when applicable, with the national legislation of the Party in whose territory the investment was made.

2. A decision of the Commission declaring the interpretation of a provision of this Agreement, pursuant to Article 20.1.3(c) (The Free Trade Commission), shall be binding on a tribunal established under this Section and any decision or award issued by a court must be compatible with that decision.

Article 12.24: Interpretation of the Annexes

1. When the defendant presents as a defense that the measure alleged to be in violation is within the scope of application of Annex I or Annex II, at the request of the defendant, the court will request an interpretation of the matter from the Commission. Within sixty (60) days after delivery of the application, the Commission shall submit to the court in writing any decision declaring its interpretation pursuant to Article 20.1.3(c) (The Free Trade Commission). .

2. The decision issued by the Commission under paragraph 1 shall be binding on the court, and any decision or award issued by the court shall be consistent with that decision. If the Commission does not issue said decision within the term of sixty (60) days, the court will decide on the matter.

Article 12.25: Expert Reports

Without prejudice to the appointment of other types of experts when authorized by the applicable arbitration rules, the court, at the request of a disputing party or, on its own initiative, unless the disputing parties do not accept it, may designate one or more experts to report in writing on any matter of fact relating to environmental, health, safety or other scientific matters that a disputing party has raised in a proceeding, in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed upon by the disputing parties.

Article 12.26: Accumulation of Procedures

1. In cases where two or more separate claims have been submitted to arbitration under Article 12.16.1, and the claims raise a common issue of fact or law and arise out of the same facts or circumstances, any disputing party may seek to obtain a consolidation order, pursuant to the agreement of all disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought or pursuant to the terms of paragraphs 2 through 10.

2. The disputing party that seeks to obtain a consolidation order in accordance with this Article shall submit a written request to the Secretary General and to all the disputing parties in respect of which the consolidation order is sought and shall specify in the request the following:

(a) the name and address of all disputing parties in respect of whom the consolidation order is sought;

(b) the nature of the accumulation order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

3. Unless the Secretary General determines, within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request pursuant to paragraph 2, that the request is manifestly unfounded, a tribunal shall be established under this Article.

4. Unless all the disputing parties in respect of which the consolidation order is sought agree otherwise, the tribunal established pursuant to this Article shall be made up of three (3) arbitrators:

(a) an arbitrator appointed by agreement of the claimants;

(b) an arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and

(c) the presiding arbitrator appointed by the Secretary General, who shall not be a national of either Party.

5. If, within sixty (60) days of the receipt by the Secretary General of the request made pursuant to paragraph 2, the respondent or claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator pursuant to paragraph 4, the Secretary General, at the request of any disputing party in respect of which the accumulation order is sought, will appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators that have not yet been appointed. If the respondent fails to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of the respondent, and if the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Secretary-General shall appoint a national of a Party of the claimants.

6. In the event that the tribunal established pursuant to this Article has found that two or more claims have been submitted to arbitration pursuant to Article 12.16.1, which raise a common issue of fact or law, and which arise out of the same facts or circumstances, the tribunal may, in the interest of achieving a fair and efficient resolution of the claims and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:

(a) assume jurisdiction, hear and jointly determine all or part of the claims;

(b) assume jurisdiction, hear and determine one or more claims, the determination of which it considers would contribute to the resolution of the others; either

(c) instruct a tribunal established pursuant to Article 12.20 to assume jurisdiction, hear and determine jointly, over all or part of the claims, provided that:

(i) that tribunal, at the request of any claimant not previously a disputing party before that tribunal, be reinstated with its original members, except that the arbitrator for the claimants is appointed pursuant to subparagraph 4(a) and the paragraph 5; and

(ii) that court decides whether to repeat any previous hearing.

7. In case a tribunal has been established under this Article, a claimant who has submitted a claim to arbitration under Article 12.16.1, and whose name is not mentioned in a request made under paragraph 2, may make a request in writing to the court for the purpose of including such plaintiff in any order made under paragraph 6 and specify in the application:

(a) the name and address of the claimant;

(b) the nature of the order sought; and

(c) the grounds on which the request is based.

The claimant shall deliver a copy of its request to the Secretary General and to the disputing parties named in the request pursuant to paragraph 2.

8. A tribunal established under this Article shall conduct proceedings in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section.

9. A tribunal established pursuant to Article 12.20 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part of a claim, over which a tribunal established or instructed pursuant to this Article has assumed jurisdiction.

10. At the request of a disputing party, a tribunal established under this Article may, pending its decision under paragraph 6, order that the proceedings of a tribunal established under Article 12.20 be adjourned, unless that latter tribunal has already suspended its proceedings.

Article 12.27: Awards

1. Cuando un tribunal dicte un laudo definitivo desfavorable al demandado, el tribunal puede otorgar, por separado o en combinación, únicamente:

(a) daños pecuniarios y los intereses que procedan; y

(b) restitución de la propiedad, en cuyo caso el laudo dispondrá que el demandado puede pagar daños pecuniarios, más los intereses que procedan en lugar de la restitución.

El tribunal puede también conceder costas y honorarios de abogado de conformidad con esta Sección y con las reglas de arbitraje aplicables.

2. Sujeto al párrafo 1, cuando se presente a arbitraje una reclamación conforme al Artículo 12.16.1 (b):

(a) el laudo que prevea la restitución de la propiedad, dispondrá que la restitución se otorgue a la empresa;

(b) el laudo que conceda daños pecuniarios e intereses que procedan, dispondrá que la suma de dinero se pague a la empresa; y

(c) el laudo dispondrá que el mismo se dicta sin perjuicio de cualquier derecho que cualquier persona tenga sobre la reparación conforme al derecho interno aplicable.

3. Un tribunal no está autorizado para ordenar el pago de daños que tengan carácter punitivo.

4. Para mayor certeza, un tribunal no será competente para pronunciarse sobre la legalidad de la medida respecto de la legislación nacional.

Artículo 12.28: Finalidad y Ejecución de un Laudo

1. Para mayor certeza, el laudo dictado por un tribunal no tendrá fuerza obligatoria salvo para las partes contendientes y únicamente respecto del caso concreto.

2. Sujeto al párrafo 3 y al procedimiento de revisión aplicable a un laudo provisional, la parte contendiente acatará y cumplirá el laudo sin demora.

3. La parte contendiente no puede solicitar la ejecución del laudo definitivo hasta que:

(a) in the case of a final award rendered in accordance with the ICSID Convention:

(i) one hundred and twenty (120) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has requested its review or annulment; either

(ii) the review or annulment procedures have been completed; and

(b) in the case of a final award made under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or the rules selected pursuant to Article 12.16.4(d):

(i) ninety (90) days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and no disputing party has initiated a proceeding to review, revoke or annul it; either

(ii) a court has dismissed or admitted a request for review, revocation or annulment of the award and this decision cannot be appealed.

4. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.

5. Where the respondent fails to comply with or comply with a final award, upon delivery of a request by the Party of the claimant, a panel shall be established in accordance with Article 18.5 (Establishment of a Panel). The requesting Party may request in said procedures:

(a) a determination that the breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement; and

(b) pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 18.9 (Panel Report) a recommendation that the respondent abide by or comply with the final award.

6. A disputing party may seek enforcement of an arbitral award under the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the proceedings under paragraph 5 have been initiated.

7. For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this Section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or transaction.

Article 12.29: Delivery of Documents

The delivery of the notification and other documents to a Party must be done at the place designated by it in Annex 12.15.

 

 

Section C: Definitions

Article 12.30: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

ICSID means the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

UNCITRAL means the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;

New York Convention means the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held at New York on June 10, 1958;

Inter-American Convention means the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, held in Panama on January 30, 1975;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded at Washington on March 18, 1965;

respondent means the Party that is a party to a dispute relating to an investment;

claimant means the investor of a Party that is a party to an investment dispute with the other Party;

company means a company as defined in Article 1.5 (Definitions of General Application) and a branch of a company;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise incorporated or organized under the domestic law of a Party, and a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out substantial business activities, in that territory;

protected information means:

(a) confidential business information; either

(b) information that is privileged or otherwise protected from disclosure, according to the Party's domestic law;

investment means any asset owned or controlled by an investor, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including characteristics such as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of profit or profit, or the assumption risky. Forms an investment can take include:

(a) a company;

(b) shares, capital and other forms of participation in the patrimony of a company;

(c) debt instruments of a company:

(i) when the company is an affiliate of the investor; either

(ii) when the original maturity date of the debt instrument is at least three (3) years;

but does not include an obligation of a Party or of a State enterprise, regardless of the original due date;

(d) a loan to a company:

(i) when the company is an affiliate of the investor; either

(ii) when the original maturity date of the loan is at least three (3) years;

but does not include a loan to a Party or to a State enterprise, regardless of the original due date;

(e) futures, options and other derivatives;

(f) turnkey, construction, management, production, concession, revenue-sharing and other similar contracts;

(g) intellectual property rights;

(h) licences, authorizations, permits and similar rights granted in accordance with national legislation 11; and

(i) other property rights, tangible or intangible, movable or immovable, and rights related to property, such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges,

but investment does not include:

(j) an order or judgment entered in a judicial or administrative action;

(k) loans granted by one Party to the other Party;

(l) operations of public debt and debt of public institutions;

(m) pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:

(i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of one Party to a national or company in the territory of the other Party; either

(ii) the granting of credit in connection with a business transaction, such as trade financing, except for a loan covered by the provisions of subparagraph (d); either

(n) any other pecuniary claim, which does not carry the interest rates provided in subparagraphs (a) to (i),

a change in the manner in which assets have been invested or reinvested does not affect their investment status under this Agreement, provided that such change falls within the definitions of this Article and is made in accordance with the domestic law of the Party to whose territory the investment has been admitted;

covered investment means, with respect to a Party, an investment in its territory, of an investor of the other Party existing on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, as well as investments made, acquired or expanded thereafter;

non-Party investor means, with respect to a Party, an investor that intends to carry out, through concrete actions 12, that is making or has made an investment in the territory of that Party, that is not an investor of a Party;

investor of a Party means a Party or a State enterprise of the Party, or a national or enterprise of the Party, that intends to carry out, through concrete actions 13, is making or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party; considering, however, that a natural person who has dual nationality shall be considered exclusively a national of the State of his dominant and effective nationality;

measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement, act or practice;

freely usable currency means "freely usable currency" as determined by the International Monetary Fund under the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;

national means a natural person who has the nationality of a Party in accordance with Annex 1.5 (Country-Specific Definitions);

disputing party means either the plaintiff or the defendant;

disputing parties means the plaintiff and the defendant;

non-disputing party means a person of a Party, or a person of a non-Party with a significant presence in the territory of a Party, who is not a party to an investment dispute under Section B;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976;

ICSID Additional Facility Rules means the Additional Facility Rules for the Administration of Proceedings by the ICSID Secretariat;

Secretary General means the Secretary General of ICSID; and

tribunal means an arbitral tribunal established under Articles 12.20 or 12.26.

 

 

Annex 12.4: Customary International Law

The Parties confirm their common understanding that customary international law, in a general way and as specifically referred to in Article 12.4, results from a general and consistent practice of States, followed by them in the sense of a legal obligation. With respect to Article 12.4, the minimum level of treatment accorded to aliens by customary international law refers to all principles of customary international law that protect the economic rights and interests of aliens.

 

 

Annex 12.10: Expropriation

The Parties confirm their common understanding that:

(a) a measure or series of measures by a Party may not constitute an expropriation unless it interferes with a tangible or intangible property right or with the essential attributes or powers of ownership of an investment;

(b) Article 12.10 addresses two situations. The first is direct expropriation, where an investment is nationalized or otherwise expropriated directly through the formal transfer of title or ownership rights;

(c) the second situation addressed by Article 12.10 is indirect expropriation, where a measure or series of measures by a Party has an effect equivalent to that of a direct expropriation without formal transfer of title or right of ownership;

(d) the determination of whether a measure or series of measures of a Party, in a specific factual situation, constitutes an indirect expropriation, requires a factual investigation, on a case-by-case basis, which considers, among other factors:

(i) the economic impact of the measure or series of measures of a Party, although the mere fact that a measure or series of measures of a Party has an adverse effect on the economic value of an investment, by itself, does not establish that an indirect expropriation has occurred;

(ii) the degree to which a Party's measure or series of measures interferes with unambiguous and reasonable expectations of the investment; and

(iii) the nature of the measure or series of measures of a Party;

(e) except in exceptional circumstances, such as where a measure or series of measures are disproportionate in light of their objective in such a way that they cannot reasonably be considered to have been adopted and applied in good faith, the non-discriminatory regulatory actions of a Parts that are designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as public health, safety, and the environment, do not constitute indirect expropriation 14.

 

 

Annex 12.15: Service of Documents to a Party under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement)

Notifications and other documents in disputes under Section B, will be handled by delivering them to:

(to Panama:

National Directorate of Administration of International Trade Treaties
and Trade Defense (DINATRADEC) of the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry of Panama, or its successor.
Plaza Edison Building, Second Floor
Avenida El Paical,
Panama, Republic of Panama; and

(b) Peru:

General Directorate of International Economic Affairs, Competition and
Private Investment
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Jirón Lampa # 277 floor 5
Lima 1, Peru,

or their successors.

 

 

Annex 12.21: Submissions from Non-Disputing Parties

1. The request for authorization to present the written communications of a non-disputing party must be submitted within the term established by the court and must:

(a) be in writing, dated and signed by the applicant, and include the address and other contact details of the applicant;

(b) be no longer than five (5) pages;

(c) describe the applicant, including where relevant, its membership, as well as its legal status (for example, a company, trade association or other non-governmental organization), its general objectives, the nature of its activities and any organization parent (including any organization that the applicant directly or indirectly controls);

(d) disclose whether the applicant has any affiliation, directly or indirectly, with any disputing party;

(e) identify any government, person or organization that provided financial or other assistance during the preparation of the submission;

(f) specify the nature of the interest that the applicant has in the arbitration;

(g) identify the specific issues of fact or law in the arbitration to which the applicant will refer in its written submission;

(h) be drawn up in the language of the arbitration.

2. The written submission of a non-disputing party must:

(a) appear within the time limit established by the court;

(b) be dated and signed by the applicant;

(c) be concise and in no case should it exceed twenty (20) pages, including annexes and appendices;

(d) duly substantiate its position; and

(e) only refer to the topics indicated in your application, in accordance with subparagraph 1 (g).

 

 

Chapter 13

Cross-Border Trade in Services

Article 13.1: Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party that affect cross-border trade in services supplied by service providers of the other Party. Such measures include measures affecting:

(a) the production, distribution, marketing, sale and supply of a service;

(b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a service;

(c) access to and use of distribution and transportation systems, or telecommunications networks and services related to the provision of a service;

(d) the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; and

(e) the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.

2. For the purposes of this Chapter, measures adopted or maintained by a Party means measures adopted or maintained by:

(a) central, regional or local governments or authorities; and

(b) non-governmental institutions exercising powers delegated to them by central, regional or local governments or authorities.

3. This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) air services 1, including national and international air transport services, scheduled and non-scheduled, as well as related support services for air services, except:

(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services while the aircraft is out of service;

(ii) the sale and marketing of air transportation services; and

(iii) computerized reservation system (SRI) services;

(b) public procurement;

(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans, guarantees, and insurance; and

(d) financial services, as defined in Chapter 14 (Financial Services).

4. Articles 13.2, 13.5, 13.9 and 13.10 shall apply to measures by a Party that affect the supply of a service in its territory by a covered investment 2.

5. This Chapter does not impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor does it confer any rights on that national with respect to such access or employment. nor will it apply to measures relating to citizenship or residence on a permanent basis.

6. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose any obligation on a Party with respect to its immigration measures.

7. This Chapter does not apply to services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority. A service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service that is not supplied on a commercial basis or in competition with one or more service providers.

Article 13.2: Subsidies

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 13.1.3 (c), if the results of the negotiations related to Article XV. 1 of the GATS of the WTO enter into force for each of the Parties, this Article will be reviewed jointly, as appropriate, with a view to determining whether this Article should be modified in order for those results to be incorporated into this Agreement. The Parties agree to coordinate such negotiations, as appropriate.

Article 13.3: National Treatment

Each Party shall accord to the other Party's service providers treatment no less favorable than it accords, in like circumstances, to its service providers.

Article 13.4: Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall accord to the service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in similar circumstances, to the service providers of a non-Party.

Article 13.5: Market Access

No Party may adopt or maintain, on the basis of a regional subdivision or its entire territory, measures that:

(a) impose limitations on:

(i) the number of service providers, whether in the form of numerical quotas, monopolies or exclusive service providers or through the requirement of an economic needs test;

(ii) the total value of assets or service transactions in the form of numerical quotas or by requiring an economic needs test;

(iii) the total number of service operations or the total amount of service output, expressed in designated numerical units, in the form of quotas or by requiring an economic needs test 3;

(iv) the total number of natural persons that can be employed in a certain service sector or that a service provider can employ and that are necessary for the supply of a specific service and are directly related to it, in the form of numerical quotas or by requiring an economic needs test; either

(b) restrict or prescribe the specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a service provider may supply a service.

Article 13.6: Local Presence

Neither Party may require a service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other form of business, or to reside in its territory, as a condition for the cross-border supply of a service.

Article 13.7: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.5 and 13.6 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party in:

(i) the central level of government, as stipulated by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I;

(ii) a regional level of government, as stipulated by that Party in its Schedule to Annex I; either

(iii) a local level of government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) the modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a), provided that such modification does not diminish the conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.5 or 13.6.

2. Articles 13.3, 13.4, 13.5 and 13.6 do not apply to any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to sectors, subsectors or activities as stipulated in its Schedule to Annex II.

Article 13.8: Notification 4

1. In the event that a Party makes an amendment or modification to any existing non-conforming measure set out in its Schedule to Annex I, in accordance with Article 13.7.1 (c), the Party shall notify the other Party, as soon as possible. possible, about such amendment or modification.

2. In the event that a Party adopts a measure after the entry into force of this Agreement, with respect to the sectors, subsectors or activities established in its Schedule to Annex II, the Party shall, to the extent possible, notify the the other Party on said measure.

Article 13.9: Transparency in the Development and Application of Regulations 5

In addition to Chapter 19 (Transparency):

(a) each Party shall establish or maintain adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from interested persons regarding its regulations relating to the subject matter of this Chapter 6;

(b) at the time of adopting final regulations regarding the subject matter of this Chapter, each Party shall respond in writing, to the extent possible, including upon request, to substantive comments received from interested persons regarding the proposed regulations; and

(c) to the extent possible, each Party will allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of final regulations and the date they enter into force.

Article 13.10: National Regulation

1. The Parties shall ensure that all measures of general application to which this Chapter applies are administered in a reasonable, objective and impartial manner. This obligation shall not apply to the measures covered by Annex I nor to the measures covered by Annex II of each Party.

2. Cuando una Parte exija autorización para el suministro de un servicio, las autoridades competentes de esa Parte, en un período de tiempo razonable a partir de la presentación de una solicitud que se considere completa de conformidad con sus leyes y reglamentos nacionales, informarán al solicitante sobre la decisión relativa a su solicitud. A petición de dicho solicitante, las autoridades competentes de la Parte facilitarán, sin demoras indebidas, información referente al estado de la solicitud. Esta obligación no se aplicará a los requisitos de autorización que se encuentran amparados por el Artículo 13.7.2.

3. In order to ensure that measures relating to qualification requirements and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements do not constitute unnecessary barriers to trade in services, each Party shall endeavor to ensure, in a manner appropriate to each individual sector, that such measures:

(a) are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and ability to provide the service;

(b) are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and

(c) in the case of licensing procedures, do not in themselves constitute a restriction on the supply of the service.

4. The Parties acknowledge their mutual obligations related to domestic regulation in Article VI.4 of the WTO GATS and affirm their commitment to the development of any necessary disciplines in accordance with Article VI.4. To the extent any such disciplines are adopted by the members of the WTO, the Parties shall jointly review them, as appropriate, with a view to determining whether this Article should be modified, so that such results are incorporated into this Agreement.

Article 13.11: Mutual Recognition

1. For the purposes of compliance, in whole or in part, with its standards or criteria for the authorization, certification, or licensing of service providers, and subject to the requirements of paragraph 4, a Party may recognize education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certificates issued in a particular country. That recognition, which may be effected through harmonization or otherwise, may be based on an agreement or convention with the country in question, or may be granted autonomously.

2. When a Party recognizes, autonomously or through an agreement or agreement, the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the territory of a non-Party country, nothing in Article 13.4 shall be interpreted in the sense of requiring that the Party grant such recognition to the education or experience obtained, the requirements fulfilled or the licenses or certificates granted in the territory of the other Party.

3. A Party that is a party to an existing or future agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party, if the other Party is interested, to negotiate its accession to such agreement or agreement or to negotiate other comparable ones with it. When a Party grants recognition autonomously, it shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunities to demonstrate that the education, experience, licenses or certificates obtained or requirements fulfilled in the territory of that other Party should be recognized.

4. No Party shall grant recognition in a way that constitutes a means of discrimination between countries in the application of its standards or criteria for the authorization or certification of service providers or the granting of licenses to them, or a disguised restriction on trade of services.

5. The Parties shall endeavor, to the extent possible, to encourage relevant professional services bodies in their territory to consider the use of standards and criteria from Annex 13.11 (Professional Services) in discussions for a potential agreement or arrangement to which refers to paragraph 1.

Article 13.12: Transfers and Payments

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply of services to be made freely and without delay to and from its territory.

2. Each Party shall allow all transfers and payments related to the cross-border supply of services to be made in freely circulating currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of the transfer.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay the making of the transfer or payment, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of its national law with respect to:

(a) bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of creditors' rights;

(b) issue, trade or deal in securities, futures, options or derivatives;

(c) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist with law enforcement or with financial regulatory authorities;

(d) criminal or criminal offenses; either

(e) guarantee of compliance with judicial or administrative orders or rulings.

Article 13.13: Denial of Benefits

Subject to prior notification in accordance with Article 19.3 (Provision of Information) and inquiries 7, a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to:

(a) a service provider of the other Party if the service provider is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party; either

(b) a service provider of the other Party if the service provider is an enterprise owned or controlled by persons of the denying Party and the enterprise does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party.

Article 13.14: Implementation

The Parties shall consult annually, or as otherwise agreed, to review the implementation of this Chapter and to consider other trade in services matters of mutual interest.

Article 13.15: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

cross-border trade in services or cross-border supply of services means the supply of a service:

(a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party, by a person of that Party, to a person of the other Party; either

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a service in the territory of a Party by a covered investment or by an investor of the other Party, as defined in Article 12.30 (Definitions);

company means a company as defined in Article 1.5 (Definitions of General Application) and a branch of a company;

existing means in force as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

service provider of a Party means a person of that Party who intends to supply or supplies a service 8;

aircraft maintenance and repair services means activities performed on an aircraft or part of an aircraft while the aircraft is out of service and does not include so-called line maintenance;

computerized reservation system (CRS) services means services provided by computerized systems that contain information about air carrier schedules, available seats, fares and fare-setting rules, and through which reservations can be made. make reservations or issue tickets;

professional services means services that require higher education for their provision 9or training or equivalent experiences and the exercise of which is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include the services provided by persons who practice a trade or to the crew of merchant ships and aircraft; and

sale or marketing of an air transport service means the opportunities for the air carrier concerned to freely sell and market its air transport services, and all aspects of marketing, such as market research, advertising and distribution, but not does not include the determination of prices of air transport services or the applicable conditions.

Addendum 13.11: Professional Services

 

Development of Professional Services Standards

1. Each Party shall encourage the relevant bodies in its respective territory to develop mutually acceptable standards and criteria for the granting of licenses and certificates to professional service providers, as well as to submit to the Commission recommendations on their mutual recognition.

2. The standards and criteria referred to in paragraph 1 may be developed in relation to the following aspects:

(a) education: accreditation of educational institutions or academic programs;

(b) examinations: qualification examinations for obtaining licenses, including alternative methods of evaluation, such as oral examinations and interviews;

(c) experience: length and nature of experience required to obtain a license;

(d) conduct and ethics: standards of professional conduct and the nature of disciplinary measures in case of violation of those standards;

(e) professional development and recertification: continuing education and the corresponding requirements to maintain the professional certificate;

(f) scope of action: scope or limits of authorized activities; and

(g) local knowledge: requirements on knowledge of aspects such as local laws, regulations, language, geography or climate.

3. Upon receipt of a recommendation referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall review it within a reasonable time to decide whether it is consistent with this Agreement. Based on the Commission's review, each Party shall encourage its respective competent authorities to implement that recommendation, where appropriate, within a mutually agreed term.

Temporary Licenses

4. For mutually agreed individual professional services, each Party shall encourage competent bodies in its territory to develop procedures for granting temporary licenses to professional service providers of the other Party.

Working Groups on Professional Services

5. The Parties, by mutual agreement, may form working groups on professional services, including representatives of the relevant professional bodies of each Party, to facilitate the activities listed in paragraphs 1 and 4.

6. Working groups may consider, for individual professional services, the following matters:

(a) develop viable procedures on standards for the licensing and certification of professional service providers; and

(b) other matters of mutual interest related to the provision of professional services.

7. The working groups should report to the Commission on their progress and future direction regarding their work.

Revision

8. The Commission will review the implementation of this Annex at least one (1) time every three (3) years.

 

 

Chapter 14

Financial services

 

Article 14.1: Scope of Application and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to a measure adopted or maintained by a Party related to:

(a) a financial institution of the other Party;

(b) an investor of the other Party, or an investment of such investor, in a financial institution in the territory of the Party; and

(c) cross-border trade in financial services.

2. Chapters 12 (Investment) and 13 (Cross-Border Trade in Services) shall apply to the measures described in paragraph 1 only to the extent that such Chapters or Articles of such Chapters are incorporated into this Chapter.

3. Articles 12.8 (Environmental Measures), 12.10 (Expropriation and Compensation), 12.11 (Transfers), 12.12 (Denial of Benefits), 12.13 (Special Formalities and Information Requirements) and 13.13 (Denial of Benefits) are incorporated into this Chapter. and are an integral part of it 1.

4. Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) of Chapter 12 (Investment) is incorporated into this Chapter and is an integral part thereof only for those cases in which a Party is alleged to have failed to comply with Articles 12.10 (Expropriation and Compensation ), 12.11 (Transfers), 12.12 (Denial of Benefits) or 12.13 (Special Formalities and Information Requirements), as incorporated into this Chapter.

5. Article 13.12 (Transfers and Payments) is incorporated into this Chapter and is an integral part thereof to the extent that cross-border trade in financial services is subject to the obligations under Article 14.6.

6. This Chapter does not apply to measures taken or maintained by a party relating to:

(a) activities or services that are part of social security systems and/or pension plans and/or regimes established by law, whether public or private; either

(b) activities or services performed on behalf of or with the guarantee of the Party, or with the use of financial resources of the Party, including its public entities.

Likewise, this Chapter shall not prevent a Party, including its public entities, from carrying out or supplying such activities exclusively in its territory.

Article 14.2: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party treatment no less favorable than the treatment it accords to its own investors, in similar circumstances, with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or otherwise disposal of financial institutions or an investment in financial institutions in its territory.

2. Each Party shall accord to a financial institution of the other Party and to an investment of an investor of the other Party in financial institutions treatment no less favorable than the treatment it accords to its own financial institutions and to investments of its own investors in financial institutions. institutions, in similar circumstances, with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation and sale or other form of disposition of financial institutions and investments.

3. For the purposes of the national treatment obligations of Article 14.6.1, a Party shall accord to cross-border financial service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords to its own financial service providers, in circumstances similar, with respect to the provision of the relevant service.

4. Differences in market share, profitability or size do not in themselves establish a breach of the obligations under this Article.

Article 14.3: Most Favored Nation Treatment

Each Party shall accord to an investor of the other Party, to a financial institution of the other Party, to an investor's investment in a financial institution, and to a cross-border financial service provider of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than the treatment to grant, in similar circumstances, to investors, financial institutions, investor investments in financial institutions, and cross-border financial service providers of a non-Party country.

Article 14.4: Recognition

1. A Party may recognize a prudential measure of a country that is not a Party in the application of a measure covered by this Chapter. Such recognition may be:

(a) granted autonomously;

(b) achieved through harmonization or other means; either

(c) based on a convention or agreement with a country that is not a Party.

2. A Party that grants recognition to a prudential measure under paragraph 1 shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunities to demonstrate that circumstances exist in which there are or will be equivalent regulation, supervision and enforcement and, if appropriate, that there are o there will be procedures regarding the exchange of information between the Parties.

3. When a Party grants prudential measures recognition pursuant to subparagraph 1(c) and the circumstances set out in paragraph 2 exist, the Party shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party to negotiate adherence to the convention or agreement, or to negotiate a comparable covenant or agreement.

Article 14.5: Right of Establishment

1. A Party shall permit an investor of the other Party that does not own or control a financial institution in the territory of the Party, to establish without the imposition of numerical restrictions or requirements of specific types of legal form, a financial institution to which is permitted to provide a financial service that a similar institution of the Party could provide in accordance with the Party's domestic law at the time of establishment. The obligation not to impose a requirement to adopt a specific legal form does not prevent a Party from imposing a condition or requirement in connection with the establishment of a particular type of entity chosen by an investor of the other Party.

2. A Party shall permit an investor of the other Party that owns or controls a financial institution in the Party's territory to establish such additional financial institutions as are necessary for the full range of financial services permitted under the national legislation of the Party at the time of the establishment of the additional financial institutions. Subject to Article 14.2, a Party may impose a term or condition on the establishment of additional financial institutions and determine the institutional and legal form that will be used for the supply of a specified financial service or the performance of a specified activity.

3. The right of establishment under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall include the acquisition of an existing entity.

4. Subject to the provisions of Article 14.2, a Party may prohibit a particular financial activity or service. Such a ban may not apply to all financial services or to an entire sub-sector of financial services such as banking.

5. For the purposes of this Article, without prejudice to other forms of prudential regulation, a Party may require that an investor of the other Party be engaged in the business of providing financial services in the territory of that other Party.

6. For the purposes of this Article, "numerical restrictions" means the limitations imposed on the number of financial institutions, whether in the form of a numerical quota, a monopoly, an exclusive service provider or the requirements of an economic needs test.

Article 14.6: Cross-Border Trade

1. Each Party shall permit, under terms and conditions that grant national treatment, cross-border financial service providers of the other Party to supply the services specified in Annex 14.6.

2. Each Party shall permit a person located in its territory, and its nationals wherever located, to purchase financial services from cross-border financial service providers of the other Party located in the territory of the other Party. This does not oblige a Party to allow such suppliers to do business or advertise in its territory. Each Party may define "doing business" and "advertising" for the purposes of this Article provided that such definitions are not inconsistent with the obligations of paragraph 1.

3. Without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in financial services, a Party may require the registration or authorization of cross-border providers of financial services of the other Party and of financial instruments.

Article 14.7: New Financial Services

1. A Party shall permit a financial institution of the other Party established in its territory to supply a new financial service that the first Party would permit its own financial institutions to supply, in similar circumstances, in accordance with its law.

2. A Party may determine the legal and institutional form through which the new financial service may be supplied and may require authorization for its supply. When a Party allows the new financial service and authorization is required to supply it, the decision will be made within a reasonable period of time and the authorization may only be refused for prudential reasons.

3. This Article does not prevent a financial institution of one Party from requesting the other Party to authorize the supply of a financial service that is not supplied within the territory of either Party. Such request shall be subject to the domestic law of the Party to which the request is made and, for greater certainty, shall not be subject to the obligations of this Article.

4. Nothing in this Article prohibits a Party from requesting the issuance of a decree, resolution or regulation by the Executive, regulatory agencies or central bank, to authorize new financial services not specifically authorized in its legislation.

Article 14.8: Treatment of Certain Types of Information

Nothing in this Chapter requires a Party to disclose or allow access to:

(a) information relating to the financial affairs and accounts of an individual customer of a financial institution or of a cross-border provider of financial services; either

(b) any confidential information the disclosure of which would prevent compliance with the law or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or harm the legitimate business interests of a particular company.

Article 14.9: Senior Executives and Boards of Directors

1. A Party may not require a financial institution of the other Party to hire persons of a certain nationality for senior executive positions or other essential personnel.

2. A Party may not require that more than a minority of the board of directors of a financial institution of the other Party be composed of nationals of the Party, residents of its territory, or a combination of both.

Article 14.10: Non-Conforming Measures

1. Articles 14.2, 14.3, 14.5 and 14.9 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by one of the Parties at the level:

(i) from the national government, as indicated in Section I of its list in Annex III;

(ii) from the sub-national government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) a modification to any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that said modification does not diminish the conformity of the measure, as it was in force immediately before the modification, with Articles 14.2, 14.3, 14.5 and 14.9 .

2. Article 14.6 does not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is maintained by a Party at the level of:

(i) national government, as set out in Section I of its Schedule to Annex III; either

(ii) sub-national government;

(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a); either

(c) a modification of any non-conforming measure referred to in subparagraph (a) provided that such modification does not lessen the conformity of the measure, as it was in effect immediately before the entry into force of this Agreement, with Article 14.6 .

3. Articles 14.2, 14.3, 14.5, 14.6 and 14.9 do not apply to a non-conforming measure that a Party adopts or maintains in accordance with Section II of its Schedule to Annex III.

4. When a Party has established a reservation to Article 12.2 (National Treatment), 12.3 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment), 13.3 (National Treatment) or 13.4 (Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment) in its Schedule to Annex I or II, the Party reservation also constitutes a reservation to Article 14.2 or 14.3, insofar as the measure, sector, sub-sector or activity established in the reservation is covered by this Chapter.

Article 14.11: Exceptions

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures for prudential reasons 2including the protection of investors, depositors, policyholders or persons with whom a financial institution or a cross-border provider of financial services has contracted a fiduciary obligation, or to guarantee the security, solvency, integrity and stability of the financial system, as well as the financial liability of individual financial institutions or cross-border providers of financial services. When such measures are not in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, they shall not be used as a means to circumvent the obligations and commitments entered into by the Party in accordance with this Agreement.

2. Nothing in this Agreement applies to non-discriminatory measures of a general nature adopted by any public entity in compliance with monetary policies and related credit or exchange policies and macroprudential policies.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 12.11 (Transfers) and Article 13.12 (Transfers and Payments), a Party may prevent or limit transfers from a financial institution or a cross-border provider of financial services to or for the benefit of an affiliated person. or related to said institution or provider, through the equitable, non-discriminatory and good faith application of measures related to maintaining the security, solvency, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers. This paragraph is without prejudice to any other provision of this Agreement that allows the Party to restrict transfers.

4. A Party may adopt or apply measures necessary to ensure compliance with laws or regulations that are not inconsistent with this Chapter, including measures related to the prevention of misleading and fraudulent practices or to deal with effects of a breach of financial service contracts. A Party shall not apply such measures in a manner that could constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination between countries where similar conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on investment in a financial institution or on cross-border trade in financial services.

Article 14.12: Transparency

1. The Parties recognize that transparent regulations and policies governing the activities of financial institutions and financial service providers are important to facilitate the access of financial institutions and financial service providers and their operations in the market of the other Party. Each Party undertakes to promote regulatory transparency in financial services.

2. Each Party shall ensure that a measure of general application to which this Chapter applies is administered in a reasonable, objective, and impartial manner.

3. Each Party shall ensure that its regulatory authorities make available to the public the requirements, including any necessary documentation, to fill out requests related to the supply of a financial service.

4. At the request of the applicant, the regulatory authority will inform the applicant about the status of his application. When said authority requires additional information from the applicant, it will be notified without undue delay.

5. The regulatory authority of a Party shall make an administrative decision on a complete application of an investor in a financial institution, of a cross-border provider of financial services or of a financial institution of the other Party related to the provision of a financial service within a term of one hundred and twenty (120) days, and will promptly notify the applicant of the decision. An application will not be considered complete until all the relevant hearings have been held and all the necessary information has been received, in accordance with the regulatory requirements established for that purpose. When it is not feasible to make a decision within one hundred and twenty (120) days,

6. Each party will maintain or establish the appropriate mechanisms to respond to queries from interested parties with respect to a measure of general application covered by this Chapter.

7. At the request of an applicant whose application has been denied, the regulatory authority that has denied an application will, to the extent practicable, inform the applicant of the reasons for the denial of his application.

8. In lieu of Article 19.2 (Publication), each Party, to the extent practicable:

(a) publish in advance any regulation of general application relating to matters of this Chapter that it proposes to adopt and the purpose of the regulation; and

(b) provide interested persons and the Parties a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed regulations.

9. In adopting final regulations, the Party shall, to the extent practicable, consider substantive written comments received from stakeholders regarding the proposed regulations. 3

10. To the extent practicable, each Party shall allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of the final regulations and their entry into force.

11. Each Party shall ensure that standards of general application adopted or maintained by self-regulatory organizations of the Party are published in a timely manner or otherwise available so that interested persons may become aware of them.

Article 14.13: Self-regulated Organizations

Where a Party requires that a financial institution or cross-border financial service provider of the other Party be a member of, participate in, or have access to a self-regulatory organization for the purpose of providing a financial service in or to its territory, the Party shall ensure that such self-regulatory organization complies with the obligations of Articles 14.2 and 14.3.

Article 14.14: Payment and Clearing Systems

Under the terms and conditions that grant national treatment, each Party shall grant to a financial institution of the other Party established in its territory, access to the payment and clearing systems administered by public entities and to the official means of financing and refinancing available in the course normal business operations. This Article does not confer access to the Party's lender of last resort services.

Article 14.15: Financial Services Committee

1. The Parties establish the Financial Services Committee (hereinafter the Committee). The principal representative of each Party shall be an official of the authority of the Party responsible for financial services established in Annex 14.15.

2. The Committee:

(a) oversee the implementation of this Chapter and its further development;

(b) consider matters related to financial services referred to it by a Party; and

(c) participate in dispute settlement procedures in accordance with Article 14.18.

3. The Committee shall meet annually, or as otherwise agreed, to evaluate the operation of this Agreement as it relates to financial services. The Committee will report to the Commission on the results of each meeting.

Article 14.16: Consultations

1. A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter related to this Agreement that affects a financial service. The other Party shall give due consideration to the request. The Parties shall inform the Committee of the results of the consultations.

2. Inquiries pursuant to this Article shall include officials of the authority specified in Annex 14.15.

3. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require a regulatory authority participating in consultations under paragraph 1 to disclose information or to act in a manner that could interfere with specific regulatory, supervisory, administrative or enforcement matters. of measurements.

4. When a Party requires information for a supervisory purpose regarding a financial institution in the territory of the other Party or a cross-border provider of financial services in the territory of the other Party, the Party may turn to the competent regulatory authority in the territory of the other Party to request the information.

5. A Party shall not be required to derogate from its legislation relating to the exchange of information between financial regulators or the requirements of an agreement or arrangement between the financial authorities of the Parties.

Article 14.17: Settlement of Disputes

1. Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement), as modified by this Article, applies to the settlement of disputes arising from this Chapter.

2. Consultations made pursuant to Article 14.16 with respect to a measure or matter constitute consultations pursuant to Article 18.4 (Consultations), unless the Parties agree otherwise. If the matter has not been resolved within forty-five (45) days after beginning the consultations as established in Article 14.16, or ninety (90) days after the delivery of the request for consultations in accordance with Article Article 14.16, whichever occurs first, the complaining Party may request in writing the establishment of a panel.

3. The following procedures shall replace Article 18.5 (Establishment of a Panel):

(a) the panel will consist of three members;

(b) each Party, within thirty (30) days of receiving the request for the establishment of the panel, shall designate a panelist who may be a national of that Party and shall notify the other Party in writing of such designation. If a Party does not appoint a panelist within thirty (30) days, the other Party may request that the appointing authority appoint, at its discretion, the panelist not appointed pursuant to paragraph 4;

(c) the Parties shall endeavor to agree on the designation of the third panelist who shall chair the panel and, unless the Parties otherwise agree, such panelist shall not be a national of a Party. If the chairperson of the panel has not been appointed within thirty (30) days of the most recent appointment under subparagraph (b), either Party may request that the appointing authority, appoint, at its discretion, and subject to as provided in paragraph 4, the chairperson of the panel, who shall not be a national of one of the Parties; and

(d) Subparagraphs (b) and (c) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, when a panelist or the chairperson of the panel retires, is removed from office, or is otherwise unable to serve on the panel. In such case, a term applicable to the panel proceeding will be suspended for a period beginning on the date a panelist ceases to serve and ending on the date a panelist's replacement is appointed.

4. Each panelist of the panels constituted for the controversies that arise with respect to this Chapter will have the qualifications required by Article 18.6 (Qualifications of Panelists) with the exception of subparagraph (d) of that Article. In addition, each panelist will have specialized knowledge or experience in financial law or the practice of financial services, which may include the regulation of financial institutions.

5. In any dispute, if a panel considers that a measure is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement and the measure affects:

(a) only to a financial services sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits only in the financial services sector;

(b) to the financial services sector and any other sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits in the financial services sector that have an effect equivalent to the effect of the measure in the Party's financial services sector; either

(c) solely to a sector other than financial services, the complaining Party may not suspend benefits in the financial services sector.

Article 14.18: Disputes over Investment in Financial Services

1. When an investor of a Party submits a claim to arbitration under Section B (Investor-State Dispute Settlement) of Chapter 12 (Investment) and the Party complained against invokes an exception under Article 14.11, the Tribunal shall transfer the subject in writing to the Committee for a decision in accordance with paragraph 2. The Tribunal may not proceed until it receives a decision or a report in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

2. In a referral under paragraph 1, the Committee will decide the issue to what extent Article 14.11 is a valid defense to the investor's claim. The Committee shall forward a copy of its decision to the Court and to the Commission. The decision will be binding on the Tribunal.

3. When the Committee has not decided the matter within sixty (60) days after receipt of the referral under the terms of paragraph 1, any Party may request, within the following ten (10) days, the establishment of a panel under Article 18.5 (Establishment of a Panel) to decide the matter. The panel will be constituted in accordance with Article 14.17. In addition to the provisions of Article 18.9 (Report of the Panel), the panel will transmit its final report to the Committee and to the Tribunal. The report will be binding on the Tribunal.

4. Where no application for the establishment of a panel under paragraph 3 has been filed within ten (10) days after the expiration of the sixty (60) day period referred to in paragraph 3, the Tribunal may proceed to decide on the matter.

Article 14.19: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

designating authority means the Secretary General or Assistant Secretary General or the next most senior member of the staff of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes, who is not a national of either Party;

Cross-border trade or supply of financial services means the supply of a financial service:

(a) from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;

(b) in the territory of a Party by a person of that Party to a person of the other Party; either

(c) by a national of a Party in the territory of the other Party;

but does not include the supply of a financial service in the territory of a Party by an investment in that territory;

public entity means a central bank, a monetary authority of a Party or any financial institution owned or controlled by a Party. For greater certainty, a public entity should not be considered a designated monopoly or a state enterprise for purposes of Chapter 11 (Competition Policy);

investment means "investment" as defined in Article 12.30 (Definitions), except that:

(a) a loan to, or a debt instrument issued by, a financial institution is an investment only when it is treated as capital for regulatory purposes by the Party in whose territory the financial institution is located; and

(b) a loan granted by a financial institution or a debt instrument owned by a financial institution is not an investment unless it is covered by subparagraph (a); and

for greater certainty:

(a) a loan to or debt instrument issued by a Party or a State enterprise of that Party is not an investment, regardless of the original date of maturity; and

(b) a loan made by, or a debt instrument owned by, a cross-border financial services provider, other than a loan to, or a debt instrument issued by, a financial institution, is an investment if such loan or debt instrument meets the investment criteria established in Article 12.30 (Definitions);

investor of a Party means "investor of a Party" as defined in Article 12.30 (Definitions);

financial institution means a financial intermediary or other enterprise that is authorized to do business and that is regulated or supervised as a financial institution in accordance with the law of the Party in whose territory it is located;

financial institution of the other Party means a financial institution, including a branch, located in the territory of a Party and controlled by a person of the other Party;

new financial service means a financial service not supplied in the territory of the Party, but which is supplied in the territory of the other Party, and includes a new form of supply of a financial service or the sale of a financial product that is not sold in the territory of the Party;

self-regulatory organization means a non-governmental entity that exercises its own or delegated regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service providers or financial institutions, including a stock or futures exchange, exchange, clearing house, or other body or association. For greater certainty, a self-regulatory entity should not be considered a designated monopoly for purposes of Chapter 11 (Competition Policy);

person of a Party means a national or enterprise of a Party. For greater certainty, it does not include a branch of a company from a non-Party country;

financial service provider of a Party means a person of a Party that is engaged in the business of supplying a financial service in the territory of that Party;

cross-border financial service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party who is engaged in the business of supplying a financial service in the territory of the Party and who seeks to supply or supplies a financial service through the cross-border supply of such service; and

financial service means a service of a financial nature. Financial services include all insurance and insurance-related services, and all banking and other financial services (with the exception of insurance), as well as all accessory or auxiliary services to a service of a financial nature. Financial services include the following activities;

insurance and insurance-related services

(a) Direct insurance (including coinsurance):

(i) life insurance;

(ii) insurance other than life;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) insurance intermediation activities, for example those of insurance brokers and agents; and

(d) ancillary insurance services, such as consulting, actuarial, risk assessment and loss compensation services;

banking and other financial services (excluding insurance):

(e) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;

(f) loans of all kinds, including personal loans, mortgage loans, factoring and financing of commercial transactions;

(g) financial leasing services;

(h) all payment and money transfer services, including credit, payment and debit cards, traveler's checks and bank drafts;

(i) guarantees and commitments;

(j) trading for own account or for the account of clients, whether on an exchange, in an over-the-counter market or otherwise, of the following:

(i) money market instruments (including checks, bills and certificates of deposit);

(ii) currencies;

(iii) derivative products, including but not limited to futures and options;

(iv) foreign exchange and interest rate market instruments, including products such as swaps and forward interest rate agreements;

(v) transferable securities;

(vi) other negotiable financial instruments and assets, metal included;

(k) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including subscription and placement as agents (publicly or privately), and the provision of services related to those issues;

(l) exchange brokerage;

(m) asset management, such as cash or securities portfolio management, collective investment management in all its forms, pension fund management, depository and custody services, and fiduciary services;

(n) payment and clearing services with respect to financial assets, including securities, derivative products and other negotiable instruments;

(o) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, by providers of other financial services; and

(p) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services with respect to any of the activities indicated in subparagraphs (e) to (o), including credit reports and analysis, studies and advice on investments and securities portfolios, and advice on acquisitions and on corporate restructuring and strategy.

 

 

 

Annex 14.6

Cross-border trade

 

Section A: Panama

Insurance and Insurance Related Services

1. Article 14.6.1 applies to cross-border trade or supply of financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross-border trade or supply of financial services in Article 14.19, with respect to:

(a) insurance covering the following risks:

(i) international maritime transport and launching and space transport (including satellites), which include some or all of the following elements: the goods being transported, the vehicle that transports the goods and the civil liability that may arise from them;

(ii) goods in international transit;

(b) reinsurance and retrocession;

(c) consultancy, risk assessment, actuary and loss adjustment; and

(d) insurance brokerage included in subparagraphs (a) and (b).

2. Article 14.6.1 applies to the cross-border supply or cross-border trade of financial services as defined in subparagraph (c) of the definition of cross-border supply of financial services in Article 14.19, with respect to insurance and financial services. related to insurance listed in paragraph 1.

Banking Services and other Financial Services (excluding insurance)

3. For Panama, Article 14.6.1 applies only with respect to:

(a) provision and transfer of financial information referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of financial service in Article 14.19;

(b) financial data processing and related software referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of financial service in Article 14.19 4; and

(c) advisory and other auxiliary financial services, 5excluding intermediation and credit reports and analysis, with respect to banking services and other financial services referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of financial service in Article 14.19.

 

Section B: Peru

Insurance and Insurance Related Services

1. Article 14.6.1 applies to the cross-border trade or supply of financial services, as defined in subparagraph (a) of the definition of cross-border trade or supply of services in Article 14.19, with respect to:

(a) insurance against risks relating to:

(i) maritime transport, commercial aviation and space launch and transport (including satellites), which cover any or all of the following elements: the goods being transported, the vehicle that transports the goods and the civil liability that may arise from the themselves; and

(ii) goods in international transit.

(b) reinsurance and retrocession services;

(c) consultants, actuaries, risk assessment and claims settlement services;

(d) insurance intermediation, such as agents or brokers, as referred to in subparagraph (c) of the definition of financial service in Article 14.19, of insurance of risks related to the services listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b);

2. Article 14.6.1 applies to the cross-border trade or supply of financial services, as defined in subparagraph (c) of the definition of cross-border trade or supply of financial services in Article 14.19, with respect to services listed in Article 14.6.1. paragraph 1.

Banking Services and other Financial Services (Excluding Insurance)

3. Article 14.6.1 applies only with respect to the provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and related software, referred to in subparagraph (o) of the definition of financial service in Article 14.19 6, subject to prior authorization from the relevant regulator, when required, and advisory services and other auxiliary financial services 7, excluding intermediation, related to banking and other financial services referred to in subparagraph (p) of the definition of financial service in Article 14.19 8.

 

 

 

Annex 14.15

Authorities Responsible for Financial Services

The authority of each Party responsible for financial services shall be:

a) in the case of Peru, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, in coordination with the regulatory entities;

b) in the case of Panama, the National Directorate for the Administration of International Trade Agreements and Trade Defense of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in consultation with the Superintendency of Banks, the Superintendency of Insurance and Reinsurance and the National Securities Commission,

or their respective successors.

 

 

Chapter 15

Maritime Services

 

Article 15.1: Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to the measures adopted or maintained by any of the Parties that affect maritime freight transport services and auxiliary maritime services provided by a maritime transport service provider of a Party and by service providers related to the maritime transport or auxiliary maritime services of a Party.

2. Measures affecting the supply of maritime transport services are within the scope of the obligations contained in the relevant provisions of Chapters 12 (Investment) and 13 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), and subject to any exceptions or non-conforming measures stipulated. in this Agreement that are applicable to such obligations.

3. Except as provided in paragraph 2, in the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, this Chapter shall control to the extent of the inconsistency.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, the Parties acknowledge their rights and obligations under international agreements issued by the different United Nations agencies, signed and ratified by each of the Parties, which regulate international maritime transport. of merchandise as well as auxiliary maritime services or activities related to maritime transport. 1

Article 15.2: Participation in Transportation

1. The Parties agree to cooperate in order to eliminate any obstacle that may impede the development of maritime trade between a port of one Party and a port of the other Party and that may interfere with the various activities related to said trade.

2. The Parties shall endeavor to guarantee the safety and/or protection of their ships and port facilities, the protection of the marine environment, the safety of human life at sea and the work of seafarers.

Article 15.3: National Treatment

A Party shall grant in its ports to the ships of the other Party, a treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to its own ships with respect to free access to ports, permanence and abandonment of ports, the use of port facilities and all the facilities guaranteed by it in connection with commercial operations and navigation, for ships, their crew and cargo. This provision will also apply to the assignment of docks and loading and unloading facilities.

Article 15.4: Agents and Representatives

A supplier of maritime transport services of a Party that operates in the territory of the other Party shall have the right to establish representations in the territory of that other Party, in accordance with its national legislation.

Article 15.5: Recognition of Vessel Documentation

1. A Party shall recognize the nationality of a ship of the other Party, by verifying through the on-board documents, that they have been issued by the competent authority of the other Party or by an organization recognized by said other Party, in accordance with your national law. For such purposes, it will be understood that:

(a) in the case of Peru, the competent authority to issue the on-board documents is the General Directorate of Captaincies and Coast Guards or an organization recognized by Peru;

(b) in the case of Panama, the competent authority to issue the on-board documents is the Panama Maritime Authority or an organization recognized by Panama.

2. Ship documents issued or recognized by one Party shall be recognized by the other Party.

Article 15.6: Recognition of Travel Documents of Crew Members of a Vessel of a Party

The Parties will recognize as travel documents of the crew members of a ship of a Party the valid passport and seaman 's book.

Article 15.7: Jurisdiction

Any dispute arising from the employment contract, between a ship owner of one Party and a crew member of the other Party, shall be referred for solution to the respective judicial or administrative authorities of the Party whose flag the ship belongs to.

Article 15.8: Cooperation

Recognizing the global nature of shipping, the Parties affirm the importance of:

(a) work together to overcome the obstacles that companies face when using the maritime transport service and share knowledge of good practices;

(b) share information and experiences on laws, regulations and programs that make the provision of port, maritime and navigation services efficient, as well as promote study and training opportunities for personnel related to the topic of port, maritime and navigation services , which are developed in specialized centers for this purpose;

(c) work to maintain cross-border flows of information, as an essential element to promote a dynamic environment that improves the options in the offers for the contracting of maritime transport services;

(d) actively participate in congresses, symposiums, business roundtables, fairs, hemispheric and multilateral forums to promote maritime and port development; and

(e) promote the exchange of students from the merchant marine schools of the Parties.

Article 15.9: Contact Points

1. The Parties establish the following points of contact,

(a) in the case of Peru: the General Directorate of Water Transport of the Ministry of Transport and Communications through the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism;

(b) in the case of Panama: the Panama Maritime Authority through the National Directorate of Administration of International Trade Treaties and Trade Defense.

or their successors.

2. The contact points will meet as necessary, to exchange information and to consider matters related to this Chapter, such as:

(a) the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(b) the development and adoption of common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the implementation of this Chapter; either

(c) the proposed modifications to this Chapter.

Article 15.10: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

vessel of a Party means any vessel that flies the flag of one of the Parties and that is registered in its registry in accordance with the legal provisions of said Party. This term does not include:

(a) ships used exclusively by the armed forces;

(b) vessels for hydrographic, oceanographic and scientific research;

(c) fishing vessels, vessels for research and inspection and for the treatment of fish; and

(d) vessels intended to provide services in bay traffic and port areas including piloting, towing, assistance and rescue at sea;

crew members of a ship of a Party mean all persons, including the master and employees, who are currently under contract for activities on board the ship during a voyage and included in the crew list or in the role of the ship's crew;

recognized organization means any Classification Society or other organization, acting on behalf of the competent authority in the field of inspections, surveys, issuance of certificates and documents, marking of ships and other regulatory tasks required under the conventions of the International Maritime Organization (IMO);

provider of services related to maritime transport or auxiliary maritime services of a Party means a person of a Party, who seeks to provide or provides an activity related to maritime transport or an auxiliary maritime service;

maritime transport service provider of a Party means a natural or legal person of a Party, or a vessel of a Party, that seeks to provide or provides a maritime transport service;

port of a Party means a seaport, including roadsteads, in the territory of that Party that has been approved and opened for international trade; and

Auxiliary maritime services or activities related to maritime transport means the supply of complementary services to the maritime activity inside or outside the port area destined to serve the cargo, the ship or crew, in accordance with the provisions of the legislation of each Party.

 

 

Chapter 16

Telecommunications

Article 16.1: Scope of Application

1. This Chapter applies to:

(a) the measures that a Party adopts or maintains, related to access to, and the use of, public telecommunications networks or services;

(b) the measures adopted or maintained by a Party, related to the obligations of providers of public telecommunications networks and services; and

(c) other measures adopted or maintained by a Party, related to public telecommunications networks or services 1.

2. This Chapter does not apply to measures that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to broadcasting or cable distribution of radio or television programming, unless they are intended to ensure that persons who operate broadcasting stations and cable systems have access to and use of public telecommunications networks and services.

3. This Chapter does not oblige a Party to:

(a) authorize a service provider of the other Party to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply public telecommunications networks or services, except as specifically provided in this Chapter;

(b) establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply public telecommunications networks or services not offered to the general public; or

(c) compel a service provider to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply public telecommunications services or services that are not offered to the general public.

4. Likewise, this Chapter shall not be interpreted in the sense of preventing a Party from prohibiting persons who operate private networks from using their networks to provide public telecommunications networks or services to third parties.

Article 16.2: Access to and Use of Public Telecommunications Networks and Services 2

1. Subject to the right of a Party to restrict the supply of a service in accordance with the reservations set out in its Schedules to Annexes I and II, a Party shall ensure that enterprises of the other Party have access to public networks or services of telecommunications and can use them in reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions, including what is established in paragraphs 2 to 6.

2. Each Party shall guarantee that companies of the other Party have access to, and may use, any public telecommunications networks or services offered within or through its borders, including private leased circuits and, to that effect, shall guarantee , subject to paragraphs 5 and 6, that such companies are permitted to:

(a) purchase or lease and connect terminals or other equipment that interfaces with public telecommunications networks;

(b) interconnect private leased or owned circuits with the public telecommunications networks and services of that Party, or with circuits leased or owned by another company;

(c) use operating protocols of your choice; and

(d) perform switching, signaling, and processing functions.

3. Each Party shall guarantee that a company of the other Party can use the public telecommunications networks and services to move information in its territory or cross-border, including for intra-company communications of said company and to have access to the information contained in databases. data or otherwise stored in a form that is machine-readable in the territory of any Party.

4. In addition to the provisions of Article 21.1 (General Exceptions), a Party may take necessary measures to:

(a) guarantee the security and confidentiality of messages; either

(b) protect the privacy of the personal data of telecommunications end users;

provided that such measures are not applied in such a way as to constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination, or a disguised restriction on trade.

For greater certainty, this Article does not prohibit any Party from requiring a license, concession or other type of authorization for a company to provide any public telecommunications service in its territory.

5. Each Party shall guarantee that conditions are not imposed on the access and use of public telecommunications networks or services, except those deemed necessary to:

(a) safeguard the public service responsibilities of providers of public telecommunications networks or services, in particular their ability to make their networks or services available to the general public;

(b) protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or services; either

(c) ensure that service providers of the other Party do not supply services that are limited by the reservations listed by the Parties in their Schedules to Annexes I and II.

6. As long as they satisfy the criteria established in paragraph 5, the conditions for access and use of public telecommunications networks or services may include:

(a) the requirement to use specific technical interfaces, including interface protocols, for interconnection with such networks and services;

(b) requirements, where necessary, for the interoperability of such services;

(c) the approval of the terminal equipment or other equipment that interfaces with the network and technical requirements related to the connection of such equipment to those networks;

(d) restrictions on the interconnection of private leased or owned circuits with said networks or services, or with owned or leased circuits by another company; and

(e) notification, registration and licenses.

Article 16.3: Procedures related to Licenses or Concessions

1. When a Party requires a provider to have a license, concession, permit, registration or other type of authorization to provide public telecommunications networks or services, the Party shall make available to the public:

(a) all applicable criteria and procedures for the granting of the license or concession, permit, registration or other type of authorization;

(b) the period of time normally required to make a decision with respect to the application for a license, concession, permit, registration or other type of authorization; and

(c) the terms and conditions of all licences, concessions, permits, registrations or other types of authorizations that it has issued.

2. The Party shall ensure that, if the request is denied, the applicant is informed of the reasons for its decision in accordance with the procedures of each Party.

Article 16.4: Behavior of Dominant or Important Suppliers Treatment of Dominant or Important Suppliers

1. Each Party shall guarantee that the dominant or important providers in its territory grant to the providers of public telecommunications services of another Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted by said important providers to their subsidiaries, their affiliates or to non-affiliated providers of services, regarding:

(a) the availability, supply, rates or quality of public telecommunications networks or services; and

(b) the availability of technical interfaces necessary for interconnection.

Competitive Safeguards

2. Each Party shall maintain appropriate measures to prevent suppliers that, individually or jointly, are dominant or important suppliers in its territory, employ or continue to employ anti-competitive practices.

3. The anti-competitive practices referred to in paragraph 1 include:

(a) engage in cross-subsidizing anti-competitive activities;

(b) use information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive results; and

(c) failure to make available to other service providers, in a timely manner, technical information about essential facilities and commercially relevant information that they need to provide services.

Interconnection

4. Subject to a Party's reservations in Annexes I and II, each Party shall ensure that interconnection is provided by a dominant or major provider:

(a) at any technically feasible point on the network;

(b) on terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications) and rates that are not discriminatory with respect to other providers;

(c) of a quality no less favorable than that supplied to its own like services, to like services of unaffiliated service providers or of their subsidiaries or other affiliates;

(d) in a timely manner, on terms, conditions (including technical standards and specifications) and cost-oriented rates that:

(i) are transparent and reasonable, taking into account economic feasibility; and

(ii) are sufficiently unbundled so that the provider does not need to pay for network components or facilities that are not required for the services to be provided; and

(e) upon request, at points additional to the network termination points offered to the majority of users, subject to charges that reflect the cost of construction of the necessary additional facilities.

Article 16.5: Universal Service

1. Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligations that it wishes to adopt or maintain.

2. Each party shall administer any universal service obligation that is adopted or maintained, in a transparent, non-discriminatory, competitively neutral manner and shall ensure that the universal service obligation is not more burdensome than necessary for the type of universal service defined by the part.

Article 16.6: Allocation and Use of Scarce Resources

1. Each Party shall administer its procedures for the allocation and use of scarce telecommunications resources, including frequencies, numbers, and rights of way, in an objective, timely, transparent, and non-discriminatory manner.

2. The measures of a Party related to the attribution and assignment of the spectrum and the administration of frequencies shall not be considered measures incompatible with Article 13.5 (Access to Markets), which applies to cross-border trade in services and to Chapter 12 (Investment ) through Article 13.1.4 (Scope of Application).

Consequently, each Party retains the right to maintain, establish and apply spectrum and frequency management policies that may limit the number of providers of public telecommunications services, provided that this is done in a manner consistent with other provisions of this Agreement. Likewise, each Party retains the right to allocate frequency bands taking into account present and future needs.

Article 16.7: Regulatory Body

1. Each Party shall ensure that its regulatory body is separate from and not accountable to any provider of public telecommunications networks or services.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the decisions and procedures of its regulatory body are impartial with respect to all market participants.

Article 16.8: Compliance

Each Party shall maintain appropriate procedures and authority to enforce its domestic measures relating to the obligations set out in Articles 16.2 and 16.4. Such procedures shall include the ability to impose appropriate sanctions, which may include, in accordance with the law of each Party, fines, corrective orders, injunctive relief, or the modification, suspension, or revocation of licenses or other authorizations.

Article 16.9: Settlement of National Telecommunications Disputes

Appeal before Regulatory Bodies 3

1. In addition to what is established in Article 19.4 (Administrative Procedures) and Article 19.5 (Review and Appeal), each Party must guarantee that:

(a) a provider of public telecommunications networks or services of the other Party may have timely recourse to its regulatory body or other relevant body of the Party, to resolve disputes relating to the measures of the Party that relate to the matters covered in the Articles 16.2 and 16.4, and that, in accordance with the national legislation of the Party, are under the jurisdiction of such bodies; and

(b) providers of public telecommunications networks or services of the other Party that request interconnection with a dominant or important provider in the territory of the Party, have recourse, within a reasonable and public period, after the provider requests interconnection before the regulatory body of the Party to resolve disputes regarding the terms, conditions, and rates for the interconnection with said dominant or important provider.

Reconsideration 4

2. Each Party shall guarantee that any provider of public telecommunications networks or services harmed, or whose interests are adversely affected by a resolution or decision of its regulatory body, may request said body to reconsider the resolution or decision 5.

Judicial Review

3. Any provider of public telecommunications networks or services that is harmed or whose interests have been adversely affected by a resolution or decision of the Party's telecommunications regulatory body, may obtain a judicial review of said resolution or decision by a independent judicial authority, in accordance with the national legislation of each Party. The request for judicial review will not constitute a basis for non-compliance with said resolution or decision unless it is suspended by the competent judicial body.

Article 16.10: Transparency

In addition to Articles 19.2 (Publication) and 19.3 (Provision of Information), and the other provisions in this Chapter related to the publication of information, each Party shall ensure that:

(a) the current status of the allocated frequency bands is made available to the public, but detailed identification of the frequencies allocated for specific government use shall not be required;

(b) the regulation of the regulatory body, including the bases for said regulation, is promptly published or made available to the public;

(c) interested persons are provided, to the extent possible, by adequately anticipated public notice, the opportunity to comment on any regulation that the telecommunications regulatory body proposes; and

(d) measures relating to public telecommunications networks or services are made available to the public, including measures relating to:

(i) fees and other terms and conditions of service;

(ii) technical interface specifications;

(iii) conditions to connect terminals or other equipment to the public telecommunications network; and

(iv) notification, permit, registration or license requirements, if applicable; and

(e) the information on the bodies responsible for the elaboration, modification and adoption of measures related to standards that affect access and use is of public knowledge.

Article 16.11: Abstention

The Parties recognize the importance of relying on market forces to achieve a wide range of alternatives in the provision of telecommunications services. To this end, each Party may refrain from applying a regulation to a telecommunications service when:

(a) compliance with said regulation is not necessary to prevent unjustified or discriminatory practices;

(b) compliance with said regulation is not necessary for the protection of consumers; either

(c) is compatible with the public interest, including the promotion and strengthening of competition between providers of public telecommunications networks or services.

Article 16.12: Relationship with Other Chapters

In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter in this Agreement, this Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

Article 16.13: International Standards and Organizations

The Parties recognize the importance of international standards for the global compatibility and interoperability of telecommunications networks or services, and undertake to promote these standards through the work of competent international organizations, including the International Telecommunication Union and the International Organization for Standardization.

Article 16.14: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

leased circuits means telecommunications facilities between two (2) or more designated points that are intended for dedicated use or for the availability of a certain customer or for other users chosen by that customer;

intra-business communications means telecommunications by which a company communicates internally with, or between its subsidiaries, branches and, subject to the domestic laws and regulations of a Party, with its affiliates, but does not include commercial or non-commercial services provided to companies that are not subsidiaries, branches or related affiliates or that are offered to customers or potential customers; for such purposes, the terms "subsidiaries" branches" and, where appropriate, "affiliates" shall be interpreted in accordance with the definition of each Party in its national legislation;

company means a "company" as defined in Article 1.5 (Definitions of General Application) and includes the branch of a company;

essential facilities means facilities of a public telecommunications network or service that:

(a) are supplied exclusively or predominantly by a single supplier or a limited number of suppliers; and

(b) it is not economically or technically feasible to replace them in order to provide a service;

interconnection means the link between providers of public telecommunications services, in order to allow users of one provider to communicate with users of another provider and access the services provided by another provider;

non-discriminatory means treatment no less favorable than that granted to any other user of similar public telecommunications networks or services, in similar circumstances;

regulatory body means the national body responsible for telecommunications regulation;

cost-oriented means cost-based, including reasonable profit, and may involve different cost calculation methodologies for different facilities or services;

dominant or important supplier 6' 7 means a provider of public telecommunications services, which has the ability to significantly affect the conditions of participation from the point of view of prices and supply in the relevant market for public telecommunications networks or services, as a result of:

(a) control of essential facilities; either

(b) the use of its position in the market;

network termination point means the final demarcation of the public telecommunications network at the user's premises;

public telecommunication network means public infrastructure 8telecommunications that allows telecommunications between two (2) or more defined points of a network;

public telecommunications service means any telecommunications service that a Party requires, either explicitly or in fact, to be offered to the general public and that generally involves real-time transmission. These services may include, inter alia, telephony and data transmission typically related to user-provided information between two (2) or more points without any end-to-end change in the form or content of the user information;

telecommunications means the transmission and reception of signals by an electromagnetic medium;

user means an end user or a provider of public telecommunications services; and

end user means an end consumer or subscriber of a public telecommunications service, including a service provider that is not a public telecommunications service provider.

 

 

Chapter 17

Temporary Entry for Business Persons

Article 17.1: General Principles

1. In addition to the provisions of Article 1.2 (Objectives), this Chapter reflects the preferential business relationship that exists between the Parties, the mutual objective of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with their national legislation and the provisions of Annexes 17.3 (1) (Categories of Business Persons) and 17.3 (2) (Permanence Periods), based on the principle of reciprocity and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for the temporary entry of business persons. It also reflects the need to guarantee border security and protect the national labor force and permanent employment in their respective territories.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures that affect natural persons of one Party seeking access to the labor market of the other Party 1., nor to measures related to citizenship, nationality, permanent residence, or permanent employment.

Article 17.2: General Obligations

1. Each Party shall apply its measures relating to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with Article 17.1, and in particular, shall apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delay or impairment in trade in goods or services or in the performance of marketing activities. investment under this Agreement.

2. For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the entry of natural persons or their temporary stay in its territory, including those measures necessary to protect the integrity of its borders and guarantee the orderly movement of natural persons through them, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that unduly delays or impairs the trade in goods or services or the performance of investment activities in accordance with this Agreement. The mere fact of requiring a visa for natural persons will not be considered as an undue impairment or impediment in the trade of goods or services, or investment activities in accordance with this Agreement.

Article 17.3: Temporary Entry Authorization

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry to business persons who comply with the immigration measures applicable to temporary entry and other measures related to public health and safety and national security, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, including the provisions contained in Annex 17.3 (1) (Categories of Business Persons) and in Annex 17.3 (2) (Terms of Permanence).

2. Each Party shall establish the value of the fees for processing applications for temporary entry of business persons, in such a way that they do not unduly delay or impair trade in goods or services or the conduct of investment activities in accordance with this Agreement. and do not exceed approximate administrative costs.

3. The authorization of temporary entry under this Chapter does not replace the requirements required for the exercise of a profession or activity in accordance with the specific regulations in force in the territory of the Party that authorizes temporary entry.

Article 17.4: Exchange of Information

1. In addition to Article 19.2 (Publication), and recognizing the importance to the Parties of the transparency of information on the temporary entry of business persons, each Party shall:

(a) provide the other Party with the relevant materials that allow it to know its measures related to this Chapter; and

(b) no later than six (6) months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, material that explains the requirements for the temporary entry of business persons, including references to the applicable national legislation, in accordance with this Chapter, so that business persons of the other Party can know them.

2. Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to the other Party, upon request and in accordance with their respective national legislation, the information related to the granting of authorizations for temporary entry of business persons, in accordance with this Chapter, to persons of businesses of the other Party to whom immigration documentation has been issued, in order to include specific information referring to each category authorized in Annex 17.3 (1) (Categories of Business Persons).

Article 17.5: Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons

1. The Parties establish a Committee for the Temporary Entry of Business Persons (hereinafter the Committee), made up of representatives of each Party 2.

2. The functions of the Committee will include, among other matters of mutual interest:

(a) review the implementation and administration of this Chapter;

(c) report to the Commission on the implementation and administration of this Chapter, when applicable;

(d) establish the procedures for the exchange of information on the measures that affect the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with this Chapter;

(e) consider developing measures to further facilitate the temporary entry of business persons;

(f) the observance of matters established in accordance with Article 17.6; and

(g) deal with any other matter related to this Chapter.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will meet at least one (1) time every three (3) years, on the date and according to the agenda previously agreed by the Parties. The Parties will determine those cases in which extraordinary meetings may be held.

4. The meetings may be held by any means agreed by the Parties. When they are face-to-face, they will be held alternately in the territory of each Party, and it will be up to the Host Party to organize the meeting.

5. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Committee will be permanent and will develop its work rules.

6. All decisions of the Committee must be taken by mutual agreement.

Article 17.6: Cooperation

Taking into account the principles established in Article 17.1, the Parties shall endeavor to the extent possible:

(a) cooperate to strengthen institutional capacity and promote technical assistance among migration authorities;

(b) exchange information and experiences on regulations and implementation of programs and technology in the framework of migration issues, including those related to the use of biometric technology, advance passenger information systems, frequent flyer programs, and security in travel documents ; and

(c) strive to actively coordinate in multilateral fora, to promote the facilitation of temporary entry of business persons.

Article 17.7: Settlement of Disputes

1. A Party may not initiate proceedings under Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement, in respect of a refusal to grant temporary entry under this Chapter unless:

(a) the matter concerns a recurring practice; and

(b) the affected business person has exhausted, in accordance with applicable national law, the administrative remedies available to him in respect of that particular matter.

2. The remedies referred to in subparagraph 1(b) shall be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution within one (1) year from the start of an administrative proceeding, and the resolution has been delayed. for causes that are not attributable to the affected business person.

Article 17.8: Relationship with other Chapters

1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as imposing any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures; however, the provisions of this Chapter and those pertinent of Chapter 1 (Initial Provisions and General Definitions), Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement), Chapter 19 (Transparency), Chapter 20 (Treaty Administration), Chapter 21 shall apply. (Exceptions) and Chapter 22 (Final Provisions).

2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in the sense that it imposes obligations or commitments with respect to other Chapters of this Agreement.

Article 17.9: Transparency in the Processing of Requests

1. In addition to Chapter 19 (Transparency), each Party shall establish or maintain adequate mechanisms to respond to inquiries from persons interested in requests and procedures regarding the temporary entry of business persons.

2. Each Party shall endeavor, within a reasonable period of time in accordance with its national law, after considering that the application for temporary entry is complete in accordance with its national law, to inform the applicant of the decision taken regarding his application. At the request of the applicant, the Party shall endeavor to provide, without undue delay, information regarding the status of its application.

Article 17.10: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

business activities means those legitimate activities of a commercial nature created and operated for the purpose of making a profit in the market. It does not include the possibility of obtaining employment, or salary or remuneration from a labor source in the territory of a Party;

executive means a business person in an organization who primarily directs the management of the organization, exercises broad decision-making, and receives only general supervision or direction from senior-level executives, the board of directors, and/or shareholders of the business;

temporary entry means entry into the territory of a Party by a business person of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;

specialist means an employee who possesses specialized knowledge of the company's products or services, technical expertise, or an advanced level of experience or knowledge of the company's processes and procedures;

manager means a business person in an organization who primarily directs the organization or a department or subdivision of the organization, supervises and controls the work of other supervisory, professional, or managerial employees, has the authority to hire and fire, or take other personnel-related actions (such as granting promotions or furloughs) and exercises discretionary authority in day-to-day operations;

national means "national" as defined in Article 1.5 (Definitions of General Application), but does not include permanent residents; and

business person means a national of a Party who is engaged in trade in goods or supply of services, or in investment activities.

 

 

 

ANNEX 17.3 (1)

Business Person Categories

 

Section A: Business Visitors

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry to the business person who intends to carry out any of the business activities mentioned in Appendix 1 to this Section, without requiring him to obtain a work permit or employment authorization, to condition that said person, in addition to complying with the existing immigration measures applicable to temporary entry, exhibits:

(a) evidence establishing the nationality of a Party;

(b) documentation that proves that the business person will undertake any business activity established in Appendix 1 of this Section and indicates the purpose of their entry; and

(c) proof of the international character of the proposed business activity and that the business person does not intend to enter the local labor market.

2. Each Party shall provide that a business person meets the requirements of subparagraph 1(c) when it demonstrates that:

(a) the primary source of remuneration for the proposed business activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; and

(b) that person's principal place of business and where profits are actually earned is predominantly outside the territory of the Party granting temporary entry.

Normally, a Party will accept a statement as to the principal place of business and the actual place where profits actually accrue. In the event that the Party requires any additional verification in accordance with its legislation, it will normally consider a letter from the employer or the organization it represents stating such circumstances to be sufficient proof.

3. Neither Party may:

(a) require, as a condition of granting temporary entry under paragraph 1, prior approval procedures or other procedures of similar effect; neither

(b) impose or maintain any numerical restriction on temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1.

4. A Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this Section to obtain a visa prior to entry.

 

 

Appendix 1: Business Visitors

Business activities covered under Section A include:

1. Meetings and Consultancies:

Business persons attending meetings, seminars or conferences, or carrying out consultations with business partners and consultancies.

2. Research and Design:

Technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out independent research or research for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

3. Cultivation, Manufacture and Production:

Procurement and production personnel, at the managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

4. Marketing:

(a) Market researchers and analysts who carry out research or analysis independently or for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

(b) Trade show and promotional personnel attending trade conventions.

5. Sales:

(a) Sales representatives and agents who take orders or negotiate contracts for goods or services for an enterprise established in the territory of the other Party, but who do not deliver the goods or supply the services.

(b) Buyers who make purchases for a company established in the territory of the other Party.

6. Post-Sale Services:

Installation, repair, maintenance and supervisory personnel, who have the essential specialized technical knowledge to comply with the contractual obligation of the seller; and who supply services or train workers to supply such services pursuant to a warranty or other service contract in connection with the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer software purchased from a company established outside the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, during the term of the warranty or service contract.

7. General Services:

(a) Management and supervisory personnel, who participate in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.

(b) Public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions.

(c) Tourism personnel (excursion and travel agents, tourist guides or travel operators), who attend or participate in conventions.

(d) Specialized kitchen personnel, who attend or participate in gastronomic events or exhibitions, train or provide advice to clients, related to gastronomy in the territory of the other Party.

(e) Translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company located in the territory of the other Party, except for services that, in accordance with the legislation of the Party authorizing temporary entry, must be provided by licensed translators.

(f) Providers of information and communication technology services that attend meetings, seminars or conferences or that carry out consultancies.

(g) Marketers and consultants in the development of franchises who wish to offer their services in the territory of the other Party.

 

Section B: Traders and Investors

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue proving immigration documentation to the business person who intends to:

(a) carry on substantial trade in goods or services, principally between the territory of the Party of which he is a national and the territory of the Party to which entry is sought; either

(b) establish, develop or manage an investment, in which the business person or his company has committed or is in the process of committing a significant amount of capital, in accordance with national law,

provided that the business person also complies with the existing immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.

2. Neither Party may:

(a) require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither

(b) impose or maintain numerical restrictions in relation to temporary entry under paragraph 1.

3. A Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this Section to obtain a visa prior to entry.

Section C: Intra-Company Personnel Transfers

1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to a business person employed by a company who is transferred to serve as an executive, manager, or specialist in said company or in one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, provided that such person and that company comply with the existing immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. Each Party may require that the person has been employed by the company, continuously, for one (1) year, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of filing the application.

2. Each Party may require the approval of the employment contract by the competent authority, as a prerequisite for the authorization of temporary entry.

3. For greater certainty, nothing in this Section may be interpreted in a way that affects the labor law or the professional practice of each Party.

4. For greater certainty, in accordance with its national legislation, a Party may require that the transferred business person provide the services under a subordinate relationship in the destination company.

5. A Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this Section to obtain a visa prior to entry.

 

 

 

Annex 17.3 (2): Term of Permanence

 

Panama

In the case of Panama, the length of stay is established at the discretion of the National Immigration Service within the following periods:

 

Section A: Business Visitors

Term of up to ninety (90) days, renewable up to the maximum possible duration in accordance with the applicable provisions in force.

 

Section B: Traders and Investors

1. Term of up to ninety (90) days, renewable up to the maximum possible duration in accordance with the current applicable provisions.

2. In the case of Investors seeking to develop or manage an investment, they will be granted the term of permanence established by the applicable national immigration legislation.

 

Section C: Intra-Company Personnel Transfers

Term of up to one (1) year, renewable up to the maximum possible duration in accordance with the current applicable provisions.

 

Peru

 

Section A: Business Visitors

You are granted a period of stay of up to one hundred eighty-three (183) days. (Immigration Quality: Business)

 

Section B: Traders and Investors

1. Merchants:

You are granted a stay period of up to one hundred eighty-three (183) days (Migratory Status: Business).

2. Investors:

(a) investors in the process of committing an investment: they are granted a stay period of up to one hundred eighty-three (183) days (Migratory Quality: Business).

(b) independent: they are granted the period of stay established by the applicable immigration legislation (Migratory Quality: Independent).

 

Section C: Intra-Company Personnel Transfers

A period of stay of up to one (1) year is granted, renewable for consecutive periods as many times as requested, to the extent that the conditions that motivated its granting are maintained (Migratory Status: Worker).

 

 

Chapter 18

Dispute Resolution

Article 18.1: Cooperation

The Parties will at all times endeavor to reach an agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement and will make every effort, through cooperation, consultation or otherwise, to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that might affect its operation.

Article 18.2: Scope of Application

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the prevention or settlement of disputes between Parties relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement, or where a Party considers that :

(a) an existing or proposed measure of the other Party could be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement; either

(b) the other Party has otherwise failed to comply with its obligations under this Agreement.

Article 18.3: Election of the Forum

1. In the event of any dispute arising under this Agreement and under another free trade agreement to which the disputing Parties are party or the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party may choose the forum to resolve the dispute.

2. Once the complaining Party has requested the establishment of a panel under one of the treaties referred to in paragraph 1, the selected forum shall be exclusive of the others.

Article 18.4: Consultations

1. A Party may request in writing to the other Party consultations regarding any current or proposed measure or any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.2.

2. The requesting Party shall seek to initiate consultations by means of a written request to the other Party, stating the reasons for its request, including identification of the measure or other matter at issue and an indication of the legal grounds for the claim.

3. The other Party will respond in writing, and except as provided in paragraph 4, will hold consultations with the requesting Party within a maximum period of thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree to another term.

4. In cases of urgency, including those related to perishable merchandise or merchandise or services that quickly lose their commercial value, such as certain seasonal merchandise or services, consultations will begin within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the request by the other Party.

5. The requesting Party may require the other Party to make available the personnel of its governmental institutions or other regulatory entities that have technical knowledge of the subject matter of the consultations.

6. The Parties will make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter through consultations, in accordance with the provisions of this Article. For these purposes, each Party:

(a) provide sufficient information to permit a full examination of the current or proposed measure or of any other matter that could affect the operation and application of this Agreement; and

(b) give confidential or proprietary information received during consultations the same treatment as the Party that provided it.

7. Consultations will be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the Parties in proceedings carried out under this Chapter.

8. Consultations may be carried out in person or through any technological means agreed by the Parties. In the event that the consultation is in person, it must be held in the capital of the consulted Party, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

Article 18.5: Establishment of a Panel

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, and without prejudice to paragraph 5, if a matter referred to in Article 18.4 has not been resolved within:

(a) forty (40) days after receiving the request for consultations;

(b) twenty-five (25) days after receipt of the request for consultations in the case of matters referred to in Article 18.4.4; either

(c) any other term that the consulting Parties agree,

the complaining Party may refer the matter to a panel.

2. The complaining Party shall send the other Party the written request for the establishment of a panel, in which it must indicate the reason for the request, indicate the specific measures or other matter that is the subject of the complaint, and provide a brief summary of the grounds. legal documents of the claim with enough information to present the problem clearly.

3. With the presentation of the application, it will be understood that the panel has been established.

4. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the panel shall be integrated and perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

5. A panel may not be established to review a proposed measure.

Article 18.6: Qualifications of Panelists

All panelists must:

(a) have specialized knowledge or experience in Law, international trade, other matters related to this Agreement or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;

(b) be selected strictly on the basis of their objectivity, impartiality, reliability and good judgment;

(c) be independent, not related to any of the Parties and not receive instructions from them; and

(d) comply with the Code of Conduct established by the Commission, in accordance with Article 20.1.2 (d) (The Free Trade Commission).

Article 18.7: Panel Selection

1. The panel will be made up of three (3) members.

2. Each Party, within fifteen (15) days after the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of the panel, shall appoint one (1) panelist, propose up to four (4) non-national candidates of the Parties for the chair of the panel and notify the other Party in writing of the appointment of its panelist and of its proposed candidates for the position of chair of the panel.

3. If a Party does not designate one (1) panelist within the stipulated term, the latter shall be selected by the other Party within the following five (5) days, among the candidates that have been proposed for the presidency.

4. The Parties, within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of a panel, shall endeavor to reach an agreement and designate the chair among the candidates that have been proposed. If in that time the Parties cannot agree on the president, the president will be selected by lot among the candidates that have been proposed, within a period of seven (7) additional days after the expiration of the thirty (30) term. days.

5. If a panelist appointed by a Party resigns, is removed, or is unable to serve, that Party shall appoint a new panelist within fifteen (15) days, otherwise the new panelist shall be appointed in accordance with paragraph 3. If the chairperson of the panel resigns, is removed or is unable to serve, the Parties will agree to the appointment of a replacement within fifteen (15) days, otherwise the replacement will be appointed in accordance with paragraph 3. paragraph 4. If there are no other candidates remaining, each Party shall propose up to three (3) additional candidates within an additional twenty (20) days and the panelist or chair shall be selected by lot within seven (7 ) following days among the proposed candidates. Anyways,

Article 18.8: Rules of Procedure

1. The Commission shall establish the Rules of Procedure, in accordance with Article 20.1.2 (d) (The Free Trade Commission).

2. Any panel established in accordance with this Chapter will follow the Rules of Procedure. A panel may establish, in consultation with the Parties, supplementary rules of procedure that do not conflict with the provisions of this Chapter.

3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Rules of Procedure will ensure:

(a) that the procedures will guarantee the right, at least to a hearing before the panel, as well as the opportunity to present arguments and replies in writing;

(b) that the hearings before the panel, the deliberations, as well as all the writings and communications presented in the proceeding, will be confidential;

(c) that all submissions and comments made by a Party to the panel will be forwarded to the other Party;

(d) the protection of information that either Party designates as confidential information; and

(e) the possibility of using technological means to carry out the proceedings, provided that the means used does not diminish the right of a Party to participate in the proceedings and that their authenticity can be guaranteed.

4. Unless the Parties agree otherwise during the fifteen (15) days following the establishment of the panel, the mandate of the panel will be:

"To examine, objectively and in light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the matter referred to in the request for the establishment of the panel and formulate conclusions, resolutions and recommendations in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.9."

5. If a Party wishes the panel to make findings on the level of adverse trade effects on a Party from any measure found to be inconsistent with Agreement obligations, the terms of reference shall so indicate.

6. At the request of a Party or on its own initiative, the panel may gather information and request technical advice from the experts it deems necessary, provided that the Parties so agree, and in accordance with the terms and conditions that those Parties agree upon, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.

7. The panel may delegate to the chair the authority to make administrative and procedural decisions.

8. The panel may, in consultation with the Parties, modify any term corresponding to its proceedings and make other administrative or procedural adjustments that may be required for the transparency and efficiency of the procedure.

9. The conclusions, determinations and recommendations of the panel, in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.9, shall be adopted by a majority of its members.

10. Panelists may present separate opinions on matters where a unanimous decision was not reached. The panel will not be able to reveal the identity of the panelists who have expressed their opinion in majority or minority.

11. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the expenses of the panel, including the remuneration of its members, will be assumed in equal parts, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.

Article 18.9: Report of the Panel

1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the panel shall base its report on the relevant provisions of this Agreement, on the pleadings and submissions of the Parties, or on any information received by it pursuant to Article 18.8.

2. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the panel will present the report to the Parties, within one hundred and twenty (120) days or ninety (90) days in urgent cases, counted from the appointment of the last panelist.

3. Only in exceptional cases, if the panel considers that it cannot issue its report within one hundred and twenty (120) days or ninety (90) days in urgent cases, it must inform the Parties in writing of the reasons justifying the delay. , along with an estimate of the time in which you will issue your report. Any delay shall not exceed an additional term of thirty (30) days, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

4. The report will contain:

(a) the conclusions, based on fact and law;

(b) determinations as to whether or not a Party has complied with its obligations under this Agreement and any other determinations requested in the mandate; and

(c) its recommendations for the implementation of the decision, when any of the Parties so requests.

5. The panel shall not disclose confidential information in its report, but may state conclusions derived from that information.

6. Unless the Parties agree on a different term, the Parties shall make the report available to the public within fifteen (15) days of its receipt, subject to the protection of confidential information.

Article 18.10: Compliance with the Report

1. Upon receipt of a panel report, the Parties will reach an agreement on the resolution of the dispute, which will be in accordance with the panel's findings and recommendations, if any, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

2. If possible, the solution will consist of the elimination of any measure that does not comply with the provisions of this Agreement.

3. If the Parties do not agree to a solution within thirty (30) days after the submission of the report, or in such other period as the Parties agree, the Party complained against, at the request of the Complaining Party, shall initiate negotiations with a view to agree compensation. Said compensation will be temporary and will be granted until the controversy is resolved.

Article 18.11: Default - Suspension of Benefits

1. If the Parties:

(a) they have not reached an agreement on the resolution of the dispute and compensation has not been requested in accordance with Article 18.10, within thirty (30) days of the presentation of the report; either

(b) fail to agree to compensation pursuant to Article 18.10, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request by the complaining Party; either

(c) have reached an agreement on the settlement of the dispute or compensation in accordance with Article 18.10 and the complaining Party considers that the Party complained against has not complied with the terms of the agreement,

the complaining Party may, upon notice to the complained Party, suspend benefits of equivalent effect to such complained Party. In the notification, the complaining Party will specify the level of benefits it proposes to suspend.

2. When considering benefits to be suspended pursuant to paragraph 1:

(a) the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure or other matter that the panel has concluded is inconsistent with its obligations under this Agreement; and

(b) the complaining Party that considers it impracticable or ineffective to suspend benefits within the same sector or sectors may suspend benefits in other sectors.

3. The suspension of benefits will be temporary and the complaining Party will only apply it until:

(a) that the measure considered inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement is brought into conformity with it; either

(b) the time when the Parties reach an agreement on the settlement of the dispute; either

(c) that the panel described in Article 18.12 concludes in its report that the Party complained against has complied.

Article 18.12: Compliance Review and Suspension of Benefits

1. A Party may, by written communication to the other Party, request that the panel established pursuant to Article 18.5 be reconstituted to determine:

(a) if the level of suspension of benefits applied by the complaining Party in accordance with Article 18.11.1 is manifestly excessive; either

(b) about any disagreement as to the existence of the measures taken to comply with the panel report originally established or as to the compatibility of such measures with this Agreement.

2. In the written communication, the Party shall indicate the specific measures or issues in dispute and provide a brief summary of the legal basis for the claim that is sufficient to present the problem clearly.

3. If the original panel or any of its members are unable to reconvene, the provisions of Article 18.7 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

4. The provisions of Articles 18.8 and 18.9 govern mutatis mutandis for the procedures adopted and the reports issued by a panel that is reconstituted under the terms of this Article, except that, pursuant to the provisions of Article 18.8. 8, the panel will present a report within sixty (60) days from the appointment of the last panelist, if the request refers to subparagraph 1 (a) and within ninety (90) days, if the application refers to subparagraph 1(b).

5. A panel reconstituted pursuant to subparagraph 1(b) shall determine whether to terminate any suspension of benefits. If the panel is reconstituted pursuant to subparagraph 1(a) and determines that the level of suspended benefits is manifestly excessive, it shall set the level of benefits it deems to be of equivalent effect.

Article 18.13: Matters Referring to Judicial and Administrative Proceedings

1. If a difference arises regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement in any internal judicial or administrative proceeding of a Party that one of the Parties considers merits its intervention, or if a court or administrative body requests the opinion of a Party , that Party shall notify the other Party. The Commission will endeavor to agree, as soon as possible, on an appropriate response.

2. The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall present the interpretation agreed upon by the Commission before the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of the instance in question.

3. If the Commission fails to reach an agreement, each Party may present its own opinions before the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of the instance in question.

Article 18.14: Rights of Individuals

Neither Party may grant a right of action under its national law against the other Party alleging that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with this Agreement.

Article 18.15: Alternative Means for Dispute Resolution

1. To the greatest extent possible, each Party shall promote and facilitate the use of arbitration and other alternative means of solving international commercial disputes between individuals in the free trade area.

2. For these purposes, each Party shall have adequate procedures that ensure the observance of the arbitration agreements and the recognition and execution of the arbitral awards that are pronounced in those controversies.

3. A Party shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of paragraph 2 if it is a party to the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done in New York on June 10, 1958, and conforms to its provisions.

Article 18.16: Suspension and Termination of the Procedure

1. The Parties may agree to suspend the work of the panel at any time for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months following the date of such agreement. If the work of the panel remains suspended for more than twelve (12) months, the authority of the panel will lapse, unless the Parties agree otherwise. If the authority of the panel lapses and the Parties have not reached an agreement on the settlement of the dispute, nothing in this Article shall prevent a Party from requesting a new proceeding on the same matter.

2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings before a panel by means of a joint notification to the chair of the panel, at any time prior to the notification of the report.

 

 

Chapter 19

Transparency

Article 19.1: Contact Points

1. Each Party shall designate within sixty (60) days following the date of entry into force of this Agreement, a contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.

2. At the request of the other Party, the contact point will indicate the office or official responsible for the matter and will provide the necessary support to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.

Article 19.2: Publication

1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative rulings of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made available for the knowledge of interested persons and the public. other part.

2. To the extent possible, each Party:

(a) publish any measure referred to in paragraph 1 that it proposes to adopt, relating to matters covered by this Agreement; and

(b) provide interested persons and the other Party with an opportunity to comment on such measures.

Article 19.3: Provision of Information

1. At the request of a Party, and to the extent permitted by its domestic law, the other Party will promptly provide information and respond to questions regarding any matter that could materially affect this Agreement.

2. Any provision of information provided under this Article shall be made without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.

Article 19.4: Administrative Procedures

In order to administer in a compatible, impartial and reasonable manner all measures of general application that affect the matters covered by this Agreement, each Party shall ensure that, in its administrative procedures in which the measures mentioned in Article 19.2.1 are applied with respect to to particular persons, goods or services of the other Party in specific cases:

(a) whenever possible, persons of the other Party who are directly affected by a proceeding receive, in accordance with national law, reasonable notice of the commencement of the proceeding, including a description of its nature, a statement of the legal basis under at which the proceeding is initiated and a general description of all the issues in dispute;

(b) when time, the nature of the proceeding and the public interest permit, such persons are given a reasonable opportunity to present facts and arguments in support of their claims, prior to any final administrative action; and

(c) its procedures conform to national law.

Article 19.5: Review and Appeal

1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial or administrative tribunals or procedures for the purposes of prompt review and, where warranted, correction of final administrative actions related to matters covered by this Agreement. These courts will be impartial and will not be linked to the agency or authority in charge of the administrative application of the law, and will not have a substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.

2. Each Party shall ensure that, before such courts or in such proceedings, the Parties have the right to:

(a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions; and

(b) a decision based on evidence and arguments or, in cases where required by national legislation, on the file compiled by the administrative authority.

3. Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with the means of challenge or subsequent review that could be resorted to in accordance with its national legislation, said resolutions are implemented by its agencies or authorities and govern their practice in relation to the administrative action in question.

Article 19.6: Specific Rules

The provisions of this Chapter are understood without prejudice to the specific rules established in other Chapters of this Agreement.

Article 19.7: Definitions

For the purposes of this Chapter:

administrative resolution of general application means an administrative resolution or interpretation that applies to all persons and factual situations that generally fall within its scope, and that establishes a rule of conduct, but does not include:

(a) resolutions or rulings in an administrative proceeding that applies to a particular person, good or service of the other Party in a specific case; either

(b) a resolution that resolves in respect of a particular act or practice.

 

 

Chapter 20

Treaty Administration

Article 20.1: The Free Trade Commission

1. The Parties establish the Free Trade Commission, made up of representatives at the Ministerial level of each Party, in accordance with Annex 20.1 (The Free Trade Commission), or by the persons they designate.

2. The Commission shall:

(a) supervise the application of the Treaty;

(b) oversee the further development of the Treaty;

(c) supervise the work of all bodies established under this Agreement, including committees and working groups;

(d) approve at their first meeting, unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Rules of Procedure and the Code of Conduct referred to in Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement), as well as modify them as necessary;

(e) set the amount of remuneration and expenses that will be paid to the members of the panels contemplated in Chapter 18 (Dispute Resolution);

(f) take cognizance of any other matter that could affect the operation of the Agreement; and

(g) establish and modify its rules of procedure.

3. The Commission may:

(a) establish and delegate responsibilities to bodies established under this Agreement;

(b) modify in pursuance of the objectives of this Agreement:

(i) the Schedules established in Annex 2.3 (Tariff Elimination Program) by improving tariff conditions for market access, which includes the possibility of accelerating tariff elimination and including one or more goods excluded in the Schedule of Tariff Elimination;

(ii) the rules of origin established in Annex 3 (Specific Rules of Origin), Annex 3.16 (Certificate of Origin), Annex 3.17 (Declaration of Origin); and

(iii) Annex 10.1 (Coverage Annex);

(c) issue interpretations of the provisions of this Agreement;

(d) analyze any proposed amendment to this Agreement in order to make a recommendation to the Parties;

(e) review the impacts of the Agreement on micro, small and medium-sized enterprises of the Parties;

(f) request the advice of non-governmental persons or groups; and

(g) adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions as agreed by the Parties.

4. Each Party shall implement, in accordance with its national legislation, any modification referred to in subparagraph 3 (b), within the period agreed by the Parties.

5. All decisions of the Commission will be adopted by mutual agreement.

6. The Commission will meet at least one (1) time a year in regular session, unless the Commission decides otherwise. The ordinary sessions of the Commission will be held alternately in the territory of the Parties or through any technological means.

Article 20.2: Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement

1. Each Party shall designate a Free Trade Agreement Coordinator, in accordance with Annex 20.2 (Free Trade Agreement Coordinators).

2. The Coordinators will work jointly in the development of agendas, as well as in other preparations for the meetings of the Commission and will give the appropriate follow-up to the decisions of the Commission.

Article 20.3: Administration of Dispute Settlement Procedures

1. Each Party shall:

(a) designate an office to provide administrative support to the panels contemplated in Chapter 18 (Dispute Settlement) and perform other functions under the instructions of the Commission; and

(b) notify the other Party of the address of its designated office.

2. Each Party shall be responsible for the operation and costs of its designated office.

 

 

Annex 20.1: The Free Trade Commission

The Free Trade Commission will be made up of:

(a) in the case of Panama, the Minister of Commerce and Industry; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the Minister of Foreign Trade and Tourism, or his successors.

 

 

Annex 20.2: Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement

The Coordinators of the Free Trade Agreement will be for:

(a) in the case of Panama, the Office of the Head of International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Commerce and Industries or whoever it designates; and

(b) in the case of Peru, the agency designated by the Vice Minister of Foreign Trade,

or their successors.

 

 

Chapter 21

exceptions

Article 21.1: General Exceptions

1. For the purposes of Chapter 2 (Merchandise Access to Markets), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and Origin Procedures), Chapter 4 (Trade Facilitation and Customs Procedures), Chapter 5 (Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters) , Chapter 6 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade), Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, mutatis mutandis. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX (b) of the GATT 1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, and that Article XX (g) of the GATT from 1994it applies to measures relating to the conservation of exhaustible living or non-living natural resources.

2. For the purposes of Chapter 13 (Cross-Border Trade in Services), Chapter 15 (Maritime Services), Chapter 16 (Telecommunications) and Chapter 17 (Temporary Entry of Business Persons), Article XIV of the WTO GATS ( including the footnotes) are incorporated into and form an integral part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV (b) of the WTO GATS include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.

Article 21.2: Essential Security

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to:

(a) compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; either

(b) prevent a Party from applying measures it considers necessary to comply with its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or to protect its essential security interests.

Article 21.3: Taxation

1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax measures.

2. Nothing provided in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties derived from any tax agreement. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any of these agreements, the agreement shall control to the extent of the inconsistency. In the case of a tax agreement between the Parties, the competent authorities under that agreement shall have sole responsibility for determining whether there is any inconsistency between this Agreement and that agreement.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Article 2.2 (National Treatment) and those other provisions in this Agreement necessary to give effect to said Article, shall apply to tax measures to the same extent as Article III of the GATT 1994 ; and

(b) Article 2.11 (Export Taxes) shall apply to tax measures.

4. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2:

(a) Articles 13.3 (National Treatment) and 14.2 (National Treatment) shall apply to tax measures on income, capital gains, or on the taxable capital of companies referring to the acquisition or consumption of specific services, except that nothing in this subparagraph shall preclude a Party from conditioning the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage related to the acquisition or consumption of specific services, on the requirement to supply the service in its territory; and

(b) Articles 12.2 (National Treatment) and 12.3 (Most Favored Nation Treatment), 13.3 (National Treatment) and 13.4 (Most Favored Nation Treatment), and 14.2 (National Treatment) and 14.3 (Most Favored Nation) shall apply to all tax measures, except those on income, capital gains, or taxable capital of companies, taxes on wealth, inheritance, donations, and generation-skipping transfers .

5. Paragraph 4 may not:

(a) impose any most-favored-nation obligation with respect to the benefit granted by a Party pursuant to any tax treaty;

(b) apply to any non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure;

(c) apply to the continuation or prompt renewal of a non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure;

(d) apply to an amendment to a non-conforming provision of any existing tax measure, as long as that amendment does not reduce, at the time of effecting it, its degree of conformity with any of the articles mentioned in paragraph 4;

(e) apply to the adoption or application of any tax measure aimed at ensuring the equitable or effective application or collection of taxes (as permitted under Article XIV(d) of the WTO GATS ) ; either

(f) apply to a provision that conditions the receipt, or continued receipt of an advantage in connection with contributions to, or income from, pension trusts or pension plans, on the requirement that the Party maintain continuing jurisdiction over the pension fiduciary or pension plan.

6. Subject to paragraph 2 and without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under paragraph 3, paragraphs 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Article 12.6 (Performance Requirements) shall apply to tax measures.

7.

(a) Article 12.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) and 12.16 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) shall apply to a tax measure that is alleged to be expropriatory. However, no investor may invoke Article 12.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) as the basis of a claim when it has been determined in accordance with this paragraph that the measure does not constitute an expropriation 1. An investor who intends to invoke Article 12.10 (Expropriation and Compensation) with respect to a tax measure, must first submit the matter to the competent authorities of the defendant and claimant Party, indicated in subparagraph (b), at the time of delivering in writing. notification of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration pursuant to Article 12.16 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration), so that said authorities may determine whether the tax measure constitutes an expropriation. If the competent authorities do not agree to examine the matter or if, having agreed to examine it, they do not agree that the measure does not constitute an expropriation, within a period of six (6) months after the matter has been submitted to them, the investor may submit your claim to arbitration,

(b) For the purposes of this paragraph, competent authorities means:

(i) in the case of Panama, the General Directorate of Revenue of the Ministry of Economy and Finance; and

(ii) in the case of Peru, the Ministry of Economy and Finance,

or their successors.

8. For the purposes of this Article:

tax agreement means an agreement to avoid double taxation or another international agreement or arrangement in tax matters; and

Taxes and tax measures do not include:

(a) a customs duty as defined in Article 1.5 (Definitions of General Application); either

(b) the measures listed in exceptions (b) and (c) of the definition of customs duty in Article 1.5 (Definitions of General Application).

Article 21.4: Disclosure of Information

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to obligate a Party to provide or give access to confidential information, the disclosure of which would impede compliance with its national law, or which would be contrary to the public interest, or which could harm the commercial interest. legitimate private companies, whether public or private.

Article 21.5: Measures to Safeguard the Balance of Payments

Pursuant to the WTO Agreement and consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, a Party may adopt or maintain temporary and non-discriminatory safeguard measures with respect to payments and movements of capital that it deems necessary:

(a) in the event of the existence or threat of serious external financial or balance of payments difficulties; either

(b) in cases where, under exceptional circumstances, payments and capital movements cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for macroeconomic management, in particular, in monetary and exchange rate policy.

 

 

Chapter 22

Final Provisions

Article 22.1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes

The Annexes, Appendices, and footnotes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.

Article 22.2: Amendments

1. The Parties may agree to any amendment to this Agreement.

2. When the amendment is agreed upon and approved in accordance with the legal procedures of each Party, the amendment shall constitute an integral part of this Agreement and shall enter into force on the date the Parties so agree.

Article 22.3: Amendments to the WTO Agreement

If any provision of the WTO Agreement that has been incorporated into this Agreement is amended, the Parties shall consult with a view to amending the corresponding provision of this Agreement, as appropriate, in accordance with Article 22.2.

Article 22.4: Reservations and Interpretative Declarations 1.

This Treaty may not be subject to reservations or unilateral interpretative declarations.

Article 22.5: Entry into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force sixty (60) days after the date the Parties exchange written notifications confirming that they have complied with their respective legal procedures or on the date the Parties so agree.

Article 22.6: Complaint

Any Party may denounce this Agreement. The denunciation shall take effect one hundred eighty (180) days after its written notification to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term to make the denunciation effective.

 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this Treaty.

DONE in Panama, Republic of Panama, in two equally authentic and valid copies on May 25, 2011.