PACIFIC AGREEMENT ON
CLOSER ECONOMIC
RELATIONS PLUS

PREAMBLE
The Governments of Australia, the Cook Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the
Independent and Sovereign Republic of Kiribati (Kiribati), the Republic of Nauru (Nauru),
New Zealand, Niue, the Republic of Palau (Palau), the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the
Independent State of Samoa (Samoa), Solomon Islands, the Kingdom of Tonga (Tonga),
Tuvalu, the Republic of Vanuatu (Vanuatu);
Recognising the unique and close historical, political, developmental, economic, geographic
and cultural links that bind the Parties as well as their shared values and interests;
Recognising the significant development relationship among the Parties and seeking to
further enhance and complement this relationship with improved trade and investment
cooperation;
Desiring to further deepen these ties of friendship and cooperation and bind their economies
closer together in order to bring further economic and social benefits and improved living
standards of all peoples of the Pacific region;
Recalling the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations (PACER), done at Nauru on
18 August 2001;
Desiring to act consistently with their respective rights, obligations and undertakings under
the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, or other multilateral,
regional and bilateral agreements to which they are party;
Confident that this Agreement will strengthen economic partnerships, support sustainable
economic development, and serve as an important building block towards regional economic
integration;
Taking into account the significant differences in the size of the Parties; the unique and
particular vulnerabilities and development challenges of developing country and leastdeveloped country Parties in the region; the need to build their capacities with a view to
fostering their enhanced participation in international trade and investment; and that many of
the Parties are not Members of the World Trade Organization;
Affirming the desire to foster a stable and predictable environment to progressively remove
barriers to trade and investment between them, while taking into account the principles of
flexibility and special and differential treatment;
Affirming that their commitment is to make a significant and sustainable contribution to the
economic and social development of the Forum Island Country Parties and to assist their
gradual integration into the world economy including, inter alia, through the strengthening of
their domestic capacity, efficiency and competitiveness;
Mindful of the links between economic development, social development and environmental
protection and the important role of development and economic cooperation in promoting 
sustainable development, the Parties resolve that PACER Plus must be a development tool for
the Forum Island Countries to, inter alia, increase their production capacity and exports;
support their economic and trade diversification, and competitiveness efforts; attract
investment to them; and lead to the creation of jobs;
Cognisant of the role of technical assistance through trade-related assistance mechanisms and
other programmes to strengthen the capacity of the Forum Island Countries to effectively
participate in the multilateral trading system and improve trade competitiveness;
Reaffirming their commitments to multilateral environmental, labour and sustainable
development agreements to which they are a Party;
Sharing a common aspiration to promote high standards of environmental and labour
protection and, to uphold these in the context of sustainable development;
Recognising that it is inappropriate to use environmental and labour standards as a disguised
means of trade protectionism, or to weaken or fail to enforce them to encourage trade or
investment; and
Recognising their right to regulate and their resolve to preserve the flexibility of the Parties to
set legislative and regulatory priorities, safeguard public welfare, and protect legitimate public
welfare objectives, such as public health, safety, the environment, the conservation of living
or non-living exhaustible natural resources, the integrity and stability of the financial system
and public morals;
Have agreed as follows:
CHAPTER 1
INITIAL PROVISIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Article 1: Establishment of the PACER Plus Free Trade Area
Consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS, the Parties
hereby establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.
Article 2: General Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless the context otherwise requires:
administrative ruling of general application means an administrative ruling or
interpretation that applies to all persons and fact situations that fall generally within its ambit,
and that establishes a norm of conduct, but shall not include:
(a) a determination or ruling made in an administrative or quasi-judicial proceeding
that applies to a particular person, good or service of the other Party in a specific
case; or
(b) a ruling that adjudicates with respect to a particular act or practice;
Agreement means the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations Plus (PACER Plus);
Agreement on Agriculture means the Agreement on Agriculture, in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;
Agreement on Customs Valuation means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures means the Agreement on Import Licensing
Procedures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
Agreement on Safeguards means the Agreement on Safeguards, in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures means the Agreement on Subsidies
and Countervailing Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
Anti-Dumping Agreement means the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
commercial samples of negligible value means commercial samples having a value,
individually or in the aggregate as shipped, of not more than the amount specified in a Party’s
laws, regulations or procedures governing temporary admission, or so marked, torn, 
perforated or otherwise treated that they are unsuitable for sale or use except as commercial
samples;
Customs Administration means the official agencies responsible for implementing the
provisions of the Chapter on Rules of Origin and Verification Procedures and the Chapter on
Customs Procedures;
customs duty means any duty or a charge of any kind, including any tax or surcharge,
imposed in connection with the importation of a good, but does not include any:
(a) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with Article III:2 of
GATT 1994, in respect of a like domestic product or in respect of an article from
which the imported product has been manufactured or produced in whole or in
part;
(b) anti-dumping or countervailing duty applied consistently with the provisions of
Article VI of GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI
of the GATT 1994, and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures; or
(c) fee or any charge commensurate with the cost of services rendered;
days means calendar days, including weekends and holidays;
developed country Party means any Party that is not a Developing Country Party or a Least
Developed Country Party;
developing country Party means a Party that designates itself as a developing country, and
includes Least Developed Country Parties unless otherwise specified;
enterprise means any entity constituted or organised under applicable law, whether or not for
profit, and whether privately or governmentally owned or controlled, including any
corporation, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, association or similar
organisation, and a branch of an enterprise;
enterprise of a Party means an enterprise which is either:
(a) organised or constituted under the law of that Party, or a branch located in the
territory of another Party, which is engaged in substantive business operations in
the territory of that Party or any other Party; or
(b) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence, owned or
controlled by:
(i) natural persons of that Party; or
(ii) an enterprise of that Party identified under subparagraph (a);
Forum Island Countries means the Pacific Island Countries which are Parties to this
Agreement and are Members of the Pacific Islands Forum, referred to in this Agreement
collectively as the Forum Island Countries and individually as a Forum Island Country;
GATS means the General Agreement on Trade in Services, in Annex 1B to the WTO
Agreement;
GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, in Annex 1A to the
WTO Agreement;
Harmonized System or HS means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding
System established by the International Convention on the Harmonized Description and
Coding System signed at Brussels on 14 June 1983, as amended;
IMF Articles of Agreement means the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary
Fund;
import licensing means an administrative procedure requiring the submission of an
application or other documentation (other than that generally required for customs clearance
purposes) to the relevant administrative body as a prior condition for importation into the
territory of the importing Party;
Joint Committee means the PACER Plus Joint Committee established pursuant to Article 1
of Chapter 12 (Institutional Provisions);
Least Developed Country Party means any Party that is on the United Nations List of Least
Developed Countries;
measure means any measure of a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, decision, administrative action or any other form;
natural person of a Party means a natural person that possesses the nationality or citizenship
of, or right of permanent residence, in that Party in accordance with its laws and regulations;
1
Negotiating Parties means Australia, the Cook Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia,
the Independent and Sovereign Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of Nauru, New Zealand,
Niue, the Republic of Palau, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Independent State of
Samoa, Solomon Islands, the Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, the Republic of Vanuatu, referred
to in this Agreement collectively as the Negotiating Parties or individually as a Negotiating
Party;
Pacific Islands Forum means the Pacific Islands Forum, as referred to in the Agreement
Establishing the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat;

1
For the purposes of this Agreement, for the Cook Islands, nationality means a person belonging to the part of
the Polynesian race indigenous to the Cook Islands and includes any person descended from a Cook Islander as
recognised by Cook Islands law, or a permanent resident of the Cook Islands pursuant to Cook Islands law; and
for Niue, a natural person is a Niuean national or permanent resident as recognised by Niuean law.
Party means any State, separate customs territory or self-governing entity for which this
Agreement is in force;
printed advertising materials means those goods classified in Chapter 49 of the Harmonized
System, including brochures, pamphlets, leaflets, trade catalogues, yearbooks published by
trade associations, tourist promotional materials and posters, that are used to promote,
publicise, or advertise a good or a service, or are essentially intended to advertise a good or a
service, and are supplied free of charge;
regional trade agreement means an agreement for closer integration between the economies
of the constituent parties composed alternatively or jointly of:
(a) a customs union or free-trade area or agreement for the formation of such a union
or area consistent with Article XXIV of GATT 1994, the Understanding on the
Interpretation of Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and, in the case of a customs union
or free-trade area or agreement for the formation of such a union or area
exclusively involving developing countries, the GATT Decision on Differential
and More Favourable Treatment, Reciprocity and Fuller Participation of
Developing Countries (Decision of 28 November 1979, L/4903);
(b) an economic integration agreement liberalising trade in services consistent with
Article V of GATS;
SPS Agreement means the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures, in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
TBT Agreement means the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, in Annex 1A of the
WTO Agreement;
WTO means the World Trade Organization;
WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, done on 15 April 1994; and
WTO Member means a state, separate customs territory or self-governing entity that is Party
to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, done at Marrakesh
on 15 April 1994.
CHAPTER 2
TRADE IN GOODS
Article 1: Objectives
The objectives of this Chapter are, with respect to measures affecting goods traded
between the Parties, to avoid unnecessary barriers to trade, facilitate and liberalise trade and
thereby promote integration between the economies of the Parties.
Article 2: Scope
This Chapter shall apply to all goods traded between the Parties.
Article 3: Commitments on Tariffs
1. Each Party shall not apply to originating goods:
(a) ordinary customs duties that are not specified, or are in excess of levels set forth,
in Part I (Commitments on Ordinary Customs Duties) of its Schedule at
Annex 2-A; or
(b) duties or charges on or in connection with their importation (other than ordinary
customs duties applied in conformity with subparagraph (a) or internal taxes or
other charges, anti-dumping or countervailing duties or fees or other charges for
services rendered applied in conformity with Articles 6, 7 and 10 respectively)
that are not specified in, or are not in conformity with, Part II (Commitments on
Other Duties or Charges) of its Schedule at Annex 2-A.
2. With respect to the levels of all duties and charges referred to in paragraph 1, any
advantage granted to any good of any country or territory, other than in respect of a
preference in force under a regional trade agreement on the date referred to in Article 8.1 of
Chapter 15 (Final Provisions), shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to all like
goods originating in the territories of all other Parties except where:
(a) (i) the advantage granted is accorded pursuant to Decision 36 of Annex F of the
WTO Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration of 2005 on Measures in Favour of
Least-Developed Countries and related WTO Decisions on duty-free and
quota-free access for products originating in Least-Developed Countries;
and
(ii) the treatment of such goods pursuant to the Decisions referred to in
subparagraph (a)(i) is in conformity with those Decisions; 
(b) the advantage granted is in respect of a preference in force pursuant to a regional
trade agreement exclusively involving Pacific Island countries and territories;
1
or
(c) the advantage granted is in respect of a preference in force pursuant to a regional
trade agreement2
exclusively involving developing countries to which at least one
Party is a party and other parties are non-Parties, where:
(i) each such non-Party accounts for not more than 1 per cent of world
merchandise exports; and
(ii) all non-Parties that are party to the regional trade agreement together
account for not more than 4 per cent of world merchandise exports;
measured as of the date of entry into force of the regional trade agreement for
each such Party and as of the date of accession of a new party to it.3
3. Paragraph 2 shall not require such advantage to be accorded in respect of a preference
in force or implemented after the date referred to in Article 8.1 of Chapter 15 (Final
Provisions) by the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands or
Palau which is extended to the United States of America in respect of:
(a) a regional trade agreement with another non-Party pursuant to the most-favourednation clause in such countries’ respective Compacts of Free Association or
successor agreements, where the regional trade agreement concerned fulfils the
requirements of paragraph 2(b) or 2(c); or
(b) a regional trade agreement established under such countries’ respective Compacts
of Free Association or successor agreements.
4. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude the Parties from negotiating and entering into
arrangements collectively for the acceleration or improvement of commitments in their
Schedules. Such agreements shall be incorporated into this Agreement in accordance with
Article 7 of Chapter 15 (Final Provisions). Accelerated or improved commitments thereunder
shall be implemented by those Parties and be extended to all Parties.
5. Two or more Parties may consult with a view to reaching an agreement on the
acceleration or improvement of commitments in their Schedules. Such agreements shall be
incorporated into this Agreement in accordance with Article 7 of Chapter 15 (Final

1
For the purposes of subparagraph (b): Pacific Island territories comprise American Samoa, French Polynesia,
Guam, New Caledonia, Northern Mariana Islands, Pitcairn Islands, Tokelau, Wallis and Futuna, provided they
are separate customs territories; and Pacific Island countries are Forum Island Countries and former Pacific
Island territories.
2 Where a party to a regional trade agreement under subparagraph (c) is a customs union, all parties to it shall be
treated as separate countries or customs territories for the purposes of determining whether the criteria under
subparagraph (c) are met.
3 Exemptions from the obligation under paragraph 2 in respect of participation in a regional trade agreement
under subparagraph (c) shall be administered in accordance with Annex 2-B.
Provisions). Accelerated or improved commitments thereunder shall be implemented by
those Parties and be extended to all Parties.
6. A Party may, at any time, unilaterally accelerate the implementation of commitments in
its Schedule. A Party intending to do so shall inform the other Parties in accordance with
Article 14.2(a). Such accelerated implementation of commitments shall be extended to all
Parties.
Modification or Withdrawal of Concessions
7. If a developing country Party faces unforeseen difficulties in implementing its tariff
commitments:4
(a) That Party may, with the agreement of all other interested Parties, modify or
withdraw a concession contained in its Schedule of Commitments on Tariffs in
Annex 2-A.
(b) In order to seek to reach such agreement, the relevant Party shall engage in
negotiations with any interested Parties. In such negotiations, the Party proposing
to modify or withdraw its concessions shall maintain a level of reciprocal and
mutually advantageous concessions no less favourable to the trade of all other
interested Parties than that provided for in this Agreement prior to such
negotiations.
(c) A negotiated outcome may include compensatory adjustments with respect to
other goods or, where the available scope for compensatory adjustments on goods
is insufficient, with respect to services or investment.
(d) The mutually agreed outcome of the negotiations, including any compensatory
adjustments, shall apply to all the Parties and shall be incorporated into this
Agreement in accordance with Article 7 of Chapter 15 (Final Provisions).
8. If a mutually agreed outcome under paragraph 7 cannot be reached within 60 days of
the request being made, the Party proposing to modify or withdraw the concession or any
interested Party may refer the matter to the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall,
within 30 days of the referral of the matter to it, determine the level of compensation to be
provided to interested Parties and then authorise the developing country Party to modify or
withdraw its tariff commitments. The provision of compensation and the modification of
tariff preferences by the developing country Party shall be effected at the same time.
9. The compensatory adjustments shall apply to all the Parties and shall be incorporated
into this Agreement in accordance with Article 7 of Chapter 15 (Final Provisions).

4
For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing a Party from having recourse to
paragraphs 7, 8 and 9 after the final reduction of a duty under its Schedule of Commitments on Tariffs.
Article 4: Goods Re-entered after Repair and Alteration
1. No Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, that re-enters its
territory after that good has been temporarily exported from its territory to the territory of
another Party for repair or alteration, regardless of whether such repair or alteration could be
performed in its own territory.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may, in accordance with its relevant legislation,
impose a customs duty on the cost of repair or alteration of the good. The duty imposed shall
not exceed the customs duty which would be payable if the good was imported for the first
time.
3. No Party shall apply a customs duty to a good, regardless of its origin, admitted
temporarily from the territory of another Party for repair or alteration.
4. For the purposes of this Article, repair and alteration does not include an operation or
process that:
(a) destroys a good’s essential characteristics or creates a new or commercially
different good; or
(b) transforms an unfinished good into a finished good.
5. Nothing in paragraph 3 shall be construed to prevent a Party from specifying in its laws
or regulations a limit on the duration of temporary entry beyond which the goods concerned
become dutiable.
Article 5: Duty-Free Entry of Commercial Samples of Negligible Value and Printed
Advertising Material
1. With the exception of tobacco products, the Parties shall grant customs duty-free entry
to commercial samples of negligible value and to printed advertising materials imported from
the territory of another Party, regardless of their origin, but may require that:
(a) such samples be imported solely for the solicitation of orders for goods, or
services provided from the territory, of another Party or a non-Party; or
(b) such advertising materials are imported in packets that each contain no more than
one copy of each material and that neither such materials nor packets form part of
a larger consignment.
2. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent a Party from requiring under its
laws and regulations that a bond be paid on the temporary import of commercial samples that
are not of negligible value and that such bond be released upon re-exportation of the
commercial samples within a time limit provided for under its legislation.
Article 6: Internal Taxation and Regulation
In respect of internal taxes, other internal charges and laws, regulations and
requirements affecting matters within the scope of Article III of GATT 1994, each Party shall
accord to the goods of other Parties most-favoured-nation treatment and national treatment in
accordance with Articles I and III, including the Interpretative Notes to Article III, of GATT
1994. To these ends, Articles I and III, including the Interpretative Notes to Article III, of
GATT 1994 are incorporated into and shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
Article 7: Trade Remedies
Anti-Dumping and Countervailing Measures
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of WTO Members
under Articles VI and XVI of GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement and the Agreement
on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
2. When applying anti-dumping or countervailing measures, non-WTO Members shall
comply with the provisions of Articles VI and XVI of GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping
Agreement and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
3. Special regard shall be given by developed country Parties to the special situation of
developing country Parties when considering and before making a decision on the application
of anti-dumping measures under this Article. A developed country Party considering the
application of an anti-dumping duty to a product of a developing country Party shall explore
possibilities of constructive remedies before applying such anti-dumping duty where it would
affect the essential interests of the developing country Party concerned.
4. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, each Party with legislation containing
provisions on anti-dumping or countervailing measures shall notify to the other Parties
through Contact Points:
(a) its laws, regulations and administrative procedures relating to anti-dumping or
countervailing measures (including inter alia procedures governing the initiation
and conduct of investigations by its competent authorities);
(b) which of its authorities are competent to initiate and conduct its anti-dumping and
countervailing investigations; and
(c) its domestic procedures governing the initiation and conduct of such
investigations.
5. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, each Party without legislation containing
provisions on anti-dumping or countervailing measures shall notify to the other Parties
through Contact Points that it does not have anti-dumping or countervailing legislation.
Thereafter, where any such Party adopts legislation containing provisions on anti-dumping or
countervailing measures, upon the adoption of such legislation it shall notify to the other 
Parties through Contact Points the information required to be notified in paragraphs 4(a), 4(b)
and 4(c). This information shall be notified prior to such Party initiating an anti-dumping or
countervailing investigation with respect to another Party or Parties.
6. Thereafter, each Party with legislation containing provisions on anti-dumping or
countervailing measures shall notify to the other Parties through Contact Points:
(a) any changes in its anti-dumping and countervailing duty laws and regulations and
in the administration of such laws and regulations; and
(b) where anti-dumping or countervailing action concerning the products of any Party
has been initiated:
(i) any preliminary or final anti-dumping or countervailing determinations;
(ii) any acceptance of undertakings;
(iii) any terminations of duties or investigations; and
(iv) the explanations, findings and conclusions reached in respect of any of the
above actions taken.
7. All information notifiable by a Party under paragraphs 5 and 6 shall be published in
accordance with Article 13.
Global Safeguard Measures
8. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of WTO Members
under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.
9. When applying a global safeguards measure, non-WTO Members shall comply with the
provisions of Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.
10. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, each Party with legislation containing
provisions on global safeguards shall notify to the other Parties through Contact Points:
(a) its laws, regulations and administrative procedures relating to safeguards
measures (including inter alia procedures governing the initiation and conduct of
investigations by its competent authorities); and
(b) its competent authorities;
and shall thereafter notify to the other Parties through Contact Points any modifications made
to information notified under subparagraphs (a) and (b).
11. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, each Party without legislation containing
provisions on global safeguards shall notify to the other Parties through Contact Points that it
does not have global safeguards legislation. Thereafter, when any such Party adopts or 
subsequently modifies legislation containing provisions on global safeguards, upon adoption
or modification of such legislation it shall promptly notify to the other Parties through Contact
Points the information required to be notified under paragraph 10.
12. Thereafter, each Party with legislation containing provisions on global safeguards shall
immediately notify the other Parties through Contact Points upon:
(a) initiating any investigatory process relating to serious injury or threat thereof, and
the reasons for it;
(b) making a finding of serious injury or threat thereof caused by increased imports;
and
(c) taking a decision to apply or extend a safeguard measure.
13. If a decision has been taken to apply a provisional safeguard measure, a notification
shall be made to the other Parties through Contact Points before that measure is applied.
14. Competent authorities shall publish promptly a report setting forth their findings and
reasoned conclusions reached on all pertinent issues of fact and law.
15. All information notifiable by a Party under paragraphs 10 to 13 shall be published in
accordance with Article 13.
16. To the extent possible, the developed country Parties shall consider exempting products
from the developing country Parties from the application of a safeguard measure under this
Article. A Party shall not apply a safeguard measure against a product originating in a
developing country that is a WTO Member or a non-WTO Member as long as its share of
imports of the product concerned in the importing Party does not exceed three per cent,
provided that the developing countries that are a WTO Member or a non-WTO Member with
less than three per cent import share collectively account for not more than nine per cent of
total imports of the product concerned.
Article 8: Transitional Safeguard Measures
Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Article:
(a) domestic industry means, with respect to an imported good, the producers as a
whole of the like or directly competitive good operating within the territory of a
Party, or those producers whose collective production of the like or directly
competitive good constitutes a major proportion of the total domestic production
of that good;
(b) transitional safeguard measure means a measure described in paragraphs 2 to 4
(Imposition of a Transitional Safeguard Measure);
(c) serious injury means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry;
(d) threat of serious injury means serious injury that, on the basis of facts and not
merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility, is clearly imminent; and
(e) transition period means, in relation to a particular good, the three-year period
beginning on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except where the
tariff elimination for the good occurs over a longer period of time, in which case
the transition period shall be the period of the staged tariff elimination for that
good.
Imposition of a Transitional Safeguard Measure
2. A developing country Party may apply a transitional safeguard measure described in
paragraph 3, during the transition period only, if as a result of the staged elimination of a
customs duty pursuant to this Agreement:
(a) an originating good of one other Party is being imported into the Party’s territory
in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic production,
and under such conditions, as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the
domestic industry that produces a like or directly competitive good; or
(b) an originating good of two or more Parties, collectively, is being imported into the
Party’s territory in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to
domestic production, and under such conditions, as to cause or threaten to cause
serious injury to the domestic industry that produces a like or directly competitive
good, provided that the Party applying the transitional safeguard measure
demonstrates, with respect to the imports from each such Party against which the
transitional safeguard measure is applied, that imports of the originating good
from each of those Parties have increased, in absolute terms or relative to
domestic production, since the date of entry into force of this Agreement for those
Parties.
3. If the conditions in paragraph 2 are met, the Party may, to the extent necessary to
prevent or remedy serious injury and facilitate adjustment:
(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty provided for under this
Agreement on the good; or
(b) increase the rate of customs duty on the good to a level not to exceed the lesser of:
(i) (A) in the case of a WTO Member, the most-favoured-nation applied rate
of customs duty; or
(B) in the case of a Party that is not a WTO Member, the general nonpreferential applied rate of customs duty;
at the time the measure is applied; and
(ii) (A) in the case of a WTO Member, the most-favoured-nation applied rate
of customs duty; or
(B) in the case of a Party that is not a WTO Member, the general nonpreferential applied rate of customs duty;
in effect on the day immediately preceding the date of entry into force of this
Agreement for that Party.
4. No Party shall apply a tariff rate quota or a quantitative restriction as a form of
transitional safeguard measure.
Standards for a Transitional Safeguard Measure
5. A Party shall maintain a transitional safeguard measure only for such period of time as
may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment.
6. That period shall not exceed two years, except that the period may be extended by up to
three years, if the competent authority of the Party that applies the measure determines, in
conformity with the procedures set out in paragraphs 12 and 13, that the transitional safeguard
measure continues to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and to facilitate
adjustment.
7. No Party shall maintain a transitional safeguard measure beyond the expiration of the
transition period.
8. In order to facilitate adjustment in a situation where the expected duration of a
transitional safeguard measure is over one year, the Party that applies the measure shall
progressively liberalise it at regular intervals during the period of application.
9. On the termination of a transitional safeguard measure, the Party that applied the
measure shall apply the rate of customs duty set out in its Schedule of Commitments on
Tariffs at Annex 2-A as if that Party had never applied the transitional safeguard measure.
10. The maximum amount of time that transitional safeguard measures can apply
cumulatively to the same good is five years.
11. No Party shall apply or maintain at the same time, with respect to the same good, a
transitional safeguard measure under this Article and a safeguard measure under Article XIX
of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards.
Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements
12. A Party shall apply a transitional safeguard measure only following an investigation by
the Party’s competent authorities in accordance with Article 3 and Article 4.2(c) of the 
Agreement on Safeguards. To this end, Article 3 and Article 4.2(c) of the Agreement on
Safeguards are incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
13. In the investigation described in paragraph 12, the Party shall comply with the
requirements of Article 4.2(a) and Article 4.2(b) of the Agreement on Safeguards; to this end,
Article 4.2(a) and Article 4.2(b) of the Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
Provisional Measures
14. (a) In critical circumstances, where delay would cause damage which would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional measure, pursuant to a
preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports of an
originating good from another Party or Parties have caused or are threatening to
cause serious injury to a domestic industry.
(b) The duration of such a provisional measure shall not exceed 200 days, during
which time the relevant requirements of this Article (Definitions, Imposition of a
Transitional Safeguard Measure, Standards for a Transitional Safeguard Measure,
Investigation Procedures and Transparency Requirements, and Notification and
Consultation) shall be met. The duration of any provisional measure shall be
counted as part of the initial period and any extension as referred to under
Imposition of a Transitional Safeguard Measure.
(c) The customs duty imposed as a result of the provisional measure shall be refunded
if the subsequent investigation referred to under Investigation Procedures and
Transparency Requirements does not determine that increased imports of the
originating good have caused or threatened to cause serious injury to a domestic
industry.
Notification and Consultation
15. A Party shall promptly notify the other Parties through Contact Points, in writing, if it:
(a) initiates a transitional safeguard investigation under this Article;
(b) makes a finding of serious injury, or threat of serious injury, caused by increased
imports, as set out in paragraph 2;
(c) takes a decision to apply or extend a transitional safeguard measure;
(d) takes a decision to modify a transitional safeguard measure previously
undertaken.
16. A Party shall provide to the other Parties through Contact Points a copy of the public
version of the report of its competent authorities that is required under paragraph 12.
17. When a Party makes a notification pursuant to paragraph 15(c) that it is applying or
extending a transitional safeguard measure, that Party shall include in that notification:
(a) evidence of serious injury, or threat of serious injury, caused by increased imports
of an originating good of another Party or Parties as a result of the staged
elimination of a customs duty pursuant to this Agreement;
(b) a precise description of the originating good subject to the transitional safeguard
measure including its heading or subheading under the Harmonized System, on
which the commitments in respect of the duty contained in its Schedule of
Commitments on Tariffs at Annex 2-A are based;
(c) a precise description of the transitional safeguard measure;
(d) the date of the transitional safeguard measure’s introduction, its expected duration
and, if applicable, a timetable for progressive liberalisation of the measure; and
(e) in the case of an extension of the transitional safeguard measure, evidence that the
domestic industry concerned is adjusting.
18. On request of a Party whose good is subject to a transitional safeguard proceeding under
this Chapter, the Party that conducts that proceeding shall enter into consultations with the
requesting Party to review a notification under paragraph 15 or any public notice or report
that the competent investigating authority has issued in connection with the proceeding.
Compensation
19. A Party applying a transitional safeguard measure shall, after consultations with each
Party against whose good the transitional safeguard measure is applied, provide mutually
agreed trade liberalising compensation in the form of concessions that have substantially
equivalent trade effects or equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result
from the transitional safeguard measure. The Party shall provide an opportunity for those
consultations no later than 30 days after the application of the transitional safeguard measure.
20. If the consultations under paragraph 19 do not result in an agreement on trade
liberalising compensation within 30 days, any Party against whose good the transitional
safeguard measure is applied may seek a determination on the level of compensation under
the procedures of Articles 3.8 and 3.9, which shall apply mutatis mutandis.
21. The obligation to provide compensation under paragraph 19 or paragraph 20 terminates
on the termination of the transitional safeguard measure.
Article 9: Industry Development
Recognising the limited number of industry development opportunities inherent in a
regional grouping of countries characterised mostly by low populations, limited arable land 
and other natural resources, small isolated economies and high vulnerability to natural
disasters; and
Taking into account the high incidence of persistent gaps between Forum Island
Countries’ respective levels of per capita gross national income and those of the world’s
developed countries and larger or more advanced developing countries:
1. The Joint Committee may approve a measure known as an Industry Development
Measure requested by a Forum Island Country for the purpose of enabling such requesting
Party to support:
(a) the establishment of a new industry or a new branch of production in an existing
industry;
(b) the substantial transformation of an existing industry;
(c) the substantial expansion of an existing industry supplying a small proportion of
the domestic demand; or
(d) an industry destroyed or substantially damaged as a result of hostilities or natural
disaster.
2. An Industry Development Measure:
(a) shall consist of:
(i) a delay in the scheduled reductions in the requesting Party’s rate of customs
duty for one or more specified goods; or
(ii) an increase in its rate of customs duty for one or more specified goods to no
more than:
(A) in the case of a WTO Member, the most-favoured-nation applied rate
of customs duty; or
(B) in the case of a non-WTO Member, the general non-preferential
applied rate of customs duty;
effective at the time of the request;
(b) can be applied:
(i) for an initial period of seven years, which may be extended for a further
three years by the Joint Committee; and
(ii) only during the period of the requesting Party’s scheduled reductions in a
rate of customs duty on the affected product;5
and
(c) shall be eligible for approval if the tariff lines subject to the requested Industry
Development Measure(s) and all Industry Development Measures of a Party in
force at the time of such request(s) together account for not more than eight per
cent of the total exports of the affected Party to the requesting Party6
and account
for not more than three per cent of tariff lines.
3. Upon conclusion of the relevant period under paragraph 2(b), the requesting Party’s
customs duties shall revert to levels not exceeding the scheduled rates that would have applied
but for the Industry Development Measure.
4. The requesting Party shall compensate affected Parties on terms agreed among the
interested Parties or otherwise determined under the procedures of Articles 3.8 to 3.9, which
shall apply mutatis mutandis. Compensation shall be provided three years after the initial
application of the Industry Development Measure. The obligation to provide compensation
ceases upon the termination of the Industry Development Measure.
5. Except in the case of a new Industry Development Measure applied for the purposes of
Article 9.1(d), if a new Industry Development Measure is applied to the same good:
(a) the total duration of the periods for which the requesting Party was not liable to
provide compensation under previous Industry Development Measures on that
good shall be counted towards the two years for which the requesting Party is not
liable to provide extend compensation under paragraph 4; and
(b) not less than two years shall elapse from the date of termination of the previous
Industry Development Measure to the date of initial application of the new
Industry Development Measure.
6. A Party shall not simultaneously apply an Industry Development Measure and a
Transitional Safeguard Measure under Article 8 to the same good. Nothing in this Article
shall be construed to prevent a Party from having recourse to Articles 3.7 to 3.9 after the
expiration of an Industry Development Measure.

5
Subparagraph 2(b)(ii) shall apply to all Forum Island Countries except Kiribati. Recognising the unique
situation of Kiribati in having all base rates in its Schedule at Annex 2-A at a rate of zero per cent, Kiribati shall
have recourse to an Industry Development Measure, subject to approval by the Joint Committee in response to a
request from Kiribati, in the event of Kiribati adopting a general non-preferential applied rate of customs duty
for the good(s) concerned in excess of the base rate. No such Industry Development Measure approved by the
Joint Committee shall be applied later than 25 years from the date on which the Agreement entered into force for
Kiribati under Article 8 of Chapter 15 (Final Provisions). The remaining provisions of this Article shall apply,
mutatis mutandis.
6 The percentage shall be calculated as the average annual percentage share of the exporting Party’s exports
falling to those lines in the annual value of its total merchandise exports to the requesting Party in the three
calendar years that immediately precede the year in which the Industry Development Measure is requested.
Article 10: Fees and Charges Connected with Importation and Exportation
1. Each Party shall ensure that all fees and charges of whatever character (other than
import and export duties, charges equivalent to an internal tax or other internal charges
applied consistently with Article III:2 of GATT 1994 and anti-dumping and countervailing
duties applied pursuant to Articles VI and XVI of GATT 1994, the Anti-Dumping Agreement
and the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures) on or in connection with
importation or exportation:
(a) are limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered;
(b) do not represent an indirect protection to domestic products or a taxation on
imports or exports for fiscal purposes; and
(c) are otherwise in conformity with the WTO Agreement, including inter alia
Articles I and VIII of GATT 1994.
2. In respect of such measures, Articles I and VIII of GATT 1994 are incorporated into
and shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
Article 11: Import Licensing
1. In respect of import licensing procedures, the Parties, taking into account the particular
trade, development and financial needs of developing country Parties:
(a) recognise the usefulness of automatic import licensing for certain purposes, and
shall ensure that such licensing is not used to restrict trade between them and is
otherwise in accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of the Agreement on Import
Licensing Procedures;
(b) recognise that import licensing may be employed to administer measures such as
those adopted pursuant to the relevant provisions of GATT 1994, and shall ensure
that import licensing procedures employed for that purpose are not utilised in a
manner contrary to the principles and obligations of GATT 1994 and are
otherwise in accordance with Articles 1 and 3 of the Agreement on Import
Licensing Procedures and other relevant WTO provisions; and
(c) recognise that trade could be impeded by the inappropriate use of import licensing
procedures and, with a view to avoiding their inappropriate use, shall ensure that:
(i) import licensing, particularly non-automatic import licensing, is
implemented in a transparent and predictable manner;
(ii) non-automatic licensing procedures are no more administratively
burdensome than absolutely necessary to administer the relevant measure;
and
(iii) administrative procedures and practices used in international trade are
transparent, are as simple as possible and are applied and administered fairly
and equitably.
2. To these ends, in respect of import licensing procedures, Articles 1 to 3 of the
Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures are incorporated into and shall form part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
3. Information related to import licensing procedures under Article 1.4(a) of the
Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures shall be published in such a manner as to enable
governments and traders to become acquainted with it and be so published no later than the
effective date of the requirement concerned. Each Party shall notify the Contact Points of
other Parties where such information is found.
4. Information exchanged between the Parties on import licensing procedures shall be
otherwise notified, published and kept up-to-date in accordance with Article 14 and be
supplied in the format set out at Annex 2-C.
Article 12: Other Non-Tariff Measures
1. Each Party shall not:
(a) adopt or maintain any measure within the purview of Article XI of GATT 1994,
including its Interpretative Notes, except in accordance with the WTO Agreement
and this Agreement; or
(b) apply to traffic in transit any measure prohibited under, or any allowable measure
inconsistently with, Article V of GATT 1994 or other relevant provisions of the
WTO Agreement; or
(c) apply any measure prohibited under Article 4.2 of the Agreement on Agriculture
or Article 11.1(b) of the Agreement on Safeguards.
2. To these ends, in respect of the aforementioned measures, GATT 1994 (including
relevant Interpretative Notes of GATT 1994), the Agreement on Import Licensing
Procedures, Articles 4.2 and 12 of the Agreement on Agriculture and Article 11.1(b) of the
Agreement on Safeguards are incorporated into and shall form part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.
3. Each Party shall not require consular transactions, including related fees, charges,
formalities and requirements, in connection with the importation of a good from another
Party.
Article 13: Publication and Administration of Trade Regulations
1. Laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings of general application,
made effective by any Party, pertaining to the classification or the valuation of products for
customs purposes, or to rates of duty, taxes or other charges, or to requirements, restrictions
or prohibitions on imports or exports or on the transfer of payments therefor, or affecting their
sale, distribution, transportation, insurance, warehousing, inspection, exhibition, processing,
mixing or other use, shall be published promptly in such a manner as to enable governments
and traders to become acquainted with them.
2. Agreements affecting international trade policy which are in force between the
government or a governmental agency of any Party and the government or governmental
agency of any other country shall also be published.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not require any Party to disclose confidential information
which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.
4. No measure of general application taken by any Party effecting an advance in a rate of
duty or other charge on imports under an established and uniform practice, or imposing a new
or more burdensome requirement, restriction or prohibition on imports, or on the transfer of
payments for those purposes, shall be enforced before such measure has been officially
published.
5. Each Party shall administer in a uniform, impartial and reasonable manner all its laws,
regulations, decisions and rulings of the kind described in paragraph 1.
6. To these ends, Article X of GATT 1994 and other provisions of the WTO Agreement
relating to the publication and administration of trade regulations are incorporated into and
shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
7. In accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, each Party shall, to the extent of
its capacity, make available online laws, regulations, decisions and rulings in relation to
matters within the purview of paragraphs 1, 2 and 4.
8. Each Party shall thereafter, to the extent of its capacity, ensure that all items of
information that are publically available pursuant to paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 7 are kept up-todate in accordance with those paragraphs.
Article 14: Information Exchange in Relation to, and Publication of, Specified Measures
1. Upon entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall provide to the other Parties
through Contact Points:
(a) the existing schedules of non-preferential and preferential applied rates of customs
duty that it maintains;
(b) a list of all existing fees and charges that it imposes on or in connection with
importation or exportation; and
(c) information on its new or modified import licensing procedures in the form of a
completed response to the questionnaire at Annex 2-C.
2. Thereafter, each Party shall ensure that all items of information provided under
paragraph 1 are kept up-to-date by transmitting to the other Parties through Contact Points
any modifications or additions to them:
(a) in the case of items under paragraphs 1(a) and 1(b), no later than the date on
which they take effect;
(b) in the case of information on modified or new import licensing procedures
provided through completed responses to the questionnaire at Annex 2-C, to the
extent possible 60 days before the modified or new procedure takes effect, but in
any case no later than within 60 days of publication.
3. A WTO Member shall be deemed to be in compliance with paragraphs 1(c) and 2(b)
upon fulfilment of its obligations under paragraphs 5.1 to 5.3 of the Agreement on Import
Licensing Procedures and upon transmitting to the other Parties through Contact Points the
relevant notifications made to the WTO.
4. Each Party shall to the extent of its capacity publish the information that it provides to
other Parties under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 online with a view to public availability and ensure
that the information available online is kept up-to-date.
5. A Party may fulfil its obligations under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 by providing to the other
Parties through Contact Points the details of such websites where the requisite information is
posted and readily accessible to any person.
6. This Article shall not apply to measures covered by the SPS Agreement or the TBT
Agreement or to import licensing regimes governing the administration of tariff rate quotas
with respect to tariff rate quotas established in the WTO Schedules of Concessions and
Commitments on Goods of WTO Members.
Article 15: Contact Points and Technical Discussions
1. Each Party shall provide each other Party with a Contact Point to facilitate the
distribution of requests and notifications made in accordance with this Chapter.
2. Each Party shall ensure the information provided under paragraph 1 is kept up-to-date.
3. When a Party considers that any proposed or actual measure of another Party or Parties
may materially affect trade in goods between the Parties, that Party may, through Contact
Points, request detailed information relating to that measure and, if necessary, request
technical discussions with a view to resolving any concerns about the measure. The other 
Party or Parties shall respond promptly to such requests for information and technical
discussions.
4. Technical discussions held under this Article do not constitute an intention to seek
formal consultations under Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement) and are
without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under that Chapter, the WTO
Agreement, or any other agreement to which both Parties are party.
Article 16: Meetings on Trade in Goods Matters
1. The Parties shall, through the Joint Committee or a relevant subsidiary body, consult
regularly to consider the implementation of their commitments under this Chapter.
2. The Parties, through the Joint Committee or a relevant subsidiary body, shall commence
a review of this Chapter within three years of entry into force of this Agreement and submit a
final report to the Joint Committee, including any recommendations, within four years of
entry into force of this Agreement.
3. The Parties, through the Joint Committee or a relevant subsidiary body, shall review the
operation of Articles 3.2(c) and 3.3 and Annex 2-B two years from the date of initial
application of Annex 2-B, and thereafter at ten-year intervals unless otherwise agreed by the
Parties, and shall submit a report to the Joint Committee, including any recommendations,
within six months of the date of commencement of each review.
Article 17: Amendments to the Harmonized System
1. When a periodic amendment to the Harmonized System is published, the Parties shall
prepare technical revisions to Annex 2-A to implement that version of the Harmonized
System, and shall do so in accordance with this Article and the relevant procedures for
technical revisions to Annex 2-A as adopted by the Joint Committee under Chapter 12
(Institutional Provisions).
2. The Parties shall mutually decide whether any other technical revisions to Annex 2-A
are necessary.
3. The Parties shall ensure that technical revisions to Annex 2-A are carried out on a
neutral basis and that market access conditions are not impaired by the process or the
outcomes of technical revision to the Annex.
4. The Parties, through the Joint Committee or a relevant subsidiary body established by it,
shall endorse and promptly publish the technical revisions that are prepared pursuant to
paragraphs 1 and 2.
Article 18: Non-Application of Articles 15 and 16 to Matters within the Scope of Other
Chapters
Articles 15 and 16 shall not apply to matters within the scope of Chapter 3 (Rules of
Origin and Verification Procedures), Chapter 4 (Customs Procedures), Chapter 5 (Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures) or Chapter 6 (Technical Regulations, Standards and Conformity
Assessment Procedures).
ANNEX 2-A
SCHEDULES OF COMMITMENTS ON TARIFFS
This Annex contains Schedules of Commitments on Tariffs pursuant to Article 3.1.
I. Commitments on Ordinary Customs Duties
1. Part I of each initial or revised Schedule annexed hereto shall be established or be
replaced in modified form as the Parties agree and as foreseen under, and pursuant to, this
Agreement.
General Notes
2. For the purposes of this Annex:
(a) “Tariff Code” and “Description” refer to each actual or proxy national tariff line
of a Party and the corresponding description the Parties agree had existed, in fact
or in effect, on a mutually agreed date prior to entry into force of the Agreement
for that Party.
(b) “Base Rate” refers to the rate of ordinary customs duty of a Party based on the
most-favoured-nation applied rate (in the case of a WTO Member) or the general
non-preferential applied rate (in the case of a non-WTO Member) the Parties
agree had existed in relation to the tariff code, in fact or in effect, on the mutually
agreed date prior to entry into force of the Agreement for that Party under
subparagraph (a).
(c) “U” refers to no commitment being shown in relation to the base rate for the
relevant tariff code and to the duty being “unbound” for the year concerned.
3. In the Schedules of all Parties, commitments shown shall:
(a) be for calendar years, except for the periods that non-calendar year references are
permitted under paragraph 4;
(b) be effective from 1 January of the year concerned, except where:
(i) the year concerned is the year of entry into force for the Party concerned; or
(ii) another date is specified pursuant to this Agreement; and
(c) remain effective after the years for which they are first shown, unless another
commitment is shown for a subsequent year.
4. For a Party that is a Signatory:
(a) Once the date of entry into force of the Agreement pursuant to Article 8.1 of
Chapter 15 (Final Provisions) is known:
(i) ‘year 1’ shall become the calendar year of the date of entry into force of the
Agreement pursuant to Article 8.1 of Chapter 15 (Final Provisions),
regardless of whether the date pursuant to Article 8.2 of Chapter 15 falls in
the same year or in a later year1
; and
(ii) non-calendar years (other than those under subparagraph (b)) shall be
replaced by specific calendar years.
(b) Once the date of graduation of a Least Developed Country (LDC) from LDC
status is known:
(i) ‘year 1 LDC’ shall become the calendar year following that of the date of its
graduation from LDC status or the 11th calendar year from the date of entry
into force pursuant to Article 8.1 of Chapter 15 (Final Provisions),
whichever is later; and
(ii) non-calendar years of the form ‘year 1 LDC’ up to ‘year 25 LDC’ in its
schedule shall be replaced by specific calendar years.
Australia: Schedule of Commitments on Tariffs – Part I
Pursuant to Article 3.1(a) of Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods), Australia shall eliminate ordinary
customs duties on originating goods from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
New Zealand: Schedule of Commitments on Tariffs – Part I
Pursuant to Article 3.1(a) of Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods), New Zealand shall eliminate
ordinary customs duties on originating goods from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.

1
For the avoidance of doubt, where this Agreement enters into force for a Signatory at a date later than the date
of entry into force of this Agreement, that Party shall implement the scheduled tariff reduction that it would have
implemented had the Agreement entered into force for that Party on the same date as the date of entry into force
of this Agreement pursuant to Article 8.1 of Chapter 15 (Final Provisions).
II. Commitments on Other Duties or Charges
General Note
1. Part II of the Schedules shall be established as the Parties agree and as foreseen under,
and pursuant to, this Agreement.
Kiribati: Schedule of Commitments on Tariffs – Part II
2. Kiribati may maintain an import levy imposed on imports under the Import Levy
(Special Fund) Act of 1977 or any successor legislation at a rate not exceeding A$30 per 875
kilogram or per cubic metre of the goods subject to the payment of the levy, whichever rate
yields the greater amount.
Tuvalu: Schedule of Commitments on Tariffs – Part II
3. Tuvalu may maintain an import levy imposed on imports under the Import Levy
(Imposition of Levy) Order of 2008 or any successor legislation at a rate not exceeding A$10
per metric ton or per cubic metre of the goods subject to the payment of the levy, whichever
rate yields the greater amount.
ANNEX 2-B
ADMINISTRATION OF EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OBLIGATION UNDER
ARTICLE 3.2 IN RESPECT OF REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS UNDER
ARTICLE 3.2(C)
1. A Party shall request an exemption from the Joint Committee pursuant to Article 3.2(c)
from the obligation under Article 3.2 by notifying the Joint Committee through Contact Points
either:
(a) it has entered into, or expects in the current calendar year to enter into, a regional
trade agreement it considers might qualify for the exemption; or
(b) a non-Party has acceded to a regional trade agreement to which it is a party for
which the Joint Committee has approved an existing exemption.
2. When such notification is provided, the Parties acting jointly shall prepare calculations
of shares of world merchandise exports for the consideration of the Joint Committee. Such
calculations shall:
(a) be averages of annual shares in the three consecutive calendar years ending in the
calendar year two years before the current calendar year;
1
(b) be prepared without undue delay and be provided to the Joint Committee within
90 days, unless sufficient data in relation to all three years are not yet published,
in case of which the date of commencement of preparation of the calculations may
be delayed until 1 July of the current year;
(c) use estimates of merchandise exports of each constituent party and the world
denominated in current US dollar values for the same time period;
(d) if annual data for a country or territory are not available, use the most recent
annual data as proxy data for the year concerned, adjusted in proportion to the
movement between each of those years in the year-average rate of exchange
between the US dollar and the local currency of the country or territory;
(e) in respect of the estimate of a customs union’s contribution to world merchandise
exports, be net of the intra-customs union exports subject to availability of
suitable data;
(f) be calculated using statistics published in the WTO International Trade Statistics
publication or successor publication for as long as such statistics are published
there in a form that is suitable for the purposes of this Annex, and notwithstanding
subparagraph (e):

1 The current calendar year for the purposes of paragraph 2(a) and paragraph 4 shall be the actual or expected
year of entry into force or the year of accession. 
(i) merchandise exports of a country or territory that is a constituent party shall
be the published estimate if available, or an estimate published in another
data source agreed by the Parties; and
(ii) world merchandise exports shall be the published estimate net of intraEuropean Union exports and, only if used to derive that estimate, also be net
of intra-customs union exports for any other customs union;
but if the WTO International Trade Statistics publication or successor publication
no longer publishes statistics in a form that is suitable for the purposes of this
Annex, the data sources to be used shall be agreed by the Parties.
3. The Joint Committee may approve the exemption if the Parties are satisfied:
(a) the calculations show that no maximum limit for exemption under Article 3.2(c) is
exceeded;
(b) the regional trade agreement otherwise qualifies for the exemption; and
(c) the Party has observed its publication and notification obligations under Articles
13 and 14 in relation to the regional trade agreement.
4. An approved exemption shall be null and void if the regional trade agreement has not
entered into force for the requesting Party five years after the date of approval. A subsequent
approval may be sought if that Party has entered into, or expects in the current calendar year
to enter into, the same agreement and considers the agreement might qualify for the
exemption.

CHAPTER 3
RULES OF ORIGIN AND VERIFICATION PROCEDURES
Section A: Rules of Origin
Article 1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
aquaculture means the farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, crustaceans,
other aquatic invertebrates and aquatic plants, from seedstock such as eggs, fry, fingerlings
and larvae, by intervention in the rearing or growth processes to enhance production such as
regular stocking, feeding, or protection from predators;
CIF value means the value of the good imported and includes the cost of insurance and
freight up to the port or place of entry into the country of importation;
FOB means the free-on-board value of the good, inclusive of the cost of transport to the port
or site of final shipment abroad;
generally accepted accounting principles means the recognised consensus or substantial
authoritative support in a Party, with respect to the recording of revenues, expenses, costs,
assets and liabilities; the disclosure of information; and the preparation of financial
statements. These standards may encompass broad guidelines of general application as well
as detailed standards, practices and procedures;
identical and interchangeable goods or materials means goods or materials that are
interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;
indirect material means a good used in the production, testing or inspection of a good but
not physically incorporated into the good, or a good used in the maintenance of buildings or
the operation of equipment associated with the production of a good, including:
(a) fuel and energy;
(b) tools, dies and moulds;
(c) spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;
(d) lubricants, greases, compounding materials and other materials used in production
or used to operate equipment and buildings;
(e) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and supplies;
(f) equipment, devices and supplies used for testing or inspecting goods;
(g) catalysts and solvents; and
(h) any other goods that are not incorporated into the good but whose use in the
production of the good can reasonably be demonstrated to be a part of that
production;
material means any matter or substance that is used in the production of a good;
non-originating good or non-originating material means a good or material that does not
qualify as originating under this Chapter;
originating material means a material that qualifies as originating under this Chapter;
packing materials and containers for shipment means goods used to protect a good during
its transportation, other than containers and packaging material used for retail sale;
preferential tariff treatment means the rate of customs duties applicable to an originating
good of the exporting Party in accordance with Annex 2-A (Schedule of Commitments on
Tariffs);
producer means a person who engages in the production of goods or materials;
production means methods of obtaining goods including but not limited to growing, mining,
harvesting, farming, raising, breeding, extracting, gathering, collecting, capturing, fishing,
trapping, hunting, manufacturing, aquaculture, processing or assembling a good; and
product specific rules are the rules set out in Annex 3-B.
Article 2: Originating Goods
For the purposes of this Chapter, a good shall be treated as an originating good if it:
(a) is wholly obtained or produced in a Party as defined in Article 3;
(b) is produced entirely in one or more of the Parties, by one or more producers,
exclusively from originating materials, in accordance with this Chapter;
(c) satisfies all applicable requirements of Annex 3-B, as a result of processes
performed entirely in the territory of one or more of the Parties by one or more
producers; or
(d) otherwise qualifies as an originating good under this Chapter,
and meets all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.
Article 3: Goods Wholly Obtained or Produced
For the purposes of Article 2, the following goods shall be considered as wholly
obtained or produced:
(a) plants and plant goods, including fruit, flowers, vegetables, trees, seaweed, fungi
and live plants, grown, harvested, picked or gathered in a Party;1
(b) live animals born and raised in one or more Parties;
(c) goods obtained from live animals in a Party;
(d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping, fishing, farming, aquaculture, gathering or
capturing in a Party;
(e) minerals and other naturally occurring substances extracted or taken from the soil,
waters, seabed or beneath the seabed in a Party;
(f) goods of sea-fishing and other marine goods taken from the high seas, in
accordance with international law2
, by any vessel registered or recorded with a
Party and entitled to fly the flag of that Party;
(g) goods produced from the goods referred to in subparagraph (f) on board any
factory ship registered or recorded with a Party and entitled to fly the flag of that
Party;
(h) goods taken by a Party, or a person of a Party, from the seabed or beneath the
seabed beyond the Exclusive Economic Zone and adjacent Continental Shelf of
that Party and beyond areas over which third parties exercise jurisdiction under
exploitation rights granted in accordance with international law;
(i) goods which are:
(i) waste and scrap derived from production and or consumption in a Party
provided that such goods are fit only for the recovery of raw materials; or
(ii) used goods collected in a Party provided that such goods are fit only for the
recovery of raw materials; and
(j) goods produced or obtained in a Party solely from products referred to in
subparagraphs (a) to (i) or from their derivatives.

1
For the purposes of this Article “in a Party” means the land, territorial sea, Exclusive Economic Zone and
Continental Shelf over which a Party exercises sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance with international
law.
2
“International law” in sub-paragraphs (f) and (h) refers to generally accepted international law such as the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Article 4: Calculation of Regional Value Content
1. For the purposes of Article 2, if Annex 3-B requires a good to meet a regional value
requirement, the formula for calculating the regional value content will be:
RVC = V – VNM x 100
 V
where:
RVC is the regional value content of a good, expressed as a percentage;
V is the value of the good, as provided in paragraph 2; and
VNM is the value of non-originating materials, including materials of undetermined origin.
2. The value of the good referred to in paragraph 1 shall be, for exported goods, the FOB
value of the good.
3. The value of non-originating materials or materials of undetermined origin referred to in
paragraph 1 shall be:
(a) for imported materials, the CIF value at the time of importation of the materials;
or
(b) for materials acquired within the territory of the Party in which the good is
produced the earliest ascertainable price paid or payable for the materials in the
territory of the Party.
4. The value of goods under this Chapter will be determined in accordance with the
Agreement on Customs Valuation.
5. Each Party shall provide that, for a non-originating material or material of undetermined
origin included under paragraph 1, the following expenses may be deducted from the value of
the material:
(a) the costs of freight, insurance, packing and all other costs incurred in transporting
the material within or between the Parties’ territories to the location of the
producer;
(b) duties, taxes and customs brokerage fees on the material paid in the territories of
one or more of the Parties, other than duties and taxes that are waived, refunded,
refundable or otherwise recoverable, including credit against duty or tax paid or
payable;
(c) the cost of waste and spoilage resulting from the use of the material in the
production of the good, less the value of renewable scrap or by-product; 
(d) the cost of processing incurred in the territory of one or more of the Parties in the
production of the non-originating material; and
(e) the cost of originating materials used or consumed in the production of the nonoriginating material in the territory of one or more of the Parties.
6. If the cost or expense of a deduction listed in paragraph 5 is unknown or documentary
evidence of the amount of the deduction is not available, then no deduction is allowable for
that particular cost.
7. For the purposes of this Chapter, all costs shall be recorded and maintained in
accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the
Party in which the good is produced or manufactured.
Article 5: Cumulative Rules of Origin
1. A good is originating if the good is produced in one or more of the Parties by one or
more producers, provided that the good satisfies the requirements in Article 2 and all other
applicable requirements in this Chapter.
2. Originating goods or materials of any of the Parties used in the production of a good in
another Party shall be considered to originate in the latter Party.
3. Production that occurs in the territory of one or more of the Parties by one or more
producers may count as originating content in the origin determination of a good regardless of
whether that production was sufficient to confer originating status to the materials themselves.
Article 6: Minimal Operations and Processes
If a claim for origin is based on a regional value content, the operations or processes
listed below, when undertaken by themselves or in combination with each other, are
considered to be minimal and shall not be taken into account in determining whether or not a
good is originating:
(a) operations to ensure preservation of goods in good condition for the purposes of
transport or storage;
(b) facilitating shipment or transportation;
(c) packaging or presenting goods for sale;
(d) affixing of marks, labels or other like distinguishing signs on products or their
packaging; and
(e) disassembly.
Article 7: De Minimis
1. A good that does not satisfy a change in tariff classification requirement pursuant to
Annex 3-B will nonetheless be an originating good if:
(a) the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good that
did not undergo the required change in tariff classification does not exceed 10 per
cent of the FOB value of the good; or alternatively
(b) for a textiles or apparel good provided for in Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized
System, the weight of all non-originating materials used in its production that did
not undergo the required change in tariff classification does not exceed 10 per
cent of the total weight of the good.
2. The goods under paragraph 1 must meet all other applicable requirements of this
Chapter.
3. The value of such non-originating materials shall, however, be included in the value of
non-originating materials for any applicable regional value content requirement for the good.
Article 8: Accessories, Spare Parts, Tools and Instructional or other Information
Materials
1. For the purposes of determining origin, accessories, spare parts, tools or instructional or
other information materials provided with the good shall be considered originating goods and
shall be disregarded in determining whether all the non-originating materials used in the
production of the originating goods undergo the applicable change in tariff classification or
production process requirements.
2. If the good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the
accessories, spare parts, tools or instructional or other information materials provided with the
good shall be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may
be, in calculating the regional value content of the good.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall only apply if:
(a) the accessories, spare parts, tools or instructional or other information materials
are not invoiced separately from the good; and
(b) the quantities and the value of those accessories, spare parts, tools or instructional
or other information materials provided with the good are customary for that
good.
4. If accessories, spare parts, tools and instructional or other information materials
presented with the good are not customary for the good or are invoiced separately from the
good, they shall be treated as separate goods for the purpose of determining origin.
Article 9: Identical and Interchangeable Goods or Materials
The determination of whether identical and interchangeable goods or materials are
originating goods shall be made either:
(a) by physical segregation of each of the goods or materials; or
(b) by the use of an inventory management method recognised in the generally
accepted accounting principles of the Party in which the production is
performed or otherwise accepted by that Party, provided that the inventory
management method selected is used throughout the fiscal year of the person
that selected the inventory management method.
Article 10: Treatment of Packing Materials and Containers
1. Packing materials and containers in which a good is placed exclusively for
transportation and shipment shall not be taken into account in determining the origin of any
good.
2. Packing materials and containers in which a good is packaged for retail sale, when
classified together with that good, shall not be taken into account in determining whether all
of the non-originating materials used in the production of the good have met the applicable
change in tariff classification or process of production requirements for the good as set out in
Annex 3-B.
3. If a good is subject to a regional value content requirement, the value of the packing
materials and containers in which the good is packaged for retail sale shall be taken into
account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, in calculating the
regional value content of the good.
4. If the packaging material and container is not customary for the good, its value shall not
be included as originating in a regional value content calculation for the good.
Article 11: Indirect Materials
An indirect material shall be treated as an originating material without regard to where
it is produced. The value of such a good shall be the cost registered in the accounting records
of the producer of the good.
Article 12: Retention of records
1. In accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, each Party shall require, that:
(a) a producer, exporter, or authorised representative of the producer or exporter shall
maintain all records relating to the origin of a good for which preferential tariff 
treatment is claimed in an importing Party, including the Declaration of Origin
relevant to the good, or a copy thereof, for five years from the date of the
exportation; and
(b) an importer claiming preferential tariff treatment shall maintain all records
relating to the importation of the good, including the Declaration of Origin
relevant to the good (completed pursuant to Article 15), or a copy thereof, for five
years after the date of importation.
2. The records to be maintained pursuant to this Article include electronic records.
Article 13: Consignment
1. Goods directly transported among the Parties will retain their originating status under
Article 2.
2. A good shall retain its originating status under Article 2 if it has been transported
through a non-party provided that the good has not undergone subsequent production or any
other operation in the territory of a non-party other than:
(a) unloading, reloading, storing, any other operation necessary to preserve the goods
in good condition, repacking, relabelling or any other operation necessary to
transport the goods to the territory of the importing Party; or
(b) if the goods have been shown in or utilised at an exhibition in a non-party.
Article 14: Goods in Storage
The Customs Administration of the importing Party shall grant preferential tariff
treatment for an originating good of the exporting Party which, on the date of entry into force
of this Agreement, is:
(a) in the process of being transported from the exporting Party; or
(b) has not been released from Customs control; or
(c) is in storage in a warehouse regulated by the Customs Administration of the
importing Party;
provided that the good is destined for home consumption in the importing Party and satisfies
all the applicable requirements of this Chapter.
Section B: Origin Procedures
Article 15: Declaration of Origin
1. A claim that goods are eligible for preferential tariff treatment shall be supported by a
Declaration of Origin completed by the exporter or producer or an authorised representative
of the exporter or producer.
2. The Declaration of Origin shall:
(a) contain the information detailed in Annex 3-A;
(b) be made in respect of one or more goods and may include a variety of goods;
(c) be completed in English;
(d) be in a written format, including electronic format; and
(e) be an original, except that copies may be made for subsequent transactions.
3. The Declaration of Origin may be made on the invoice for the goods or on a separate
document, including on a company’s letterhead.
4. Neither erasures nor superimposition shall be allowed on the Declaration of Origin. Any
alteration shall be made by striking out the erroneous information and making any addition
required. Such alteration shall be approved by the exporter or producer making the
declaration. To the extent possible, unused spaces on the form shall be crossed out. If the
Declaration of Origin is more than one page long, subsequent pages shall be numbered in
sequence. For example, a three page document shall be numbered as 1 of 3, 2 of 3 and 3 of 3.
5. A Declaration of Origin shall remain valid for two years after the date on which the
Declaration of Origin was signed.
6. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a producer or exporter from obtaining the
services of a third party to assist them to complete the Declaration of Origin.
Article 16: Submission of Declaration of Origin
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the original Declaration of Origin or a
copy shall be submitted to the Customs Administration of the importing Party when requested
by that Customs Administration.
Article 17: Circumstances When Declaration Not Required
1. In accordance with its domestic laws and regulations, the importing Party shall not
require a Declaration of Origin in order to claim preferential tariff treatment for:
(a) goods for which the customs value does not exceed US$200 FOB or the
equivalent amount in the importing Party’s currency, or such higher amount as it
may establish; or
(b) any good for which a Party has waived the requirement for a Declaration of
Origin,
provided that the importation does not form part of one or more importations that may
reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of avoiding the
submission of the Declaration of Origin.
2. Notwithstanding Article 15, the importing Party may elect to waive the requirement for
a Declaration of Origin or any of the requirements in Section B.
Article 18: Claim for Preferential Tariff Treatment
1. Subject to Article 22, the importing Party shall grant preferential tariff treatment to a
good imported into its territory from any other Party, provided that:
(a) the good is an originating good under Article 2;
(b) the consignment criteria outlined in Article 13 have been met; and
(c) the importer claiming preferential tariff treatment has met the Declaration of
Origin requirements specified in Article 15.
2. If the origin of the good is not in doubt, the discovery of minor transcription errors or
discrepancies in documentation shall not by that sole fact invalidate the Declaration of Origin,
if it does in fact correspond to the goods submitted.
3. For multiple goods declared under the same Declaration of Origin, a problem
encountered with one of the goods listed shall not affect or delay the granting of preferential
tariff treatment and customs clearance of the remaining goods listed in the Declaration of
Origin.
4. The importing Party shall require that an importer promptly makes a corrected import
declaration and pays any owed duties when the importer has reason to believe that the good
does not meet the origin requirements.
5. Each Party shall provide that an importer may apply for preferential tariff treatment and
a refund of any excess duties paid for a good if the importer did not make a claim for
preferential tariff treatment at the time of importation, provided that:
(a) the good would have qualified for preferential tariff treatment when it was
imported into the territory of the Party; and
(b) the application is made within two years of the date of importation or such longer
period as the importing Party’s laws and regulations allow.
Article 19: Verification of Origin
1. When there is a reasonable doubt as to the origin of a good, the Customs Administration
of an importing Party may verify the eligibility of a good for preferential tariff treatment
under this Agreement by means of:
(a) written requests for information to the importer;
(b) written requests for information to the exporter or producer or an authorised
representative of the exporter or producer;
(c) a verification visit to the premises of the exporter or producer in the territory of
another Party (under Article 20); or
(d) any other procedures as mutually agreed by the relevant Parties.
2. A written request referred to in paragraph 1 shall include:
(a) the identity of the Customs Administration making the request;
(b) the reason for the request, including the specific issue the importing Party seeks to
resolve with the verification;
(c) sufficient information to identify the good that is being verified; and
(d) a copy of relevant information submitted with the good, including the Declaration
of Origin.
3. Subject to the availability of resources and to the extent allowed by its laws, regulations
and policies, the exporting Party shall whenever possible cooperate in any action to verify
eligibility and require that producers and exporters cooperate in any action to verify
eligibility.
Article 20: Verification Visit
1. If all verification actions under Article 19.1 (a), (b) and (d) have been exhausted and
have failed to resolve the concerns of the Customs Administration of the importing Party, a
verification visit may be conducted. 
2. Prior to conducting such a visit, the Customs Administration of the importing Party
shall:
(a) make a written request to the exporter or producer to conduct a verification visit
of their premises; and
(b) obtain the written consent of the exporter or producer whose premises are to be
visited.
3. If an exporter or producer consents to a proposed verification visit, it shall provide its
written consent within 30 days of the receipt of a request for a visit.
4. The written request referred to in paragraph 2(a) shall include:
(a) the identity of the Customs Administration issuing the request;
(b) the name of the exporter or producer of the good in the exporting Party to whom
the request is addressed;
(c) the date the written request is made;
(d) the proposed date and place of the visit;
(e) the objective and scope of the proposed visit, including specific reference to the
good that is the subject of the verification referred to in the Declaration of Origin;
and
(f) the names and titles of the officials of the Customs Administration of the
importing Party who will participate in the visit.
5. The Customs Administration of the importing Party shall notify the Customs
Administration of the exporting Party when it requests a verification visit in accordance with
this Article.
6. Officials of the Customs Administration of the exporting Party may participate in the
verification visit as observers.
7. Nothing in this Article shall affect the rights of the Customs Administration of a Party
to undertake verification or compliance activities within its territory in accordance with its
laws and regulations.
Article 21: Time Limits for Decision on Origin
The Customs Administration of the importing Party shall complete any action to
verify eligibility for preferential tariff treatment within 130 days of the commencement of
such action or within 90 days of the conclusion of a verification visit, whichever is later, and 
make a decision and provide written advice as to whether the good is eligible for preferential
tariff treatment to all relevant parties within the following 21 days.
Article 22: Denial of Preferential Tariff Treatment
1. An importing Party may deny a claim for preferential tariff treatment for a good if:
(a) the good does not meet the requirements of this Chapter;
(b) the importer, exporter or producer fails to comply with any of the relevant
requirements of this Chapter; or
(c) a verification conducted in accordance with this Chapter has failed to determine
that the good is originating.
2. In the event that preferential tariff treatment is denied, the Customs Administration of
the importing Party shall provide full reasons for that decision in writing to the importer, on
request.
3. The Customs Administration of the importing Party shall not reject a claim for
preferential tariff treatment only for the reason that the invoice is issued in a non-party or by a
third party.
Article 23: Right of Appeal
1. The importing Party shall grant the right of appeal in matters relating to the eligibility
for preferential tariff treatment to producers, exporters or importers of goods traded or to be
traded between the Parties, in accordance with its domestic laws, regulations and
administrative practices.
2. If no right of appeal exists in a Party in matters relating to the eligibility for preferential
tariff treatment to producers, exporters or importers of goods traded or to be traded between
the Parties, those Parties will, subject to the availability of resources, endeavour to establish
such rights of appeal.
Article 24: Confidentiality
Information communicated between the Parties for the purpose of verification of origin
shall be used for that purpose only, and be otherwise subject to Article 6 of Chapter 15 (Final
Provisions).
Article 25: Action Against Fraudulent Acts
When it is suspected that fraudulent acts in connection with the evidence of origin 
requirements have been committed, the Parties concerned shall cooperate in the exchange of
information in accordance with the Parties’ respective laws and regulations.
Section C: Consultation and Review
Article 26: Meetings and Consultations on Rules of Origin
1. The Parties shall, through the Committee on Trade in Goods, Rules of Origin and
Customs Procedures, consult regularly to ensure that this Chapter is administered in a manner
consistent with the objectives and other provisions of this Chapter.
2. The government authorities of the Parties with a direct interest in any issues that arise
concerning origin determination, classification of products, or other matters related to this
Chapter shall consult with a view to resolving such issues and, where relevant, inform the
importer of the outcome. The Joint Committee shall be notified of any significant outcomes
from such consultations.
Article 27: Review of Origin Procedures
1. The Parties, through the Committee on Trade in Goods, Rules of Origin and Customs
Procedures shall commence a review of this Chapter within three years of entry into force of
this Agreement and submit a final report to the Joint Committee, including any
recommendations, within four years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. The Committee on Trade in Goods, Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures shall
review the implementation of the Declaration of Origin provisions within four years of the
date of entry into force of this Agreement and make appropriate recommendations to the Joint
Committee.
Article 28: Consultation and Review of Product Specific Rules
1. The Parties shall consult and cooperate to ensure that Article 2(c) is applied in an
effective and uniform manner.
2. If a Party considers that the regional value content, change in tariff classification or
specific process requirement set out in Annex 3-B is unduly restricting, distorting or
disrupting of the Party’s trade of a good, then that Party may request in writing consultations
with the other Parties to determine a suitable amendment to Annex 3-B. The Committee on
Trade in Goods, Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures shall promptly consider the
request. In the event that the Committee considers a change to one or more rules in Annex 3-
B is warranted, it shall make recommendations to the Joint Committee, which shall decide
whether to adopt the recommendations in accordance with Chapter 12 (Institutional
Provisions).
3. The Parties shall complete a review of this Article within three years of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement or a period otherwise agreed by the Parties to address any
differences between the Parties arising from the operation of this Article.
Article 29: Technical Revisions of the Product Specific Rules Schedule
1. When a periodic amendment to the Harmonized System is published, the Parties shall
prepare technical revisions to Annex 3-B to implement that version of the Harmonized
System, and shall do so in accordance with this Article and the relevant procedures for
technical revisions to Annex 3-B as adopted by the Joint Committee under Chapter 12
(Institutional Provisions).
2. The Parties shall ensure that technical revisions to Annex 3-B are carried out on a
neutral basis and market access conditions are not impaired by the process or the outcomes of
technical revisions to Annex 3-B.
3. The Parties, through the Joint Committee or a relevant subsidiary body established by it,
shall endorse and promptly publish the technical revisions that are prepared pursuant to
paragraph 1 and determine the date on which such revisions will come into effect.
ANNEX 3-A
DECLARATION OF ORIGIN REQUIREMENTS
A declaration of origin that is the basis for a claim for preferential tariff treatment under
this Agreement shall include the following elements:
1. Producer:
Provide the producer’s name, address (including country), e-mail address and telephone
number. If multiple producers have been involved in producing the good(s) covered in the
declaration, provide a list of those producers.
2. Exporter:
If known, provide the exporter’s name, address, including country, e-mail address and
telephone number.
3. Authorised Representative:
If the declaration is signed by an authorised representative of the exporter or producer,
provide the authorised representative’s name, address, including country, e-mail address and
telephone number.
4. Importer:
If known, provide the importer’s name, address, e-mail address and telephone number.
5. Description and Harmonized System Tariff Classification of the Good(s):
Provide a description of the good(s) and the Harmonized System tariff classification(s) of the
good(s) to the 6-digit level. The description should be sufficient to relate it to the good(s)
covered by the declaration.
If the declaration of origin covers a single shipment of a good or goods, indicate if known, the
invoice number related to the exportation.
6. Origin Criterion:
Using codes, specify the rule(s) of origin criteria under which the good(s) qualify. (The codes
are: WO = goods wholly obtained or produced in a Party in accordance with Article 2(a); PE
= goods produced entirely in one or more of the Parties by one or more producers exclusively
from originating materials in accordance with Article 2(b); and PSR = goods satisfying all
applicable requirements of Annex 3-B as a result of processes performed entirely in the
territory of one or more Parties by one or more producers in accordance with Article 3(c)).
7. Period of Validity:
If the declaration covers multiple shipments of identical goods, include the period of validity
(a specified period of up to two years from the date of declaration).
8. Authorised Signature and Date:
The declaration must be signed and dated by the exporter or producer or an authorised
representative of the exporter or producer accompanied by the following statement: 
I declare that the good(s) described in this document qualify as originating in [NAME OF
PACER PLUS PARTY(IES)] in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin
and Verification Procedures) of the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations Plus
(PACER Plus) and the information contained in this document is true and accurate. I assume
responsibility for proving such representations and agree to maintain for a period of five years
and present upon request or to make available during a verification visit, documentation
necessary to support this declaration.
ANNEX 3-B
SCHEDULE OF PRODUCT SPECIFIC RULES
1. For the purpose of interpreting the Product Specific Rules set forth in this Annex:
Chapter means a chapter of the Harmonized System (the first two digits of the tariff
classification number under the Harmonized System 2012);
Heading means a heading of the Harmonized System (the first four digits in the tariff
classification number under the Harmonized System 2012); and
Subheading means a subheading of the Harmonized System (the first six digits in the tariff
classification number under the Harmonized System 2012).
2. This Annex is set out as follows:
(a) Column 1 – Tariff item (2-digit or 4-digit)
(b) Column 2 – Tariff subheading (6-digit)
(c) Column 3 – Applicable change in tariff classification rule
(d) Column 4 – Applicable regional value content rule
(e) Column 5 – Applicable process rule
3. The Product Specific Rule or set of Product Specific Rules that applies to a particular
chapter (2-digit code), heading (4-digit code) or subheading (6-digit code) is set out
immediately adjacent to the chapter, heading or subheading.
4. For the purposes of this Annex:
“CC” means that all non-originating materials used in the production of the good have
undergone a change in tariff classification at the 2-digit level;
“CTH” means that all non-originating materials used in the production of the good have
undergone a change in tariff classification at the 4-digit level;
“CTSH” means that all non-originating materials used in the production of the good have
undergone a change in tariff classification at the 6-digit level; and
“RVC (40)” means that the good must have a regional value content of not less than 40 per
cent as calculated under Article 4.
5. Where a range of Product Specific Rules are provided for a good, origin may be
claimed on the basis that at least one of the Product Specific Rules is satisfied. 
6. Where a Product Specific Rule requires a regional value content, origin may be claimed
only if the final process of production is performed within a Party.
7. Where a Product Specific Rule requires a change in tariff classification or a specific
process, the requirement applies only to non-originating materials, and the specific process
must take place within the territory of one or more Parties. For example; the process
“smoking, drying or production of flours, meals or pellets”, means that origin may be claimed
only if all non-originating material used in the production of the good has undergone the
processes of smoking, drying or production of flours, meals or pellets within one or more of
the Parties. The Annex may include definitions of some processes.
8. Where a Product Specific Rule requires a change in tariff classification that excludes a
change from other specified tariff classifications, the exclusion applies only to non-originating
materials.
9. Section notes within this Annex apply to all chapters, headings or subheadings within
the indicated section unless a specific exclusion is indicated.
10. Chapter notes within this Annex apply to all headings or subheadings within the
indicated chapter unless a specific exclusion is indicated.
11. Heading notes within this Annex apply to all subheadings within the indicated heading
unless a specific exclusion is indicated.
12 Reclassification of a good which does not undergo any transformation within a Party
will not, in itself, confer origin to that good.

CHAPTER 4
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES
Article 1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
customs law means such laws and regulations administered and enforced by the Customs
Administration of a Party concerning the importation, exportation, and transit/transhipment of
goods, as they relate to customs duties, other taxes and other charges, or to prohibitions,
restrictions and other similar controls with respect to the movement of controlled items across
the boundary of the customs territory of a Party;
customs procedures means the treatment applied by the Customs Administration of a Party
to goods, which are subject to that Party’s customs law;
Revised Kyoto Convention means the World Customs Organization’s International
Convention on the Simplification and Harmonization of Customs Procedures done on 26 June
1999; and
WCO means the World Customs Organization.
Article 2: Objectives
1. The objectives of this Chapter are:
(a) to ensure predictability, consistency and transparency in the application of
customs laws and regulations of the Parties;
(b) to promote efficient, economical administration of customs procedures and the
expeditious clearance of goods;
(c) to simplify and harmonise customs procedures;
(d) to facilitate trade among the Parties and the security of such trade;
(e) to enhance the implementation of the requirements of Article VII of GATT 1994,
the Agreement on Customs Valuation and other relevant WTO provisions relating
to customs matters; and
(f) to promote cooperation between the Customs Administrations of the Parties.
2. Recognising the capacity constraints of the developing country Parties, and with a view
to increasing their export opportunities, assistance in relation to this Chapter would be 
provided under Chapter 10 (Development and Economic Cooperation) and the associated
Work Programme.
Article 3: Scope
This Chapter shall apply, in accordance with the Parties’ respective laws, regulations
and policies, to customs procedures applied to goods traded between the Parties.
Article 4: Customs Procedures and Facilitation
1. Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures and practices are predictable,
consistent and transparent, and facilitate trade, including through the expeditious clearance of
goods.
2. Customs procedures of each Party shall, if possible and to the extent permitted by its
customs law, conform to international standards and recommended practices, in particular
those of the WCO.
3. The Customs Administration of each Party shall periodically review its customs
procedures with a view to their simplification and the facilitation of trade.
Article 5: Customs Cooperation
1. Subject to available resources and to the extent its domestic laws permit, the Customs
Administration of each Party should assist the Customs Administration of another Party in
relation to:
(a) the implementation and operation of this Chapter;
(b) the development and implementation of customs best practice and risk
management techniques;
(c) the provision, if possible, of prior notice of changes to laws, regulations, and
relevant procedures and guidelines that would affect the operation of this Chapter;
(d) the simplification and harmonisation of customs procedures;
(e) the advancement of technical skills and the use of technology;
(f) the application of the Harmonized System;
(g) the application of the disciplines on valuation for customs purposes under Article
VII of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Customs Valuation;
(h) the movement of goods among the Parties; and
(i) customs enforcement, including inter alia investigation and prevention of prima
facie customs offences.
2. Subject to available resources, the Customs Administrations of the Parties may, as
deemed appropriate, explore and undertake cooperation projects, including:
(a) capacity building programmes to enhance the capability of customs personnel of
Parties that are Forum Island Countries; and
(b) technical assistance programmes to facilitate the activities of Parties that are
Forum Island Countries in relation to customs matters.
Article 6: Use of Automated Systems
1. The Customs Administration of each Party should have its own system that supports
electronic customs transactions.
2. In implementing initiatives under paragraph 1, the Customs Administration of each
Party shall take into account relevant international standards and best practices, including
those recommended by the WCO, taking into consideration its available infrastructure,
capabilities and needs.
Article 7: Expedited Shipments
To the extent possible, the Customs Administration of each Party shall adopt procedures
to expedite the clearance of shipments while maintaining appropriate control, including:
(a) to provide for pre-arrival processing of information related to shipments;
(b) to permit the submission of a single document covering all goods contained in a
shipment, including through electronic means; and
(c) to minimise the documentation required for the release of shipments.
Article 8: Release of Goods
1. To the extent possible, each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures allowing, goods
to be released:
(a) within 48 hours of arrival or as soon as practicable; and
(b) where possible, at the point of arrival, without temporary transfer to warehouses
or other locations.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not prevent the Customs Administration of a Party
from holding a shipment:
(a) for the purpose of determining, in accordance with risk management techniques,
whether an examination of the goods is necessary;
(b) if permits need to be obtained for restricted goods; or
(c) in any situation if it has concerns in relation to the goods.
Article 9: Valuation
1. Subject to paragraph 2, each Party shall apply the provisions of Article VII of GATT
1994 and the Agreement on Customs Valuation, including the Interpretative Notes at Annex I
to that Agreement, in determining the value for customs purposes of goods traded between the
Parties.
2. If a Party is a developing country and not a WTO Member, it may apply the provisions
of the Agreement on Customs Valuation to the extent of its capacity, provided that if a
problem arises from the application of a specific valuation procedure, it engages in bilateral
consultations on request of another Party with an interest in a good to which that valuation
procedure has been applied, with a view to finding a mutually agreed solution. Such
consultations shall be undertaken in accordance with Article 15.
3. A Party that is a developing country and not a WTO Member:
(a) shall to the extent of its capacity apply a system for the valuation of goods for
customs purposes that:
(i) is fair, uniform and neutral;
(ii) precludes the use of arbitrary or fictitious customs values;
(iii) bases the valuation of goods for customs purposes, to the greatest extent
possible, on the transaction value of the goods being valued;
(iv) bases customs value on simple and equitable criteria consistent with
commercial practices;
(v) ensures that valuation procedures are of general application without
distinction between sources of supply; and
(vi) does not use valuation procedures to combat dumping;
(b) shall to the greatest extent possible not determine customs value on the basis of:
(i) the selling price in the country of importation of goods produced in such
country;
(ii) a system which provides for the acceptance for customs purposes of the
higher of two alternative values;
(iii) the price of goods in the domestic market of the country of exportation;
(iv) the cost of production other than computed values which have been
determined for identical or similar goods in accordance with the provisions
of Article 6 and Article 8(2) of the Agreement on Customs Valuation;
(v) the price of goods for export to a country other than the country of
importation;
(vi) minimum customs values; or
(vii) arbitrary or fictitious values;
and shall seek to eliminate those measures which are so determined as soon as
practicable; and
(c) shall ensure that, if the importer so requests, the importer be informed in writing
of the customs value and the method used to determine such value.
Article 10: Advance Rulings
1. To the extent permitted by its domestic laws, regulations and administrative practices
and its capacity, each Party upon receiving an application pursuant to paragraph 2(a), shall
through its Customs Administration provide written advance rulings on tariff classification
and origin of goods, and, if the Party has implemented the Agreement on Customs Valuation
on questions arising from the application of that Agreement to goods.
2. Procedures for advance rulings adopted by a Party shall:
(a) provide that an importer in its territory or an exporter or producer in the territory
of another Party may apply for an advance ruling before the importation of the
goods in question;
(b) include a detailed description of the information required to process an application
for an advance ruling;
(c) provide that its Customs Administration may, at any time during the course of an
evaluation of an application for an advance ruling, request that the applicant
provide additional information within a specified period;
(d) provide that any advance ruling be based on the facts and circumstances presented
by the applicant, and any other relevant information in the possession of the
decision-maker;
(e) provide that an advance ruling be issued to the applicant expeditiously, within the
period specified in each Party’s domestic laws, regulations or administrative
procedures; and
(f) provide that a written explanation of the reasons for the ruling be provided to the
applicant.
3. A Party may reject a request for an advance ruling where the additional information
requested by it in accordance with paragraph 2(c) is not provided within the specified period.
4. Subject to paragraphs 1 and 5, each Party that permits advance rulings under its
domestic laws, regulations and administrative procedures, shall apply an advance ruling to
goods described in that ruling imported into its territory beginning on the date it issues the
ruling or any other date specified in the ruling for such period in accordance with its domestic
laws, regulations and administrative procedures. The issuing Party shall accord the same
treatment to all importations described in that ruling, if the facts and circumstances are
identical in all respects.
5. A Party may modify or revoke an advance ruling if:
(a) a determination is made that the ruling was based on an error of fact or law;
(b) a determination is made that false or misleading information was provided or
relevant information was withheld;
(c) there is a change in domestic law consistent with this Chapter;
(d) there is a change in a material fact or circumstance on which the ruling was based;
or
(e) conflicting rulings have been issued.
6. If an importer claims that the treatment accorded to an imported good should be
governed by an advance ruling, the Customs Administration may evaluate whether the facts
and circumstances of the importation are consistent with the facts and circumstances upon
which an advance ruling was based.
Article 11: Risk Management
1. Each Party shall administer customs procedures so as to facilitate the clearance of lowrisk goods and focus on high-risk goods. To enhance the flow of goods across its borders, the
Customs Administration of each Party shall regularly review these procedures.
2. If a Customs Administration of a Party deems that the inspection of goods is not
necessary to authorise clearance of the goods from customs control, that Party shall endeavour
to provide a single point for the documentary or electronic processing of those goods.
3. Each Party shall, to the extent of its capacity, work to further enhance the use of risk
management techniques in the administration of its customs procedures.
Article 12: Confidentiality
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require any Party to furnish or allow
access to confidential information pursuant to this Chapter, the disclosure of which it
considers would:
(a) be contrary to the national and public interest as determined by its laws, rules,
regulations or policies;
(b) be contrary to any of its laws, regulations or policies including, but not limited to,
those protecting personal privacy or the financial affairs and accounts of
individuals;
(c) prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or
private; or
(d) impede law enforcement.
2. A Party shall maintain the confidentiality of information provided pursuant to this
Chapter and shall not use or disclose information provided pursuant to this Chapter except for
the purpose for which it was provided, unless it has the consent of the providing Customs
Administration, or disclosure is required by its laws and regulations. If a Party is required or
authorised by its laws and regulations to disclose information provided pursuant to this
Chapter, it shall, wherever possible, give advance notice of any such disclosure to the
providing Customs Administration.
Article 13: Enquiry Points and Transparency
1. Each Party shall designate one or more enquiry points to address enquiries from
interested persons concerning customs matters, and shall publish online if possible and, if not,
in print form, information concerning procedures for making such enquiries.
2. Each Party shall publish online if possible and, if not, in print form, all statutory and
regulatory provisions and any customs administrative procedures applied or enforced by its
Customs Administration, not including law enforcement procedures and internal operational
guidelines.
3. Each Party that is a WTO Member or a Contracting Party to the Revised Kyoto
Convention shall ensure that all items of information required to be published under
paragraphs 1 and 2 are published promptly in such a manner as to enable interested Parties
and persons to become acquainted with them. Each Party that is not a WTO Member or a
Contracting Party to the Revised Kyoto Convention shall ensure that those items of
information are published in such a manner as to enable interested Parties and persons to
become acquainted with them and shall, to the extent of its capacity, ensure that those items
are published promptly.
Article 14: Review and Appeal
1. In accordance with its domestic law, each Party shall provide that any person to whom
its Customs Administration issues an administrative decision has access, within its territory,
to:
(a) administrative review independent of the official or office that issued the decision
subject to review, or administrative review by a higher authority supervising its
Customs Administration; and
(b) judicial review of the determination taken at the final level of administrative
review.
2. The decision on appeal shall be given to the appellant and the reasons for such decision
shall be provided in writing.
Article 15: Consultations
The Customs Administrations of the Parties shall encourage consultation with each
other regarding significant customs issues that affect goods traded between the Parties.
Article 16: Meetings on Customs Procedures
1. The Parties shall, through the Joint Committee, the Committee on Trade in Goods,
Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures, or another relevant subsidiary body, consult
regularly to consider the implementation of their commitments under this Chapter.
2. The Parties, through the Joint Committee, the Committee on Trade in Goods, Rules
of Origin and Customs Procedures, or another relevant subsidiary body, shall commence a
review of this Chapter within three years of entry into force of this Agreement and submit a
final report to the Joint Implementation Committee, including any recommendations, within
four years of entry into force of this Agreement.
CHAPTER 5
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
Article 1: Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Chapter:
Competent Authority means those authorities within each Party recognised by the national
government as responsible for developing and administering sanitary and phytosanitary
measures within that Party;
relevant international organisations in the field of sanitary or phytosanitary protection
mean the Codex Alimentarius Commission (Codex), the World Organisation for Animal
Health (OIE) and those operating under the framework of the International Plant Protection
Convention (IPPC), as specified in paragraph 3 of Annex A to the SPS Agreement; and
2. The definitions in Annex A of the SPS Agreement are incorporated into this Chapter
and shall form part of this Chapter, mutatis mutandis.
Article 2: Objectives
1. The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) facilitate trade between the Parties while protecting human, animal or plant life or
health in the territory of each Party;
(b) provide greater transparency in, and enhance understanding of, the application of
each Party’s sanitary and phytosanitary measures;
(c) strengthen cooperation between the Parties on sanitary and phytosanitary matters;
(d) enhance the practical implementation of the SPS Agreement by Parties that are
WTO Members; and
(e) promote the application of the requirements of the SPS Agreement by Parties that
are not WTO Members.
2. Recognising the capacity constraints of the developing country Parties, and with a view
to increasing their export opportunities, assistance in relation to this Chapter would be
provided under Chapter 10 (Development and Economic Cooperation) and the associated
Work Programme.
Article 3: Scope
This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party that may,
directly or indirectly, affect trade between that Party and other Parties.
Article 4: Basic Rights and Obligations of Parties under this Chapter
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the rights of a Party to take sanitary and
phytosanitary measures necessary for the protection of human, animal or plant life or health,
provided that such measures are not inconsistent with this Chapter.
2. Parties that are WTO Members affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each
other under the SPS Agreement. While reserving their rights under the SPS Agreement,
Parties that are WTO Members shall apply the provisions of Article 1 to Article 8 of the SPS
Agreement with respect to Parties that are not WTO Members, to the extent that such
provisions are not already covered in this Chapter.
3. Notwithstanding that this Chapter applies to developing country Parties that are not
WTO Members, where such a Party prepares, adopts or applies a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure, such measure shall be based on the SPS Agreement only to the extent of its capacity.
On request of a Party with an interest in a product subject to a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure applied by such a Party, those Parties shall engage promptly in bilateral technical
discussions on the matter in accordance with the procedure under Article 12.
Article 5: Scientific Basis for Non-Discrimination with Respect to and Harmonization of
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. Each Party shall ensure that any sanitary or phytosanitary measure is applied only to the
extent necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, is based on scientific
principles and is not maintained without sufficient scientific evidence, except as provided for
in paragraph 5 of this Article.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its sanitary and phytosanitary measures do not arbitrarily or
unjustifiably discriminate between Parties where identical or similar conditions prevail,
including between its own territory and that of other Parties.
3. Wherever possible, each Party shall base its sanitary or phytosanitary measures on
international standards, guidelines or recommendations, where they exist. Sanitary or
phytosanitary measures which conform to international standards, guidelines or
recommendations shall be deemed to be necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or
health and be presumed to be consistent with this Chapter.
4. A Party may introduce or maintain sanitary or phytosanitary measures which result in a
higher level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection than would be achieved by measures
based on the relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, provided there
is a scientific justification.
5. In cases where relevant scientific evidence is insufficient, a Party may provisionally
adopt sanitary or phytosanitary measures on the basis of pertinent information. In such
circumstances, Parties shall seek to obtain additional information necessary for a more
objective assessment of risk and review the sanitary or phytosanitary measure within a
reasonable period of time.
Article 6: Equivalence of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. Each Party shall accept the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of other Parties as
equivalent, even if the measures of another Party differ from its own or from those of other
Parties trading in the same product, if the exporting Party objectively demonstrates to the
importing Party that its measures achieve the importing Party’s appropriate level of sanitary
or phytosanitary protection. For this purpose, reasonable access shall be given on request to
the importing Party for inspection, testing and other relevant procedures.
2. A Party shall on request enter into negotiations within a reasonable period of time with
the aim of achieving bilateral or regional recognition arrangements of the equivalence of
specified sanitary or phytosanitary measures.
3. With a view to facilitating appropriate trading opportunities for all of the Parties,
particularly the developing country Parties, in respect of requests for recognition of
equivalence under paragraphs 1 and 2:
(a) requests should be processed as expeditiously as possible;
(b) Parties shall cooperate on the prioritisation of exporting Parties’ requests in
accordance with each importing Party’s laws, regulations and procedures
governing the prioritisation of such requests;
(c) once the importing Party has determined that the information provided by the
exporting Party is sufficient, it shall begin the equivalence assessment within a
reasonable period of time with a view to completing it as expeditiously as
possible.
4. In respect of equivalence determinations, the Parties shall take into account the
guidance provided by the relevant international organisations in the field of sanitary or
phytosanitary protection.
5. If an exporting Party considers that limitations on its capacity to objectively
demonstrate achievement of an importing Party’s appropriate level of sanitary or
phytosanitary protection constitute an obstacle to acceptance of the case for equivalence, it
may request technical discussions with that importing Party in accordance with the procedure
under Article 12, with a view to clarifying the matter and identifying any actions that may
enhance the capacity of the exporting Party or otherwise assist the acceptance of equivalence.
6. Should the importing Party make a final decision to recognise a measure, a group of
measures or a system as equivalent under this Article, the importing Party shall take the
necessary actions to allow trade on the basis of the relevant measure, group of measures or
system as promptly as possible.
7. Should the importing Party make a final decision to not recognise a measure, a group of
measures or a system as equivalent to its own, the importing Party shall provide to the
exporting Party an explanation of the reasons for its decision as promptly as possible.
8. To the extent possible, where mutually agreed, the Parties involved in a positive
equivalence determination are to report the outcome to other Parties through Contact Points.
Article 7: Adaptation of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures to Regional Conditions,
including Pest- or Disease-Free Areas and Areas of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence
1. The Parties may, by mutual agreement, cooperate on adaptation to regional conditions
in accordance with the SPS Agreement and relevant international standards, guidelines and
recommendations, in order to facilitate trade.
2. Importing Parties may make determinations in relation to regionalisation, pest- or
disease-free areas, areas of low pest or disease prevalence, zoning and compartmentalisation
which shall be consistent with the SPS Agreement, in particular Article 6 of the SPS
Agreement.
3. Following a determination assessment, if the evaluation of the evidence provided by the
exporting Party does not result in a decision by the importing Party to recognise the pest- and
disease-free areas, or areas of low pest and disease prevalence, the importing Party shall
provide the exporting Party the rationale for its decision.
Article 8: Publication of Regulations
1. Each Party shall ensure that all sanitary and phytosanitary regulations (sanitary and
phytosanitary measures such as laws, decrees or ordinances which are applicable generally)
which have been adopted are published promptly in such a manner as to enable interested
Parties and persons to become acquainted with them.
2. Except in urgent circumstances, a Party shall allow a reasonable interval between the
publication of a sanitary or phytosanitary regulation and its entry into force in order to allow
time for producers in exporting Parties, and particularly in developing country Parties, to
adapt their products and methods of production to the requirements of the importing Party.
The reasonable interval shall be a period of not less than six months.
Article 9: Competent Authorities and Contact Points
1. Each Party shall provide the other Parties with a description of its Competent
Authorities and their division of responsibilities.
2. Each Party shall provide the other Parties with a Contact Point to facilitate distribution
of requests and notifications made in accordance with this Chapter.
3. Each Party shall ensure that the information provided under paragraphs 1 and 2 is kept
up to date.
Article 10: Notification
1. Each Party shall provide timely and appropriate information directly to the Contact
Points of all other Parties where:
(a) any new sanitary or phytosanitary measure or amendment to an existing measure
that may directly or indirectly have a significant effect on the trade of an
exporting Party is prepared;
(b) a provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure against or affecting the exports of
another Party is considered necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or
health within the importing Party and is applied; or
(c) a change in animal or plant health status may affect existing trade.
2. Each exporting Party should, to the extent possible, provide relevant information to the
Contact Point of an importing Party where it identifies after exportation a significant sanitary
or phytosanitary risk associated with an export consignment destined for that importing Party.
3. If a Party has determined a significant, sustained or recurring pattern of non-compliance
with a sanitary and phytosanitary measure, the importing Party shall notify the exporting
Party as soon as possible of the non-compliance.
4. On request, the importing Party shall provide the exporting Party with relevant available
information on sanitary and phytosanitary-related non-compliant consignments from the
exporting Party where there is a significant, sustained or recurring pattern of non-compliance.
5. Further to paragraphs 1(a) and 1(b), if an international standard, guideline or
recommendation does not exist or the content of a proposed sanitary or phytosanitary
regulation is not substantially the same as the content of an international standard, guideline
or recommendation, and if the regulation may have a significant effect on the trade of other
Parties, the Party preparing it shall:
(a) publish a notice at an early stage in such a manner as to enable interested Parties
to become acquainted with the proposal to introduce a particular regulation;
(b) notify other Parties, at an early stage when amendments can be still be introduced
and comments taken into account, of the products to be covered by the proposed
regulation, together with a brief indication of the regulation’s objective and
rationale;
(c) on request, provide to other Parties through Contact Points electronic copies of the
proposed regulation and, whenever possible, identify the parts which deviate in
substance from relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations;
and
(d) without discrimination, allow reasonable time for other Parties to make comments
in writing, discuss these comments on request and take these written comments
and the results of these discussions into account;
but, where urgent problems of health protection arise or threaten to arise for that Party, it may
omit such steps of subparagraphs (a) to (d) as it finds necessary, provided that the Party:
(e) immediately notifies other Parties of the particular regulation, the products
covered and its objective and rationale, including the nature of the urgent
problems, and follows up such notification in writing if necessary;
(f) on request, provides other Parties with electronic copies of the regulation; and
(g) allows other Parties to make comments in writing, discusses these comments on
request, and takes the comments and the results of these discussions into account.
6. Notifications, requests, comments, responses and other communications for the
purposes of paragraph 5 shall be conveyed through Contact Points.
7. Paragraphs 5 and 6 shall apply to proposed amendments to existing sanitary or
phytosanitary regulations and to proposed new sanitary or phytosanitary regulations.
Article 11: Cooperation
1. The Parties acknowledge existing cooperation between them on sanitary and
phytosanitary matters. Parties shall explore opportunities for further cooperation and
information exchange on sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest or of
significant interest to a developing country Party consistent with the objectives of this
Chapter.
2. To enhance market access opportunities for the developing country Parties under this
Agreement, each developing country Party may establish and maintain an updated list of
prioritised products of significant export interest. The lists shall be considered by the
developed country Parties in their import standards development work programmes, within
the framework of their laws, regulations and procedures governing the prioritisation of market
access requests, with a view to facilitating the exports of the developing country Parties.
3. The Parties recognise that capacity constraints may limit the ability of developing
country Parties to comply with relevant sanitary and phytosanitary standards and make use of
market access opportunities. The Parties also recognise the importance of information
exchange on sanitary and phytosanitary matters pursuant to Article 10 for the timely
identification of market access issues. Accordingly, where an exporter from a developing
country Party is finding it difficult to address a significant, sustained or recurring pattern of
non-compliance with an importing Party’s requirements, cooperative actions shall be explored
by the Parties to address the identified problem.
4. As appropriate in the implementation of this Chapter, each Party shall endeavour to
coordinate with regard to regional or multilateral activities with the objective of avoiding
unnecessary duplication and to maximise the benefits from the application of resources.
5. Each Party agrees to explore how it can strengthen cooperation on the provision of
technical assistance and capacity building, especially in relation to trade facilitation.
Article 12: Technical Discussions
1. A Party may, through Contact Points, request technical discussions with another Party
on any sanitary or phytosanitary measure affecting trade between it and that other Party. The
other Party shall respond promptly to any such request. The two Parties shall seek to clarify
any measure at issue and, where there is any remaining difference of view, shall endeavour to
find a mutually acceptable solution, taking into account the objectives of trade facilitation and
of minimising the negative trade effects of sanitary and phytosanitary measures. In the case
of measures affecting the export interests of a developing country Party, the Parties concerned
should seek to resolve any concerns in a timely manner.
2. Parties may, through Contact Points, arrange to undertake technical discussions with
each other on sanitary and phytosanitary matters of mutual interest. Technical discussions
should be conducted using electronic means. If this is not possible they may be conducted in
person or by any other means, as mutually determined by the Parties.
3. The Parties participating in technical discussions or negotiations pursuant to this
Chapter may mutually agree to invite another Party or a relevant international or regional
organisation in the field of sanitary or phytosanitary protection to participate for the purposes
of providing technical advice.
4. If technical discussions on a matter under Article 6.5 have taken place, an importing
Party may decline a further request for technical discussions, unless the exporting Party can
demonstrate at the time of the request that there has been:
(a) a material advancement in relevant science, technology or domestic processes; or
(b) a material improvement in the risk profile of the exporting Party.
5. Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under other provisions of
this Agreement, where the importing Party declines a request for technical discussions under
paragraph 4 it shall provide an explanation of the reasons for its position.
6. Technical discussions held under this Article do not constitute formal consultations
under Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement) and are without prejudice to the
rights and obligations of the Parties under that Chapter, the WTO Agreement, or any other
agreement to which both Parties are party.
Article 13: Meetings on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Matters
1. The Parties shall, through the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and
Technical Barriers to Trade, the Joint Committee or any other relevant subsidiary body,
consult as required to consider the implementation of their commitments under this Chapter.
2. The Parties, through the Joint Committee, the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures and Technical Barriers to Trade, or any other relevant subsidiary body, shall
commence a review of this Chapter within three years of the entry into force of this
Agreement and submit a final report to the Joint Committee, including any recommendations,
within four years of the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 14: Special and Differential Treatment
In the preparation and application of sanitary or phytosanitary measures, each Party
shall take into account the special needs and interests of the developing country Parties. If the
appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection allows scope for the phased
introduction of new sanitary or phytosanitary measures, longer time-frames for compliance
should be accorded on products of interest to developing country Parties so as to maintain
their opportunities for export. If possible, producers in the developing country Parties shall be
given longer time-frames to comply with sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
CHAPTER 6
TECHNICAL REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT
PROCEDURES
Article 1: Definitions
The definitions set out in Annex 1 of the TBT Agreement are incorporated into this
Chapter and shall form part of this Chapter, mutatis mutandis.
Article 2: Objectives
1. The objectives of this Chapter are to:
(a) facilitate trade among the Parties by ensuring that technical regulations, standards
and conformity assessment procedures do not create unnecessary obstacles to
trade;
(b) ensure transparency and promote understanding of each Party’s technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures;
(c) strengthen information exchange and cooperation, including on the preparation,
adoption and application of technical regulations, standards and conformity
assessment procedures;
(d) promote good regulatory practice and good practice in the preparation, adoption
and application of standards by standardising bodies in the territory of each Party;
(e) enhance the implementation of the TBT Agreement by Parties that are
WTO Members;
(f) promote the observance of the requirements of the TBT Agreement by Parties that
are not WTO Members; and
(g) provide a framework of supporting mechanisms to realise these objectives.
2. Recognising the capacity constraints of the developing country Parties, and with a view
to increasing their export opportunities, assistance in relation to this Chapter would be
provided under Chapter 10 (Development and Economic Cooperation) and the associated
Work Programme.
Article 3: Scope
1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, this Chapter shall apply to all technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment procedures that are prepared, adopted or applied by the 
central government of a Party and that may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods between
the Parties.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to purchasing specifications prepared by governmental
bodies for production or consumption requirements of such bodies or to sanitary or
phytosanitary measures under Chapter 5 (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures).
3. Each Party shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to ensure
compliance in the implementation of the provisions of this Chapter by local government and
non-governmental bodies within its territory.
Article 4: Rights and Obligations of Parties
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a Party from preparing, adopting or applying
technical regulations necessary for the protection of human health or safety, of animal or plant
life or health or of the environment, for the prevention of deceptive practices, for ensuring the
quality of its exports or for the protection of its essential security interests, or standards or
related conformity assessment procedures, provided that such measures are not inconsistent
with this Chapter.
2. Parties that are WTO Members affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each
other under the TBT Agreement. While reserving their rights under the TBT Agreement,
Parties that are WTO Members shall apply the provisions of Articles 1 through 10 of the TBT
Agreement with respect to Parties that are not WTO Members, to the extent that such
provisions are not already covered in this Chapter.
3. Notwithstanding that the provisions of this Chapter apply to developing country Parties
that are not WTO Members, where a Party that is a developing country and not a
WTO Member prepares, adopts or applies a technical regulation, standard or conformity
assessment procedure, such regulation, standard or procedure shall be based on the
TBT Agreement only to the extent of such Party’s capacity. On request of a Party with an
interest in a product subject to a technical regulation, standard or conformity assessment
procedure applied by such Party, those Parties shall engage promptly in bilateral technical
discussions on the matter in accordance with the procedure under Article 11.
Article 5: Non-discrimination
1. Each Party shall, in respect of technical regulations and standards, ensure that products
imported from any Party shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to
like products of national origin and to like products originating in any other country.
2. In cases where a positive assurance of conformity with technical regulations or
standards is required, each Party shall ensure that:
(a) conformity assessment procedures are prepared, adopted and applied so as to
grant access for suppliers of like products originating in any Party under 
conditions no less favourable than those accorded to suppliers of like products of
national origin or originating in any other country, in a comparable situation; and
(b) such access shall, inter alia, entail suppliers’ right to an assessment of conformity
under the rules of the procedure, including, when foreseen by this procedure, the
possibility to have conformity assessment activities undertaken at the site of the
facilities and to receive the mark of the system.
Article 6: Trade Facilitation through Information Exchange
1. Each Party shall respond to all requests for information relating to its technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures and for clarification of its
responses, provided that the requests are reasonable and are made in writing. Responses to
written requests for information or clarification (including those made under Paragraph 3 of
Article 4) shall be provided no later than 90 days after the receipt of the request or as mutually
agreed between the Parties.
2. Further to Paragraph 1, if a Party:
(a) does not use an international standard, guide or recommendation or the relevant
parts thereof as a basis for a technical regulation or related conformity assessment
procedure; or
(b) does not accept a technical regulation of another Party as equivalent to its own; or
(c) does not accept the results of a conformity assessment procedure conducted in the
territory of another Party; or
(d) recognises a body assessing conformity with a specific technical regulation or
standard in its territory and refuses to recognise a body assessing conformity with
that technical regulation or standard in the territory of another Party; or
(e) applies a technical regulation that, in the view of another Party, is more trade
restrictive than necessary to fulfil a legitimate objective, taking account of the
risks that non-fulfilment would create; or
(f) applies a conformity assessment procedure that, in the view of another Party, is
more strict or applied more strictly than necessary to give adequate confidence
that products conform with the applicable technical regulation or standard, taking
account of the risks that non-conformity would create; or
(g) applies a technical regulation that, in the view of another Party, is not in
conformity with Article 5.1 of this Chapter; or
(h) applies conformity assessment procedures in a manner that, in the view of another
Party, is not in conformity with Article 5.2 of this Chapter;
it shall on request explain its reasons in writing. If the Party requesting an explanation so
desires, it may request further technical discussions in accordance with the procedure under
Article 11.
Article 7: Code of Good Practice for the Preparation, Adoption and Application of
Standards
Each Party in respect of central government bodies shall ensure, and in respect of local
government and non-governmental bodies shall take such reasonable measures as may be
available to it to ensure, that standardising bodies in its territory:
(a) in the case of a Party that is a WTO Member, accept and comply with the Code of
Good Practice for the Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards at
Annex 3 to the TBT Agreement; and
(b) in the case of a Party that is not a WTO Member, observe to the extent of its
capacity the Substantive Provisions of the Code of Good Practice for the
Preparation, Adoption and Application of Standards at Annex 3 to the
TBT Agreement.
Article 8: Transparency
1. Consistent with Articles 2.9, 2.10, 5.6 and 5.7 of the TBT Agreement, where a relevant
international standard, guide or recommendation does not exist or the technical content of a
proposed technical regulation or related conformity assessment procedure is not in accordance
with the technical content of relevant international standards, guides or recommendations, and
if such regulation or procedure may have a significant effect on the trade of other Parties, the
Party preparing it shall:
(a) publish a notice of its proposal to introduce the regulation or procedure in a
publication at an early appropriate stage, in such a manner as to enable interested
Parties to become acquainted with it;
(b) notify Parties, at an early appropriate stage when amendments can still be
introduced and comments taken into account, of the products to be covered by the
regulation or procedure and its objective and rationale;
(c) on request, provide to other Parties through Contact Points particulars or copies
in electronic format of the proposed regulation or procedure and, whenever
possible, identify the parts which deviate in substance from relevant international
standards, guides or recommendations; and
(d) without discrimination, allow reasonable time for other Parties to make comments
in writing, discuss these comments on request and take these written comments
and the results of these discussions into account.
2. Where urgent problems of safety, health, environmental protection or national security
arise or threaten to arise for that Party, it may omit such steps of paragraph 1(a) to 1(d) as it
finds necessary, provided that, upon adoption of the regulation or procedure, the Party:
(a) notifies other Parties in writing of the regulation or procedure, the products
covered, its objective and rationale, and the nature of the urgent problems;
(b) on request, provides other Parties through Contact Points with electronic copies of
the regulation or the rules of the procedure; and
(c) without discrimination, allows other Parties to present their comments in writing,
discusses these comments on request, and takes these written comments and the
results of these discussions into account in making an informed decision about the
measure.
3. Notifications, requests, comments, responses and other communications for the
purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be conveyed through Contact Points.
4. Each Party shall ensure that technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures
which have been adopted are published promptly or otherwise made available in such manner
as to enable any member of the public in any Party to become acquainted with them.
5. Consistent with Articles 2.12 and 5.9 of the TBT Agreement and except in the urgent
circumstances specified in Articles 2.10 and 5.7 of the TBT Agreement, an importing Party
shall allow a reasonable interval between the publication of a technical regulation or related
conformity assessment procedure and its entry into force in order to allow time for producers
in exporting Parties, and particularly in developing country Parties, to adapt their products or
methods of production to its requirements. The reasonable interval shall be a period of not
less than six months, except where this would be ineffective in fulfilling the legitimate
objective pursued.
Article 9: Contact Points
1. Each Party shall provide the other Parties with a Contact Point to facilitate the
distribution of requests and notifications made in accordance with this Chapter and which
shall, for that Party, have responsibility for coordinating the implementation of this Chapter.
2. Each Party shall provide each other Party with the name of its Contact Point and the
contact details of the relevant position in the organisation which performs its functions,
including telephone, facsimile, e-mail address, mailing address and any other relevant details.
3. Each Party shall ensure that the information provided under paragraphs 1 and 2 is kept
up-to-date.
4. Each Party shall ensure that its Contact Point facilitates the exchange of information
between the Parties on any matters relating to the implementation of this Chapter.
5. To promote efficiency in the distribution of requests and notifications under this
Chapter and ensure consistency with the performance of related functions under the
TBT Agreement, each Party that is a WTO Member should consider assigning to its Enquiry
Point established pursuant to Article 10 of the TBT Agreement the role of Contact Point for
the purposes of this Chapter.
Article 10: Cooperation
1. The Parties shall undertake joint efforts in the fields of standards, technical regulations
and conformity assessment procedures with a view to facilitating trade between the Parties,
including increasing market access opportunities for developing country Parties.
2. Each Party shall on request of another Party give positive consideration to proposals for
cooperation on matters within the scope of this Chapter on mutually agreed terms and
conditions, including but not limited to:
(a) advice, technical assistance or capacity building relating to the development and
application of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
procedures;
(b) cooperation between conformity assessment bodies, both governmental and nongovernmental, in the territories of each of the Parties on matters such as:
(i) use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies; and
(ii) enhancing infrastructure in calibration, testing, inspection, certification and
accreditation to meet relevant international standards, guidelines and
recommendations;
(c) cooperation in areas of mutual interest in the work of relevant regional and
international bodies relating to the development and application of standards and
conformity assessment procedures, such as enhancing participation, particularly of
the developing country Parties, in the existing frameworks for mutual recognition
developed by relevant regional and international bodies; and
(d) enhancing cooperation in the development and improvement of technical
regulations and conformity assessment procedures in areas such as:
(i) cooperation in the development and promotion of good regulatory practice;
(ii) transparency, including ways to promote improved access to information on
standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures; and
(iii) management of risks relating to health, safety, the environment and
deceptive practices.
3. On request of another Party, a Party shall give positive consideration to a sectorspecific proposal that the requesting Party makes for further cooperation under this Chapter
on mutually agreed terms and conditions.
Article 11: Technical Discussions
1. If a Party considers that a technical regulation, standard or conformity assessment
procedure affecting trade between it and another Party warrants further discussion, it may,
through the Contact Points, request a detailed explanation of the measure and if necessary,
request to hold technical discussions in an attempt to resolve any concerns on specific issues
arising from the application of the measure. The other Party shall respond promptly to any
requests for such explanations, and if so requested, shall enter into technical discussions
within 60 days from the date of the request. The Parties to the technical discussions shall
make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution through technical discussions
within 90 days from the date of the request or within a timeframe mutually agreed upon by
them.
2. A Party participating in technical discussions or negotiations pursuant to paragraph 3 of
Article 4, paragraph 2 of Article 6 or paragraph 1 of this Article may invite another Party or a
relevant international or regional organisation in the field of technical regulations, standards
and conformity assessment procedures to participate for the purpose of providing technical
advice.
3. Technical discussions should be conducted using electronic means. If this is not
possible they may be conducted in person or by any other means, as mutually determined by
the Parties.
4. The Parties shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to them to ensure
that representatives of bodies responsible for the technical regulations, standards or
conformity assessment procedures that are the subject of the technical discussions participate
in those discussions.
5. A Party shall exercise restraint when requesting technical discussions between it and
another Party on a matter that has been the subject of a previous technical discussion between
the two Parties. If technical discussions on a matter under Article 6.2(b) to Article 6.2(f) have
taken place, and a mutually satisfactory solution cannot be reached, an importing Party may
only decline a further request for technical discussions on justifiable grounds.
6. Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under other provisions of
this Agreement, if the importing Party declines a request for technical discussions under
paragraph 5 it shall provide an explanation of reasons for its position.
7. Technical discussions held pursuant to this Article do not constitute formal
consultations under Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement) and are without
prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under that Chapter, the WTO Agreement
or any other agreement to which both Parties are party.
Article 12: Meetings on Technical Regulations, Standards and Conformity Assessment
Procedures
1. The Parties shall, through the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and
Technical Barriers to Trade, the Joint Committee or any other relevant subsidiary body,
consult as required to consider the implementation of their commitments under this Chapter.
2. The Parties, through the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and
Technical Barriers to Trade, the Joint Committee or any other relevant subsidiary body, shall
commence a review of this Chapter within three years of entry into force of this Agreement
and submit a final report to the Joint Committee, including any recommendations, within four
years of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 13: Special and Differential Treatment
Consistent with Articles 12.3, 12.4 and 12.9 of the TBT Agreement:
(a) Each Party shall, in the preparation and application of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment procedures, take account of the special
development, financial and trade needs of developing country Parties, with a view
to ensuring that such technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment
procedures do not create unnecessary obstacles to exports from developing
country Parties.
(b) Parties recognise that, although international standards, guidelines or
recommendations may exist, in their particular technological and socio-economic
conditions, developing country Parties may adopt certain technical regulations,
standards or conformity assessment procedures aimed at preserving indigenous
technology and production methods and processes compatible with their
development needs. Parties therefore recognise that developing country Parties
should not be expected to use international standards as a basis for their technical
regulations or standards, including test methods, which are not appropriate to their
development, financial and trade needs.
(c) During consultations, developed country Parties shall bear in mind the special
difficulties experienced by developing country Parties in formulating and
implementing technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment
procedures and, in their desire to assist developing country Parties with their
efforts in this direction, developed country Parties shall take into account the
special needs of the former in regard to financing, trade and development.
CHAPTER 7
TRADE IN SERVICES
Article 1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
aircraft repair and maintenance services means such activities when undertaken on an
aircraft or a part thereof while it is withdrawn from service but does not include line
maintenance;
airport operation services means the supply of air terminal, airfield and other airport
infrastructure operation services on a fee or contract basis. Airport operation services does
not include air navigation services;
commercial presence means any type of business or professional establishment, including
one operating through:
(a) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of an enterprise; or
(b) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office;
within the territory of a Party for the purposes of supplying a service;
computer reservation system services means services provided by computerised systems
that contain information about air carriers’ schedules, availability, fares and fare rules,
through which reservations can be made or tickets may be issued;
ground handling services means the supply at an airport, on a fee or contract basis, of the
following: airline representation, administration and supervision; passenger handling;
baggage handling; ramp services; catering (except the preparation of the food); air cargo and
mail handling; fuelling of an aircraft; aircraft servicing and cleaning; surface transport; and
flight operations, crew administration and flight planning. Ground handling services do not
include self-handling; security; line maintenance; aircraft repair and maintenance; or
management or operation of essential centralised airport infrastructure such as de-icing
facilities, fuel distribution systems, baggage handling systems, and fixed intra-airport
transport systems;
measures adopted or maintained by a Party means any measure taken by:
(a) central, state, regional or local Government and authorities; or
(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, state,
regional or local Governments or authorities;
Such measures include measures in respect of:
(a) the purchase, payment or use of a service;
(b) the access to and use of, in connection with the supply of a service, services which
are required by a Party to be offered to the public generally; and
(c) the presence, including commercial presence, of persons of a Party for the supply
of a service in the territory of another Party;
monopoly supplier of a service means any person, public or private, who in the relevant
market of the territory of a Party is authorised or established formally or in effect by that
Party as the sole supplier of that service;
person means either a natural person or an enterprise;
sector of a service means:
(a) with reference to a specific commitment, one or more, or all subsectors of that
service, as specified in a Party’s Schedule of Specific Services Commitments at
Annex 7-A to this Agreement;
(b) otherwise, the whole of that service sector, including all of its subsectors;
selling and marketing of air transport services means opportunities for the air carrier
concerned to sell and market freely its air transport services including all aspects of marketing
such as market research, advertising and distribution. These activities do not include the
pricing of air transport services nor the applicable conditions;
service of another Party means a service which is supplied:
(a) from or in the territory of that other Party; or in the case of maritime transport, by
a vessel registered under the laws of that other Party, or by a person of that other
Party who supplies the service through the operation of a vessel or its use in
whole or in part; or
(b) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence or through the
presence of natural persons, by a service supplier of that other Party;
service consumer means any person that receives or uses a service;
service supplier of a Party means a person of a Party that supplies a service;1

1Where the service is not supplied directly by an enterprise but through other forms of commercial presence such
as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e., enterprise) shall, nonetheless, through such
presence be accorded the treatment provided for service suppliers under this Agreement. Such treatment shall be
extended to the presence through which the service is supplied and need not be extended to any other parts of the
supplier located outside the territory where the service is supplied.
services includes any service in any sector except services supplied in the exercise of
governmental authority;
services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority means any service which is
supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in competition with one or more service suppliers;
specialty air services means any non-transportation air services such as aerial firefighting,
sightseeing, spraying, surveying, mapping, photography, parachute jumping, glider towing,
and helicopter-lift for logging and construction, and other airborne agricultural, industrial, and
inspection services;
supply of a service includes the production, distribution, marketing, sale and delivery of a
service;
trade in services means the supply of a service:
(a) from the territory of one Party into the territory of another Party (‘Mode 1’);
(b) in the territory of one Party to the service consumer of another Party (‘Mode 2’);
(c) by a service supplier of one Party, through commercial presence in the territory of
another Party (‘Mode 3’);
(d) by a service supplier of one Party, through presence of natural persons of a Party
in the territory of another Party (‘Mode 4’);
traffic rights means the right for scheduled and non-scheduled services to operate or carry
passengers, cargo and mail for remuneration or hire from, to, within, or over the territory of a
Party, including points to be served, routes to be operated, types of traffic to be carried,
capacity to be provided, tariffs to be charged and their conditions, and criteria for designation
of airlines, including such criteria as number, ownership, and control.
Article 2: Scope
1. This Chapter applies to measures affecting trade in services adopted or maintained by a
Party.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority;2
(b) any measures adopted or maintained by a Party with respect to government
procurement;

2
For greater certainty, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring the privatisation of public services
supplied in the exercise of government authority.
(c) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, including government-supported loans,
guarantees, and insurance, or any conditions attached to the receipt or continued
receipt of such subsidies or grants, whether or not such subsidies or grants are
offered exclusively to domestic services, service consumers or service suppliers;
(d) in respect of air transport services, measures affecting traffic rights however
granted; or measures affecting services directly related to the exercise of traffic
rights, other than measures affecting:
(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services;
(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services;
(iii) computer reservation system services;
(iv) specialty air services;
(v) ground handling services; and
(vi) airport operation services.
3. For greater certainty, the Parties recognise the right of all Parties to regulate and to
introduce new regulations to regulate the supply of services within their territory in order to
meet national policy objectives, provided that such regulation is not inconsistent with this
Chapter.3
4. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking
access to the employment market of another Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding
citizenship, residence or employment on a permanent basis.
Article 3: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment
1. With respect to any measure covered by this Chapter, each Party shall accord
immediately and unconditionally to services and service suppliers of another Party treatment
no less favourable than that it accords to like services and service suppliers of a non-party.
2. A Party may maintain a measure inconsistent with Paragraph 1 provided that such a
measure falls within the scope of any exemptions list in Annex I (Schedule of MostFavoured-Nation Exemptions on Services and Investment).
Article 4: Increasing the Participation of Forum Island Countries
1. The increasing participation of Forum Island Countries in services trade shall be

3
For greater certainty, the Parties mutually understand that Parties have the right to regulate, provided that
regulation does not nullify or impair obligations and commitments of this Chapter.
facilitated through negotiated specific commitments pursuant to Article 5, Article 6, Article 7
and Article 8 relating to:
(a) the strengthening of their domestic services capacity and its efficiency and
competitiveness inter alia through access to technology on a commercial basis;
(b) the improvement of their access to distribution channels and information
networks; and
(c) the liberalisation of market access in sectors and modes of supply of export
interest to Forum Island Countries.
2. Within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall
establish contact points to facilitate the access of service suppliers to information related to
their respective markets in relation to commercial and technical aspects of the supply services,
registration, recognition and the obtaining of professional qualifications and the availability of
technology.
Article 5: Market Access
1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in the definition
of “trade in services” in Article 1, each Party shall accord services and service suppliers of
another Party treatment no less favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations
and conditions specified in its Schedule of Specific Services Commitments at Annex 7-A to
this Agreement.
2. In the sectors where market access commitments are undertaken, a Party shall not
maintain or adopt, either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire
territory, unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, measures which:
(a) limit the number of service suppliers whether in the form of numerical quotas,
monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirement of an economic needs
test;
(b) limit the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of numerical
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(c) limit the total number of service operations or on the total quantity of service
output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas or
the requirement of an economic needs test, except measures of a Party which limit
inputs for the supply of services;
(d) limit the total number of natural persons who may be employed in a particular
service sector or who a service supplier may employ and who are necessary for,
and directly related to, the supply of a specific service, in the form of numerical
quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(e) restrict or require specific types of legal entity or joint venture through which a
service supplier may supply a service; and
(f) limit the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage limit on
foreign shareholding or of the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
3. If a Party undertakes a market access commitment in relation to the supply of a service
through Mode 1, and if the cross-border movement of capital is an essential part of the service
itself, it shall allow such movement of capital.
4. If a Party undertakes a market access commitment in relation to the supply of a service
through Mode 3, it shall allow related transfers of capital into its territory.
Article 6: National Treatment
1. In the sectors specified in its Schedule of Specific Services Commitments at Annex 7-
A to this Agreement, and subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein, each
Party shall accord to services and service suppliers of another Party, in respect of all measures
affecting the supply of services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own
like services and service suppliers.
2. A Party may meet the requirement in paragraph 1 by according to services and service
suppliers of another Party either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to
that which it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less
favourable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service
suppliers of the Party compared to the like service or service suppliers of another Party.
4. Specific commitments assumed under this Article shall not be construed to require any
Party to compensate for any inherent competitive disadvantages which result from the foreign
character of the relevant services or service suppliers.
Article 7: Additional Commitments
The Parties may negotiate commitments with respect to measures affecting trade in
services not subject to scheduling under Article 5 and Article 6, including those regarding
qualifications, standards or licensing matters. Such commitments shall be entered in a Party’s
Schedule of Specific Services Commitments at Annex 7-A to this Agreement.
Article 8: Specific Commitments
1. The specific commitments undertaken by each Party under Article 5 and Article 6
shall be set out in the Schedule of Specific Services Commitments under Annex 7-A to this 
Agreement. With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken, each Schedule
shall specify:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings related to additional commitments; and
(d) where appropriate, the time-frame for implementation of such commitments.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Article 5 and Article 6 are inscribed in the column
relating to Article 5. In this case, the inscription shall be considered to also provide a
condition or qualification to Article 6.
Article 9: Modification of Schedules
1. (a) A Party (referred to in this Article as the “modifying Party”) may modify or
withdraw any commitment in its Schedule, at any time after three years have
elapsed from the date on which that commitment entered into force, in accordance
with the provisions of this Article.
(b) A modifying Party shall notify its intent to modify or withdraw a commitment
pursuant to this Article to the Joint Committee no later than three months before
the intended date of implementation of the modification or withdrawal.
2. (a) At the request of any Party whose benefits under this Agreement may be affected
(referred to in this Article as an "affected Party") by a proposed modification or
withdrawal notified under paragraph 1(b), the modifying Party shall enter into
negotiations with a view to reaching agreement on any necessary compensatory
adjustment. In such negotiations and agreement, the Parties concerned shall
endeavour to maintain a general level of mutually advantageous commitments not
less favourable to trade than that provided for in Schedules of specific
commitments prior to such negotiations.
(b) Compensatory adjustments shall be made on a most-favoured-nation basis.
3. (a) If agreement is not reached between the modifying Party and any affected Party
before the end of the period provided for negotiations, such affected Party may
refer the matter to the Joint Committee. Any affected Party that wishes to enforce
a right that it may have to compensation must participate in meetings that may be
convened by the Joint Committee to resolve this matter.
(b) If no affected Party has requested the intervention of the Joint Committee, the
modifying Party shall be free to implement the proposed modification or
withdrawal.
4. (a) The modifying Party may not modify or withdraw its commitment until it has made
compensatory adjustments in conformity with the findings of the Joint
Committee.
(b) If the modifying Party implements its proposed modification or withdrawal and
does not comply with the recommendations of the Joint Committee, any affected
Party that participated in the Joint Committee’s meetings may modify or withdraw
substantially equivalent benefits in conformity with those findings.
Notwithstanding Article 3, such a modification or withdrawal may be
implemented solely with respect to the modifying Party.
5. The Joint Committee shall establish procedures for the rectification or modification of
Schedules. Any Party which has modified or withdrawn scheduled commitments under this
Article shall modify its Schedule according to such procedures.
Article 10: Domestic Regulation
1. In sectors where specific commitments are undertaken, each Party shall ensure that all
measures of general application affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable,
objective and impartial manner.
2. (a) Each Party shall maintain or institute as soon as practicable judicial, arbitral or
administrative tribunals or procedures, which provide, at the request of an affected
service supplier, for the prompt review of, and where justified, appropriate
remedies for, administrative decisions affecting trade in services, including
correction of the contested final administrative actions. Where such tribunals or
procedures are not independent of the agency responsible for the administrative
action concerned, the Party shall ensure that the tribunals or procedures provide
for an objective and impartial review.
(b) Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunal or under any such procedures
referred to in subparagraph (a), the parties to any proceedings are provided with
the right to:
(i) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend their respective positions;
and
(ii) a decision in accordance with the Party’s laws.
(c) Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further review as provided in its law,
that any decision referred to in subparagraph (b) shall be implemented in
accordance with its laws.
(d) The provisions of subparagraph (a) shall not be construed to require a Party to
institute such tribunals or procedures where this would be inconsistent with its
constitutional structure or the nature of its legal system.
3. With a view to ensuring that measures relating to qualification requirements and
procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures do not constitute
unnecessary barriers to trade in services, the Parties shall jointly review the results of the
WTO negotiations on disciplines on such measures pursuant to Article VI:4 of GATS, and
shall amend this Article, as appropriate, after consultations among the Parties to bring the
results of those negotiations into effect under this Agreement. The Parties note that the
disciplines arising from such negotiations shall aim to ensure that qualification requirements
and procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements and procedures are, inter alia:
(a) based on objective and transparent criteria, such as competence and the ability to
supply the service;
(b) not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of the service; and
(c) in the case of licensing procedures, not in themselves a restriction on the supply of
the service.
4. In sectors in which a Party has undertaken specific commitments under Article 5,
Article 6 and Article 7, pending the incorporation of the disciplines referred to in paragraph 3,
that Party shall not apply licensing and qualification requirements and technical standards that
nullify or impair such specific commitments under this Agreement in a manner which:
(a) does not comply with the criteria outlined in paragraph 3(a), (b) or (c); and
(b) could not reasonably have been expected of that Party at the time the specific
commitments in those sectors were made.
5. In determining whether a Party is in conformity with its obligations under paragraph 3,
account shall be taken of international standards of relevant international organisations
applied by that Party.4
6. If authorisation is required for the supply of a service on which a specific commitment
has been made, the competent authorities of that Party shall:
(a) in the case of an incomplete application, at the request of the applicant, identify all
the additional information that is required to complete the application and provide
the opportunity to remedy deficiencies within a reasonable timeframe;
(b) within a reasonable period of time after the submission of an application
considered complete under domestic laws and regulations, inform the applicant of
the decision concerning the application;
(c) at the request of the applicant, provide, without undue delay, information
concerning the status of the application under consideration; and

4 The term "relevant international organisations" refers to international bodies whose membership is open to the
relevant bodies of all of the Parties.
(d) if an application is rejected, to the maximum extent possible, inform the applicant
in writing, and without delay, the reasons for the rejection of the application and
of the timeframe to appeal against the decision. An applicant should be permitted,
within reasonable time limits, to resubmit an application.
7. In sectors where specific commitments regarding professional services are undertaken,
each Party shall provide for adequate procedures to verify the competence of professionals of
any other Party.
8. Subject to its domestic laws and regulations, each Party shall permit service suppliers
of the other Parties to use the business names under which they ordinarily trade in the
territories of the other Parties and otherwise ensure that the use of business names is not
unduly restricted.
Article 11: Recognition
1. For the purposes of the fulfilment, in whole or in part, of its standards or criteria for
the authorisation, licensing or certification of service suppliers, and subject to the
requirements of paragraph 4, a Party may recognise the education or experience obtained,
requirements met, or licenses or certifications granted in a particular country. Such
recognition, which may be achieved through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon
an agreement or arrangement with the country concerned or may be accorded autonomously.
2. Where a Party recognises, autonomously or by agreement or arrangement, the
education or experience obtained, requirements met, or licences or certifications granted in
the territory of a non-party, nothing in Article 3 shall be construed to require the Party to
accord such recognition to the education or experience obtained, requirements met, or
licences or certifications granted in the territory of another Party.
3. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement of the type referred to in
paragraph 2, whether existing or future, shall afford adequate opportunity for other interested
Parties to negotiate their accession to such an agreement or arrangement or to negotiate
comparable ones with it. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford
adequate opportunity for another Party to demonstrate that education, experience, licences, or
certifications obtained or requirements met in that other Party's territory should be recognised.
4. A Party shall not accord recognition in a manner which would constitute a means of
discrimination between other Parties in the application of its standards or criteria for the
authorisation, licensing or certification of services suppliers, or a disguised restriction on trade
in services.
5. If appropriate, recognition should be based on multilaterally agreed criteria. In
appropriate cases, Parties shall work in cooperation with relevant inter-governmental and nongovernmental organisations towards the establishment and adoption of common international
standards and criteria for recognition and common international standards for the practice of
relevant services trades and professions.
6. The Parties shall actively encourage their competent bodies to consult with each other
and with relevant regional bodies after the entry into force of this Agreement to explore the
possibilities for recognition of qualifications or professional recognition or registration. The
Parties shall report periodically to the Joint Committee for review.
Article 12: Payments and Transfers
1. Except under the circumstances envisaged in Article 2 of Chapter 11 (General
Provisions and Exceptions), a Party shall not apply restrictions on international transfers and
payments for current transactions relating to its specific commitments.
2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of a Party as a Member
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) under the IMF Articles of Agreement, provided
that a Party shall not impose restrictions on any capital transactions inconsistent with its
specific commitments regarding such transactions, except under Article 3 of Chapter 11
(General Provisions and Exceptions), or at the request of the IMF.
Article 13: Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers
1. Each Party shall ensure that any monopoly supplier of a service in its territory does
not, in the supply of the monopoly service in the relevant market, act in a manner inconsistent
with that Party’s obligations under Article 3, Article 5, Article 6 and Article 7.
2. If a Party’s monopoly supplier competes, either directly or through an affiliated
company, in the supply of a service which is outside the scope of its monopoly rights and
which is subject to that Party’s specific commitments, the Party shall ensure that such a
supplier does not abuse its monopoly position to act in its territory in a manner inconsistent
with such commitments.
3. If a Party has a reason to believe that a monopoly supplier of a service of another
Party is acting in a manner inconsistent with paragraph 1 or 2, it may request the Party
establishing, maintaining or authorising such supplier to provide specific information
concerning the relevant operations.
4. This Article shall also apply to cases of exclusive service suppliers, where a Party,
formally or in effect:
(a) authorises or establishes a small number of service suppliers; and
(b) substantially prevents competition among those suppliers in its territory.
Article 14: Emergency Safeguard Measures
1. The Parties note the multilateral negotiations pursuant to Article X of GATS on the
question of emergency safeguard measures based on the principle of non-discrimination. On 
the conclusion of such multilateral negotiations, the Parties shall conduct a review for the
purposes of discussing appropriate amendments to this Chapter so as to incorporate the results
of such multilateral negotiations.
2. In the event that the implementation of the commitments made under this Agreement
causes substantial adverse impact to a service sector of a Party before the conclusion of the
multilateral negotiations referred to in paragraph 1, that affected Party may request to hold
consultations with the other Party or Parties. The requested Party or Parties shall respond to
such a request in good faith.
3. In undertaking such consultations, the Parties shall endeavour to reach a mutually
agreed solution within a reasonable period of time.
4. The consulting parties shall notify the agreed solution to all other Parties as soon as
practicable and by no later than the next meeting of the Joint Committee.
Article 15: Subsidies
1. Notwithstanding Article 2.2(c), where one Party considers that subsidies provided by
another Party affecting trade in services nullify or impair any benefits it expected to receive
under this Chapter, the Parties agree to consult with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory
solution.
2. Notwithstanding Article 2.2(c), following the conclusion of the negotiations on trade
distorting subsidies on trade in services under Article XV of the GATS, the Parties agree to
review the operation of this Article with a view to considering the possible modification or
elimination of this Article.
Article 16: Denial of Benefits
1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service supplier of another Party
where the Party establishes that:
(a) the service is being supplied by an enterprise that is owned or controlled by
persons of a non-party and the enterprise has no substantive business operations in
the territory of any Party; or
(b) the service is being supplied by an enterprise that is owned or controlled by
persons of the denying Party and the enterprise has no substantive business
operations in the territory of any Party.
2. In the case of the supply of maritime transport services, a Party may deny the benefits
of this Chapter to a service supplier of another Party if it establishes that the service is
supplied by a vessel registered under the laws of a non-party, and by a person who operates or
uses the vessel in whole or in part but is of a non-party.
Article 17: Contact Points and Transparency
1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the
Parties on any matter covered by this Chapter, and shall provide details of such contact point
to the other Parties. The Parties shall notify each other promptly of any amendments to the
details of their contact points.
2. Each Party shall publish promptly or otherwise make publicly available international
agreements pertaining to or affecting trade in services to which it is a signatory.
3. To the extent of its capacity, each Party shall ensure that all measures of general
application relating to licensing requirements and procedures, qualification requirements and
procedures, and technical standards are published promptly through printed or electronic
means, or otherwise. Information regarding these measures shall include, where applicable:
(a) requirements for authorisation, including for application and periodic renewal of
such authorisation, and generally applicable terms and conditions of such
authorisation;
(b) licensing requirements and procedures, including requirements, criteria and
procedures for application and renewal, and applicable fees;
(c) qualification requirements and procedures, including requirements, criteria and
procedures for application and renewal, and procedures for verification and
assessment of qualifications, and applicable fees;
(d) technical standards;
(e) procedures relating to appeals or reviews of decisions concerning applications;
(f) procedures for monitoring or enforcing compliance with the terms and conditions
of licences;
(g) an established timeframe for the processing of an application.
4. Each Party shall respond promptly to all requests by another Party for specific
information on any measures of general application which pertain to or affect the operation of
this Chapter or international agreements within the meaning of paragraph 2.
Article 18: Review of Commitments
1. The Parties shall review commitments on trade in services, with the first review within
three years of entry into force of this Agreement and periodically thereafter as determined by
the Joint Committee, with the aim of improving the overall commitments undertaken by the
Parties under this Chapter so as to progressively liberalise trade in services among the Parties. 
2. The Parties recognise the limited capacities of developing country Parties which will
be taken into account in the review process. When improving the overall commitments
undertaken by the Parties, appropriate flexibility will be given to the developing country
Parties to opening fewer sectors, liberalising fewer types of transaction, progressively
extending market access in line with their development situation and, when making access to
their markets available to foreign service suppliers, attaching to such access conditions aimed
at achieving the objectives referred to in Article 4.
Article 19: Joint Committee
The Parties shall, through the Joint Committee or a relevant subsidiary body, consult
regularly to consider the implementation of their commitments under this Chapter.

CHAPTER 8
MOVEMENT OF NATURAL PERSONS
Article 1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
temporary entry means entry into the territory of a Party by a natural person covered by this
Chapter, without the intent to establish permanent residence; and
immigration formality means a visa, permit, pass or other document or electronic authority
granting a natural person of a Party the right to enter, reside or work in the territory of the
granting Party.
Article 2: Objectives
1. The objectives of this Chapter, which reflect the preferential trading relationship between
the Parties, are to:
(a) provide for rights and obligations additional to those set out in Chapter 7 (Trade in
Services) and Chapter 9 (Investment) in relation to the temporary entry of natural
persons;
(b) facilitate the temporary entry of natural persons;
(c) establish transparent criteria and streamlined immigration formality application
procedures for the temporary entry of natural persons to whom this Chapter
applies; and
(d) protect the integrity of the Parties’ borders, and protect the domestic labour force
and permanent employment in the territories of the Parties.
Article 3: Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply, as set out in each Party’s schedule of specific commitments in
Annex 8-A (Schedules of Commitments on Movement of Natural Persons), to measures
affecting the temporary entry of natural persons of a Party into the territory of any other Party.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting natural persons seeking access to the
employment market of another Party, nor shall it apply to measures regarding citizenship,
residence or employment on a permanent basis.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from applying measures to regulate the
entry or temporary stay of natural persons of any other Party in its territory, including those 
measures necessary to protect the integrity of its territory and to ensure the orderly movement
of natural persons across its borders, provided such measures are not applied in a manner so
as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to any other Party under this Agreement.1
Article 4: Grant of Temporary Entry
1. Each Party shall set out in Annex 8-A a schedule containing the specific commitments it
undertakes for each of the categories of natural persons specified therein. These schedules
shall specify the conditions and limitations2
governing those commitments, including the
requirements and length of stay, for each category of natural persons included in each Party’s
schedule of specific commitments.
2. If a Party makes a commitment under paragraph 1, that Party shall grant temporary entry
to natural persons of another Party provided that those natural persons:
(a) follow the prescribed application procedures for the immigration formality
sought; and
(b) meet all relevant eligibility requirements for entry to the granting Party.
A Party may deny temporary entry to natural persons of another Party who do not comply
with paragraph 2(a) and (b).
3. Temporary entry granted pursuant to this Chapter does not replace the requirements
needed to carry out a profession or activity according to the domestic laws and regulations,
and any applicable mandatory codes of practice made pursuant to domestic law, in force in
the territory of the Party authorising the temporary entry.
Article 5: Requirements and Procedures Relating to the Movement of Natural Persons
1. In relation to the natural persons covered by Article 3, each Party shall endeavour to:
(a) establish or maintain immigration formalities, which can be granted prior to
arrival in its territory, to allow natural persons of another Party entry into and
temporary stay in its territory;
(b) expeditiously process complete applications for immigration formalities received
from natural persons of another Party, including further immigration formality
requests or extensions thereof;

1 The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural persons of a Party and not for those of non-Parties shall not be
regarded as nullifying or impairing trade in goods or services or conduct of investment activities under this
Agreement.
2
For greater certainty, the terms ‘conditions and limitations’ include limitations on the total number of visas or
the requirement of a labour market test. 
(c) on request, and within a reasonable period after an application by a natural person
of another Party requesting temporary entry is lodged, notify the applicant of:
(i) receipt of the application;
(ii) the status of the application; and
(iii) the decision concerning the application, including:
(A) if approved, the period of stay and other conditions; or
(B) if refused, the reasons for refusal and any avenues for review.
Article 6: Mutual Recognition
If the requirements for an immigration formality include requirements relating to
authorisation, licensing or certification of natural persons, Article 11 of Chapter 7 (Trade in
Services) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to such authorisation, licensing or certification, but
that obligation shall only apply to a Party in relation to the commitments they have made
under Article 4.
Article 7: Contact Points
Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the
Parties on any matter covered by this Chapter, and shall provide details of that contact point
to the other Parties. The Parties shall notify each other promptly of any amendments to the
details of their contact point.
Article 8: Application of Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement)
1. The Parties shall endeavour to settle any differences arising out of the implementation of
this Chapter through consultations.
2. A Party shall not have recourse to Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement)
regarding a refusal to grant temporary entry under this Chapter unless:
(a) the matter involves a pattern of practice on the part of the granting Party; and
(b) the natural persons affected have exhausted all available domestic remedies
regarding the particular matter.
3. The remedies referred to in paragraph 2(b) shall be deemed to be exhausted if a final
determination in the matter has not been issued within one year after the date of the institution
of proceedings for such remedy, and the failure to issue a determination is not attributable to
delays caused by the natural persons concerned.
Article 9: Review of Commitments
The Parties shall review commitments for the temporary entry of natural persons, with
the first review taking place within three years of entry into force of this Agreement and
periodically thereafter as determined by the Joint Committee, with the aim of improving the
overall commitments undertaken by the Parties under this Chapter so as to progressively
liberalise the movement of natural persons among the Parties.

CHAPTER 9
INVESTMENT
Article 1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter, the term:
covered investment means with respect to a Party, an investment in its territory of an
investor of another Party, in existence as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or
established, acquired or expanded thereafter, which has been admitted by the host Party
subject to its relevant laws, regulations and policies;
freely usable currency means freely usable currency as determined under the IMF Articles
of Agreement and amendments thereafter, or any currency that is used to make international
payments and is widely traded in international principal exchange markets;
investment means every kind of asset that an investor owns or controls, directly or indirectly,
that has the characteristics of an investment, including such characteristics as the commitment
of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk.
Forms that an investment may take include:
(a) an enterprise;
(b) tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property and related property rights
such as mortgages, liens or pledges;
1
(c) shares, stock and other forms of equity participation in an enterprise;
(d) bonds, debentures, other debt instruments, and loans;
2
(e) futures, options, and other derivatives;
(f) intellectual property rights;
(g) turnkey, construction, management, production and revenue sharing contracts,
concessions and other similar contracts; and
(h) licences, authorisations, permits and similar rights conferred pursuant to a Party’s
domestic law.3

1
For greater certainty, market share, market access, expected gains and opportunities for profit-making are not,
by themselves, investments.
2
Some forms of debt, such as bonds, debentures, and long-term notes, are more likely to have the characteristics
of an investment, while other forms of debt are less likely to have such characteristics. Loans issued by one
Party to another Party are not investments.
3 Whether a particular type of licence, authorisation, permit or similar instrument (including a concession, to the
extent that it has the nature of such an instrument) has the characteristics of an investment depends on factors 
An investment does not, however, include:
(a) claims to payment resulting solely from the commercial sale of goods and services
unless it is a loan that has the characteristics of an investment;
(b) a bank letter of credit; or
(c) the extension of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade
financing.
For the purposes of the definition of investment in this chapter, returns that are invested shall
be treated as investments and any alteration of the form in which assets are invested or
reinvested shall not affect their character as investments;
investor of a Party means a Party, or a natural person or an enterprise of a Party that has made
or seeks to make an investment in the territory of another Party;
4
measures adopted or maintained by a Party means any measure taken by:
(a) central, state, regional or local Government or authorities; or
(b) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, state,
regional or local Governments or authorities;
permanent resident of a Party means a natural person who has permanent residence status in
a Party in accordance with its laws and regulations;
TRIMS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures, in Annex
1A to the WTO Agreement; and
TRIPS Agreement means the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property,
in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement.
Article 2: Objectives
This Chapter is intended to encourage a stable and predictable environment to attract and
promote the flow of investment between the Parties with due respect to national policy
objectives and to the right of each Party to regulate.

such as the nature and extent of the rights that the holder has under the law of the Party that granted such rights.
Among the licences, authorisations, permits and similar instruments that do not have the characteristics of an
investment are those that do not create any rights protected under domestic law. For greater certainty, the
foregoing is without prejudice to whether any asset associated with the licence, authorisation, permit or similar
instrument has the characteristics of an investment.
4
For greater certainty, the Parties understand that, for the purposes of the definition of “investor” of a Party, an
investor “seeks to make” an investment when that investor has taken concrete action or actions to make an
investment, such as channeling resources or capital in order to set up a business, or obtained a permit or licence.
Article 3: Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a) investors of other Parties;
(b) covered investments; and
(c) with respect to Article 11 all investments in the territory of the Party.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) procurement by a Party; and
(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party, except subsidies provided in connection
with measures prohibited under Article 11.
Article 4: Relation to Other Chapters
1. This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party affecting
trade in services.5
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Article 9, Article 10, Article 12, Article 13, Article 14,
and Article 17 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any measure affecting the supply of service
by a service supplier of a Party through commercial presence in the territory of any other
Party pursuant to Chapter 7 (Trade in Services), but only to the extent that any such measures
relate to a covered investment and an obligation under this Chapter, regardless of whether
such a service sector is scheduled in a Party's Schedules of Specific Commitments in Annex
7-A (Schedule of Specific Services Commitments).
Article 5: Obligation to Comply with Domestic Law and Corporate Social Responsibility
1. The Parties acknowledge that investors of a Party and their investments are subject to
the laws, regulations and standards of the host state Party.
2. The Parties reaffirm the importance of each Party encouraging enterprises operating
within its territory or subject to its jurisdiction to voluntarily incorporate into their internal
policies internationally recognised standards, guidelines and principles of corporate social
responsibility that have been endorsed or are supported by that Party.

5
For the purposes of this Chapter, the definition of Trade in Services in Article 1 of Chapter 7 (Trade in
Services) shall apply. 
Article 6: National Treatment
1. In the sectors specified in Annex 9-A of this Agreement, and subject to any conditions
and qualifications set out therein, each Party shall accord to investors and covered
investments of investors of any other Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords,
in like circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect to the acquisition,
establishment, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
investments in its territory.
2. In respect of intellectual property rights, a Party may derogate from the obligations set
out in this Article provided this is not inconsistent with the TRIPS Agreement.
Article 7: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment
1. Each Party shall accord to investors and covered investments of investors of any other
Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of a
non-party or to their investments with respect to the acquisition, establishment, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments in its territory.
2. A Party may maintain a measure inconsistent with paragraph 1 provided that such a
measure falls within the scope of exemptions lists in Annex I (Schedule of Most-FavouredNation Exemptions on Services and Investment).
3. In respect of intellectual property rights, a Party may derogate from the obligations set
out in this Article provided this is not inconsistent with the TRIPS Agreement.
Article 8: Scheduling of Commitments
1. Each Party shall set out in Annex 9-A the sectors where it undertakes specific
commitments with respect to Article 6. With respect to sectors where such commitments are
undertaken, each Schedule shall specify any conditions or qualifications on national
treatment.
2. Schedules of specific commitments are annexed to this Agreement and shall form an
integral part thereof.
Article 9: Minimum Standard of Treatment
1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments of investors of any other Party the
customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens including fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security.
2. For greater certainty, paragraph 1 prescribes the customary international law6 minimum
standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of treatment to be afforded to
covered investments. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and
security” shall not require treatment in addition to or beyond that which is required by that
standard, and shall not create additional substantive rights. The obligation in paragraph 1 to
provide:
(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in
criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with the
principle of due process embodied in the principal legal systems of the world; and
(b) “full protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of police
protection required under customary international law.
3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this Agreement, or
of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there has been a breach of this
Article.
Article 10: Senior Management and Boards of Directors
1. No Party may require that an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment appoint
to Senior Management positions natural persons of any particular nationality.
2. No Party may require that a majority of the board of directors, or any committee thereof,
of an enterprise of that Party that is a covered investment, be of a particular nationality, or
resident in the Party.
3. A Party may maintain a measure inconsistent with this Article provided that such a
measure falls within the scope of any exemptions listed in Annex 9-B.
Article 11: Prohibition of Performance Requirements
1. If a Party is a WTO Member, it shall, in connection with the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of an investment of an
investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, ensure that any measure taken is
consistent with the TRIMS Agreement.
2. (a) If a Party is not a WTO Member, it shall, to the extent of its capacity, strive to
ensure that, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, sale or other disposition of an investment of an

6The Parties confirm their shared understanding that “customary international law” generally and as specifically
referenced in Article 9 results from a general and consistent practice of States that they follow from a sense of
legal obligation. With regard to Article 9, the customary international law minimum standard of treatment of
aliens refers to all customary international law principles that protect the economic rights and interests of aliens.
investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its territory, any measure taken is
consistent with the TRIMS Agreement.
 (b) For greater certainty, if a Party is not a WTO Member, a list of that Party's
measures that do not comply with the TRIMS Agreement shall be listed in Annex
9-D within two years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement. After the
expiry of this date, new measures that are inconsistent with the TRIMS
Agreement may not be introduced.
Article 12: Compensation for Losses
1. Each Party shall accord to investors of any other Party and to their covered investments,
with respect to measures it adopts or maintains relating to losses suffered by investments in its
territory owing to armed conflict, civil strife or state of emergency, treatment no less
favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to:
(a) its own investors and their investments; and
(b) investors of any other Party or non-Party and their investments.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an investor of a Party, in the situations referred to in
paragraph 1, suffers a loss in the territory of another Party resulting from:
(a) requisitioning of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces or
authorities; or
(b) destruction of its covered investment or part thereof by the latter’s forces or
authorities, which was not required by the necessity of the situation,
the latter Party shall provide the investor with restitution, compensation, or both as
appropriate, for such loss.7 Any compensation shall be made in accordance with Articles 13.2,
13.3 and 13.4 which shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Article 13: Expropriation and Compensation
1. A Party shall not expropriate or nationalise a covered investment of an investor from
another Party, either directly or indirectly through measures equivalent to expropriation or
nationalisation, except:
(a) for a public purpose;
(b) in a non-discriminatory manner;

7
For greater certainty, in the event of providing both restitution and compensation, their combined value shall
not exceed the loss suffered.
(c) in accordance with due process of law; and
(d) upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation pursuant to
paragraphs 2, 3 and 4.
2. Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated
investment at the time when the expropriation was publicly announced or when the
expropriation occurred, whichever is the earlier. Compensation shall be determined in
accordance with the generally recognised principles of valuation and equitable principles,
taking into account, inter alia, the capital invested, depreciation, capital already repatriated,
replacement value and other relevant factors. Compensation shall not reflect any change in
value occurring because the expropriation had become publicly known earlier.
3. The compensation shall be paid without undue delay. Such compensation shall be in a
freely usable currency and include interest at a commercially reasonable rate, taking into
account the length of time before payment occurs. It shall be effectively realisable and freely
transferable.
4. An investor of a Party affected by a direct expropriation may seek, under the law of the
host state making the expropriation, a review, by a judicial or other independent authority of
the host country, of the decision to expropriate and of the valuation of its investment in
accordance with the principles set out in this Article.
5. For those Parties that are WTO Members, this Article does not apply to the issuance of
compulsory licences granted in relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the
TRIPS Agreement or the revocation, limitation, or creation of intellectual property rights, to
the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is consistent with the TRIPS
Agreement.
6. For those Parties that are not currently WTO Members, this Article does not apply to
the issuance of compulsory licences granted in relation to intellectual property rights in
accordance with relevant international agreements or the revocation, limitation, or creation of
intellectual property rights, to the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation
is in accordance with relevant international agreements on intellectual property rights.
Article 14: Free Transfer of Funds
1. Each Party shall allow all transfers relating to a covered investment to be made freely
and without delay into and out of its territory. Such transfers include:
(a) contributions to capital, including the initial contribution;
(b) profits, capital gains, dividends, royalties, licence fees, technical assistance and
technical and management fees, interest and other current income accruing from
any covered investment;
(c) proceeds from the total or partial sale or liquidation of any covered investment;
(d) payments made under a contract, including a loan agreement;
(e) payments made pursuant to Article 12 and Article 13;
(f) payments arising out of the settlement of a dispute or an agreement between the
disputing parties; and
(g) earnings and other remuneration of personnel engaged from abroad in connection
with that investment.
2. Each Party shall allow such transfers relating to a covered investment to be made in a
freely usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing at the time of transfer.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may prevent or delay a transfer through the
equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws and regulations relating
to:
(a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the rights of creditors;
(b) issuing, trading, or dealing in securities, futures, options, or derivatives;
(c) criminal or penal offences and the recovery of the proceeds of crime;
(d) financial reporting or record keeping of transfers when necessary to assist law
enforcement or financial regulatory authorities;
(e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in judicial or administrative
proceedings;
(f) taxation;
(g) social security, public retirement, or compulsory savings schemes; and
(h) severance entitlements of employees.
Article 15: Transparency
1. On request by a Party, information shall be exchanged relating to measures of another
Party that may have a material impact on any covered investment under this Chapter.
2. A Party may request, in writing, consultations with another Party regarding any actual or
proposed measure or any other matter that it considers might materially affect the operation of
this Chapter. The other Party shall engage in consultations in accordance with Article 5 of
Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement).
Article 16: Special Formalities and Disclosure of Information
1. Nothing in Article 6 or Article 7 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities in connection with covered
investments, including a requirement that covered investments be legally constituted under
the laws or regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do not substantially impair
the protections afforded by a Party to investors of any other Party and covered investments
pursuant to this Chapter.
2. Notwithstanding Article 6, a Party may require an investor of another Party to provide
information concerning an investment solely for informational or statistical purposes. The
Party shall protect, to the extent possible, any confidential information which has been
provided from any disclosure that would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of the
investor or the covered investment. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a
Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing information in connection with the equitable and
good faith application of its law.
Article 17: Subrogation
1. If a Party or an agency of a Party makes a payment to an investor of that Party under a
guarantee, a contract of insurance or other form of indemnity it has granted on noncommercial risk in respect of an investment, other Parties shall recognise the subrogation or
transfer of any right or claim in respect of such investment. The subrogated or transferred
right or claim shall not be greater than the original right or claim of the investor.
2. If a Party or an agency of a Party has made a payment to an investor of that Party and
has taken over the investor’s rights and claims, that investor shall not, unless authorised to act
on behalf of the Party or the agency making the payment, pursue those rights and claims
against any other Party.
3. In any proceedings involving an investment dispute, a Party shall not assert, as a
defence, counter-claim, right of set-off or otherwise, that the investor or the covered
investment has received or will receive, pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract,
indemnification or other compensation for all or part of any alleged loss.
Article 18: Denial of Benefits
1. Following notification through the contact point of a Party, a Party may deny the benefits
of this Chapter:
(a) to an investor of another Party where the covered investment is being made by an
enterprise that is owned or controlled by persons of a non-party and the enterprise
has no substantive business operations in the territory of any other Party; or
(b) to an investor of another Party where the covered investment is being made by an
enterprise that is owned or controlled by persons of the denying Party and the
enterprise has no substantive business operation in the territory of any other Party.
Article 19: Investment and Environment, Health and Other Regulatory Objectives
1 Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by investors of another
Party and of non-Parties by not enforcing their own environmental, health, labour, safety or
other regulatory standards.
2 Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining any measure otherwise consistent with this Agreement that it considers
appropriate to ensure that investment activity in its territory is undertaken in a manner
sensitive to its environmental, health, or other regulatory objectives.
Article 20: Promotion and Facilitation of Investment
Taking into account the different levels of economic development of the Parties, the
developed country Parties shall aim to assist the developing country Parties in the promotion
and facilitation of foreign investment to their countries. In that regard, the Parties shall aim to
explore through Chapter 10 (Development and Economic Cooperation) and the Implementing
Arrangement for Development And Economic Cooperation under the Pacific Agreement on
Closer Economic Relations Plus how the developing country Parties may be assisted to attract
investment into their territories.
Article 21: Competent Authorities and Contact Points
1. Each Party shall provide all other Parties with a description of its competent authorities
and their division of responsibilities.
2. Each Party shall provide all other Parties with a Contact Point to facilitate distribution
of requests and notifications made in accordance with this Chapter.
3. Each Party shall ensure that the information provided under paragraphs 1 and 2 is kept
up to date.
Article 22: Technical Discussions
1. A Party may, through Contact Points, request technical discussions with another Party
on any measure affecting investment between them. The Party to which the request was made
shall respond promptly to any such request. The Parties shall seek to clarify any measure at
issue and, where there is any remaining difference of view, they shall endeavour to find a
mutually acceptable solution, taking into account the objectives of this Chapter. In the case of 
measures affecting the investment interests of a developing country Party, the Parties shall
endeavour to resolve any concerns in a timely manner.
2. A Party may, through Contact Points, arrange to undertake technical discussions with
other Parties on investment matters of mutual interest. Technical discussions should be
conducted using electronic means. If this is not possible, they may be conducted in person or
by any other means, as mutually determined by the Parties.
3. The Parties participating in technical discussions pursuant to this Chapter may mutually
agree to invite another Party or a relevant international or regional organisation in the field of
investment to participate for the purpose of providing technical advice.
Article 23: Review of Commitments
1. The Parties shall review commitments on investment, with the first review to be
undertaken within three years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and
periodically thereafter as determined by the Joint Committee, with the aim of improving the
overall commitments undertaken by the Parties under this Chapter.
2. The Parties recognise the limited capacities of developing country Parties which will be taken into account in the review process.

CHAPTER 10
DEVELOPMENT AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Article 1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
development assistance coordination agency means the agency of a Party with primary
responsibility for the coordination and management of Official Development Assistance
within that Party;
implementing Party or implementing Parties means, for each component of the Work
Programme, the Party or Parties primarily responsible for the implementation of that
component;
participating Party or participating Parties means, for each component of the Work
Programme, the Party or Parties participating in that component; and
Work Programme means the programme of development and economic cooperation
activities mutually prioritised and determined by the Parties taking into account the needs
identified by the developing country Parties, under the relevant components.
Article 2: Scope and Objectives
1. The Parties reaffirm the importance of ongoing development and economic cooperation
between them, including existing bilateral and regional cooperation through the Australian
and New Zealand Aid Programmes that support the Forum Island Countries’ increased
participation in international trade, including the expansion and diversification of their
exports.
2. The Parties agree to improve and complement their existing development and economic
cooperative partnerships in trade and investment related areas, taking into account the needs
that are identified by the developing country Parties; and mutually prioritised and determined
by the participating Parties. In elaborating areas of partnership, the Parties shall take account
of the different levels of development and capacities of the Parties.
3. The Parties take due note of the provisions in various Chapters of this Agreement that
encourage and facilitate cooperation and consultation. The Parties agree to adopt targeted
measures to address the capacity constraints of the developing country Parties through
cooperation and consultation as determined in the various Chapters.
4. The development and economic cooperation objectives under this Chapter will be
achieved through the Work Programme and broader trade and investment related assistance as
set out in the Implementing Arrangement for Development and Economic Cooperation under
Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations Plus, in particular, paragraph 6 thereof.
Article 3: Resources for the Work Programme
1. The Parties shall contribute appropriately to the implementation of the Work Programme.
In that regard, the financial resources to be provided by the developed country Parties are set
out in the Implementing Arrangement for Development and Economic Cooperation under
Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations Plus.
2. In determining the appropriate level of contribution to the Work Programme, the Parties
shall take into account:
(a) the different levels of development and capacities of the Parties;
(b) any in-kind contributions that Parties are able to make to Work Programme
components;
(c) any contributions that non-Parties are able to make to Work Programme
components, directly or indirectly; and
(d) that the appropriate level of contribution enhances the relevance and sustainability
of cooperation, strengthens partnerships between Parties and builds Parties’
shared commitment to the effective implementation and oversight of Work
Programme components.
Article 4: Development and Economic Cooperation Work Programme
1. Each Work Programme component shall:
(a) be trade- or investment-related and support the implementation of this Agreement,
(b) be specified in the Work Programme;
(c) involve a minimum of two Forum Island Countries, and Australia or New
Zealand;
(d) address the needs of the developing country Parties as mutually prioritised and
determined by the participating Parties; and
(e) wherever possible, avoid duplication in relation to, and build on and complement,
existing economic cooperation activities and delivery mechanisms.
2. The description of each Work Programme component shall specify the details necessary
to provide clarity to the Parties regarding the scope and purpose of such component.
Article 5: Focal Points for Implementation
1. Each Party shall designate a focal point for all matters relating to the implementation of
the Work Programme and shall keep all Parties updated on its focal point’s details.
2. The focal points shall be responsible for overseeing and reporting on the
implementation of the Work Programme in accordance with Article 6 and Article 7 and for
responding to enquiries from any Party regarding the Work Programme.
3. The focal point of a Party shall coordinate the Work Programme with the development
assistance coordination agency of that Party.
Article 6: Implementation and Evaluation of Work Programme Components
1. Prior to the commencement of each Work Programme component, the implementing
Party or Parties, in consultation with the relevant participating Parties, shall develop an
implementation plan for that Work Programme component and provide that plan to each
Party.
2. The implementing Party or Parties for a Work Programme component shall use existing
mechanisms for the implementation of that component, unless otherwise agreed by those
Parties.
3. Until the completion of a Work Programme component, the implementing Party or
Parties shall regularly monitor and evaluate the relevant component and provide periodic
reports to each Party including a final component completion report.
Article 7: Review and Modification of Work Programme
1. At the direction of the Joint Committee, the Work Programme shall be reviewed
within three years of the commencement of its implementation, and thereafter at regular
intervals to assess its overall effectiveness in terms of assisting the developing country Parties
to implement their PACER Plus obligations.
2. The Joint Committee shall, where appropriate, modify, renew or terminate the Work
Programme, taking into account outcomes of reviews and the needs of the developing country
Parties as mutually prioritised and determined by Participating Parties and available
resources.
Article 8: Non-Application of Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement)
Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to any matter
arising under this Chapter.
CHAPTER 11
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
Article 1: General Exceptions
1. For the purposes of Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods), Chapter 3 (Rules of Origin and
Verification Procedures), Chapter 4 (Customs Procedures), Chapter 5 (Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 6 (Technical Regulations, Standards and Conformity
Assessment Procedures), Article XX of the GATT 1994 shall be incorporated into and shall
form part of this Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
2. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XX(b) of the GATT
1994 include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or
health, that measures referred to in Article XX(f) of the GATT 1994 include measures
necessary to protect national works or specific sites of historical or archaeological value, or
measures necessary to support creative arts of national value,
1
and that Article XX(g) of the
GATT 1994 applies to measures relating to the conservation of living and non-living
exhaustible natural resources.
3. For the purposes of Chapter 7 (Trade in Services), Article XIV of the GATS including
its footnotes shall be incorporated into and shall form part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.
4. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in Article XIV(b) of the GATS
include environmental measures necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health.
5. For the purposes of Chapter 9 (Investment), subject to the requirement that such
measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination between investments and investors of the Parties or of a non-Party
where like conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade or investment
flows, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
enforcing measures:
(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order;
2
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

1
“Creative arts” include: the performing arts – including theatre, dance and music – visual arts and craft,
literature, film and video, language arts, creative on-line content, indigenous traditional practice and
contemporary cultural expression, and digital interactive media and hybrid art work, including those that use new
technologies to transcend discrete art form divisions. The term encompasses those activities involved in the
presentation, execution and interpretation of the arts; and the study and technical development of these art forms
and activities.
2 The public order exception may be invoked only where a genuine and sufficiently serious threat is posed to one
of the fundamental interests of society.
(c) necessary to ensure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent
with this Agreement, including those relating to:
(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with the
effects of a default on a contract;
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and
dissemination of personal data and the protection of confidentiality of
individual records and accounts; or
(iii) safety; or
(d) relating to the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources if
such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic
production or consumption.
6. The Parties understand that the measures referred to in paragraph 5(b) of this Article
include environmental measures to protect human, animal or plant life or health, and that the
measures referred to in paragraph 5(d) of this Article include environmental measures relating
to the conservation of living and non-living exhaustible natural resources.
7. For the purposes of Chapter 7 (Trade in Services) and Chapter 9 (Investment), and
subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where like
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in services or investment, nothing in this
Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or enforcing measures:
(a) necessary to protect national works or specific sites of historical or archaeological
value, or measures necessary to support creative arts of national value;3
or
(b) relating to the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources.
Article 2: Security Exceptions
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
(a) to require any Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which it
considers contrary to its essential security interests; or

3
“Creative arts” include: the performing arts – including theatre, dance and music – visual arts and craft,
literature, film and video, language arts, creative on-line content, indigenous traditional practice and
contemporary cultural expression, and digital interactive media and hybrid art work, including those that use new
technologies to transcend discrete art form divisions. The term encompasses those activities involved in the
presentation, execution and interpretation of the arts; and the study and technical development of these art forms
and activities.
(b) to prevent any Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the
protection of its essential security interests:
(i) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from which
they are derived;
(ii) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition, and implements of war and to
such traffic in other goods and materials, or relating to the supply of
services, as carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying or
provisioning a military establishment;
(iii) taken so as to protect critical public infrastructures4
including
communications, power and water infrastructures from deliberate attempts
intended to disable or degrade such infrastructures;
(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
(c) to prevent any Party from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under
the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
2. A Party taking action under this Article shall, to the fullest extent possible, inform the
Joint Committee of measures that have been taken and of their termination.
Article 3: Measures to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
1. Where a Party is in serious balance of payments and external financial difficulties or
under threat thereof, it may:
(a) in the case of trade in goods, in accordance with the GATT 1994, including
Article XVIII:B, and the WTO Understanding on the Balance-of-Payments
Provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to
the WTO Agreement, adopt restrictive import measures;
(b) in the case of trade in services, adopt or maintain restrictions on trade in services
for which it has undertaken commitments, including payments or transfers for
transactions related to such commitments; and
(c) in the case of investments, adopt or maintain restrictions on payments or transfers
related to covered investments as defined in Article 1 (Definitions) of Chapter 9
(Investment).
2. Restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph 1(b) or 1(c) shall:

4
For greater certainty, this includes critical public infrastructures whether publicly or privately owned.
(a) be consistent with the IMF Articles of Agreement;
(b) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic and financial interests of
the other Parties;
(c) not exceed those necessary to deal with the circumstances described in paragraph
1 of this Article;
(d) be temporary and be phased out progressively as the situation specified in
paragraph 1 of this Article improves;
(e) be applied on a non-discriminatory basis such that the other Parties are treated no
less favourably than any non-Party; and
(f) take into account that particular pressures on the balance of payments of a Party in
the process of economic development may necessitate the use of restrictions to
ensure, inter alia, the maintenance of a level of financial reserves adequate for the
implementation of its programme of economic development.
3. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, the Parties may give priority to
economic sectors which are more essential to their economic development. However, such
restrictions shall not be adopted or maintained for the purpose of protecting a particular
sector.
4. Any restrictions adopted or maintained by a Party under paragraph 1 of this Article, or
any changes therein, shall be notified promptly to the other Parties from the date such
measures are taken.
5. The Party adopting or maintaining any restrictions under paragraph 1 of this Article
shall promptly commence consultations with any interested Parties if requested in order to
review the restrictions adopted or maintained by it.
Article 4: Prudential Measures
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, a Party shall not be
prevented from taking measures for prudential reasons,
5
including for the protection of
investors, depositors, policy holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a
financial service supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system. If
such measures do not conform with the provisions of the Agreement, they shall not be used as
a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under the Agreement.

5
For greater certainty, it is understood that the term “prudential reasons” includes the maintenance of the safety,
soundness, integrity, or financial responsibility of individual financial institutions or cross-border financial
service suppliers as well as the safety and financial and operational integrity of payment and clearing systems.
Article 5: Taxation Measures
1. Except as provided in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation
measures. For the purposes of this Article, taxes and taxation measures include excise duties,
but do not include:
(a) a “Customs duty” as defined in Article 2 of Chapter 1 (Initial Provisions and
General Definitions); or
(b) the measures listed in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of that definition.
2. This Agreement shall only grant rights or impose obligations with respect to taxation
measures where:
(a) corresponding rights and obligations are also granted or imposed under the WTO
Agreement; or
(b) they are granted or imposed under Article 11 of Chapter 9 (Investment).
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, nothing in the Articles referred to in that paragraph shall
apply to:
(a) any non-conforming provision of any existing taxation measure;
(b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any non-conforming provision of any
existing taxation measure;
(c) an amendment to any non-conforming provision of any existing taxation measure,
provided that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as
it existed immediately before the amendment, with any of those Articles;
(d) the adoption or enforcement of any new taxation measure aimed at ensuring the
equitable or effective imposition or collection of taxes including any taxation
measure that differentiates between persons based on their place of residence or
incorporation, provided that the taxation measure does not arbitrarily discriminate
between persons, goods or services of the Parties;
6
or
(e) a provision that conditions the receipt, or continued receipt, of an advantage
relating to the contributions to, or income of, a pension trust, superannuation fund,
or other arrangement to provide pension, superannuation, or similar benefits on a
requirement that the Party maintain continuous jurisdiction, regulation, or
supervision over such trust, fund, or other arrangement.
4. Article 13 of Chapter 9 (Investment) shall apply to taxation measures.

6The Parties understand that this paragraph must be interpreted by reference to the footnote to Article XIV(d) of
GATS as if the Article was not restricted to services or direct taxes.
5. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party under
any tax convention.
7
In the event of any inconsistency relating to a taxation measure between
this Agreement and any such tax convention that convention shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.
6. If an issue arises as to whether any inconsistency exists between this Agreement and a
tax convention between two or more Parties, the issue shall be referred to the competent
authorities of the Parties. The competent authorities of the Parties shall have six months from
the date of referral of the issue to make a determination as to the existence and extent of the
inconsistency. If the competent authorities agree, such a period may be extended up to twelve
months from the date of referral of the issue. No procedure concerning the measure giving
rise to the issue may be initiated under Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement) or
Chapter 9 (Investment) until the expiry of the six month period, or such other period as may
have been agreed by the competent authorities pursuant to the previous sentence. A panel
established to consider a dispute related to a taxation measure shall accept as binding a
determination of the competent authorities of the Parties made under this paragraph. For the
purpose of this Article, competent authorities shall include representatives of the tax
administration of each Party.
7. Nothing in this Agreement shall oblige a Party to extend to any other Party the benefit
of any treatment, preference or privilege arising from any tax convention by which the Party
is bound.
Article 6: Treaty of Waitangi
1. Provided that such measures are not used as a means of arbitrary or unjustified
discrimination against persons of any other Party or as a disguised restriction on trade in
goods and services, nothing in this Agreement shall preclude the adoption by New Zealand of
measures it deems necessary to accord more favourable treatment to Māori in respect of
matters covered by this Agreement including in fulfilment of its obligations under the Treaty
of Waitangi.
2. The Parties agree that the interpretation of the Treaty of Waitangi, including as to the
nature of the rights and obligations arising under it, shall not be subject to the dispute
settlement provisions of this Agreement. Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement)
shall otherwise apply to this Article. A panel established under Article 11 of Chapter 14
(Consultations and Dispute Settlement) may be requested by any other Party to determine
only whether any measure (referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article) is inconsistent with its
rights under this Agreement.

7
For greater certainty, “tax convention” means a convention for the avoidance of double taxation or other
international taxation agreement.
CHAPTER 12
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 1: PACER Plus Joint Committee
1. The Parties hereby establish a Joint Committee consisting of representatives of the
Parties.
2. The functions of the Joint Committee shall be to:
(a) consider any matter relating to the implementation and operation of this
Agreement and the associated Development and Economic Work Programme;
(b) consider and recommend to the Parties any amendments to this Agreement;
(c) supervise and coordinate the work of all subsidiary bodies established pursuant to
this Agreement;
(d) adopt, where appropriate, decisions and recommendations of subsidiary bodies
established pursuant to this Agreement;
(e) identify areas to be improved for promoting and facilitating trade in goods,
services and investment among the Parties;
(f) adopt procedures for the transposition of the tariff schedules in Annex 2-A
(Schedules of Commitments on Tariffs) and technical revisions to Annex 3-B
(Schedule of Product Specific Rules);
(g) adopt recommendations on modifications of the rules of origin under Chapter 3
(Rules of Origin and Verification Procedures);
(h) as appropriate, decide on specific matters relating to the operation, application and
implementation of this Agreement;
(i) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this Agreement or that
is entrusted to the Joint Committee by the Parties;
(j) carry out any other functions as the Parties may agree; and
(k) undertake a general review of this Agreement with a view to furthering its
objectives in three years from the date of entry into force, and every five years
thereafter, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties.
3. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules and procedures at its first meeting.
4. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Joint Committee shall convene its first meeting
within one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement. Its subsequent meetings
shall be convened at such frequency as the Parties may mutually determine, and as necessary
to discharge its functions under this Agreement. Special meetings of the Joint Committee
may be convened, as mutually agreed by the Parties within 60 days of the request of a Party.
5. The Joint Committee shall report regularly to relevant Ministers of Parties to this
Agreement.
Article 2: Subsidiary Bodies
1. (a) The Parties hereby establish:
(i) a Committee on Trade in Goods, Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures
to consider any matter arising under Chapter 2 (Trade in Goods), Chapter 3
(Rules of Origin and Verification Procedures) and Chapter 4 (Customs
Procedures);
(ii) a Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and Technical
Barriers to Trade to consider any matter arising under Chapter 5 (Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter 6 (Technical Regulations,
Standards and Conformity Assessment Procedures); and
(iii) a Committee on Services, Movement of Natural Persons and Investment to
consider any matter arising under Chapter 7 (Trade in Services), Chapter 8
(Movement of Natural Persons) and Chapter 9 (Investment);
that shall comprise representatives of the Parties including those who retain the
technical skills relevant to the matters under discussion.
(b) The terms of reference of each Committee shall be proposed by that Committee,
in accordance with the Chapter(s) or Annexes of the Agreement within its
mandate and be subject to the approval of and review by the Joint Committee.
(c) The Joint Committee may delegate any of its functions outlined in Article 1.2 to
any of the Committees established under paragraph 1(a). Such delegated
functions shall be added to the relevant Committee’s terms of reference.
(d) Each Committee shall review the implementation by the Parties of the relevant
Chapters or Annexes as that Committee considers appropriate and shall make
recommendations to the Joint Committee to support the implementation of this
Agreement through the Development and Economic Cooperation Work
Programme.
(e) Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, each Committee shall
commence an initial review of the relevant Chapters and Annexes within two
years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement and submit a final report to 
the Joint Committee, including any recommendations, within three years of the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. In the fulfilment of its functions, the Joint Committee may establish additional
subsidiary bodies, including ad hoc bodies, and assign them with tasks on specific matters, or
delegate its responsibilities to any subsidiary body established pursuant to this Agreement.
3. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, each subsidiary body established under this Article
shall meet within one year of the date of entry into force of this Agreement or the
establishment of that body, and thereafter, as and when required, as determined by the Joint
Committee or by mutual agreement of the Parties. Meetings shall, wherever possible, be held
in the margins of other relevant regional meetings, or following the meetings of the Joint
Committee. Meetings may be held by teleconference or through any other means as mutually
determined by the Parties.
Article 3: Mutual Agreement
1. All decisions of the Joint Committee and any subsidiary bodies shall be taken by mutual
agreement.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Joint Committee or subsidiary
body shall be deemed to have acted by mutual agreement if no Party present at any meeting
when a decision is taken formally objects to the proposed decision.
Article 4: Support for Attendance at Meetings
Consistent with the commitment of the developed country Parties to support the
implementation of this Agreement, appropriate funding will be made available under Chapter
10 (Development and Economic Cooperation) for the participation of officials from Forum
Island Countries to attend meetings of the Joint Committee and other subsidiary bodies. In
determining the number of officials to be funded from the Forum Island Countries, account
shall be taken of the issues on the agenda to be considered by the Joint Committee or the
subsidiary bodies.
Article 5: Communications
1. Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications among the
Parties on any matter relating to this Agreement. All official communications in this regard
shall be in the English language.
2. On the request of another Party, the contact point shall identify the office or official
responsible for the matter and assist, as necessary, in facilitating communication with the
requesting Party.
ANNEX 12-A: SUBSIDIARY BODIES
Committee on Trade In Goods, Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures
The functions of the Committee on Trade in Goods, Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures
may include:
(a) reviewing the implementation of, and measures taken pursuant to, the Chapters
referred to in Article 2.1(a)(i);
(b) considering any matter related to the implementation of the Chapters referred to in
Article 2.1(a)(i) or of interest to a Party;
(c) identifying and recommending measures to promote and facilitate improved
market access;
(d) reviewing, where appropriate, the implementation of the Development and
Economic Cooperation Work Programme for the Chapters listed in Article
2.1(a)(i);
(e) adopting procedures for the technical revision of the tariff schedules in Annex 2-A
(Schedules of Commitments on Tariffs) and technical revisions to Annex 3-B
(Schedule of Product Specific Rules);
(f) discussing any proposed modifications of the rules of origin under Chapter 3
(Rules of Origin and Verification Procedures);
(g) consulting on issues relating to rules of origin, customs procedures and
administrative cooperation; and
(h) reporting outcomes of discussions to the Joint Committee within a reasonable
time after the conclusion of each meeting.
Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and Technical Barriers to Trade
The functions of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and Technical
Barriers to Trade may include:
(a) reviewing the implementation of, and measures taken pursuant to, the Chapters
referred to in Article 2.1(a)(ii);
(b) considering any matter related to the implementation of the Chapters referred to in
Article 2.1(a)(ii);
(c) reviewing, where appropriate, the implementation of the Work Programme for the
Chapters listed in Article 2.1(a)(ii); and
(d) reporting outcomes of discussions to the Joint Committee within a reasonable
time after the conclusion of each meeting.
Committee on Trade in Services, Movement of Natural Persons and Investment
The functions of the Committee on Trade in Services, Investment, and the Movement of
Natural Persons may include:
(a) reviewing the implementation of, and measures taken pursuant to, the Chapters
referred to in Article 2.1(a)(iii);
(b) considering any matter related to the implementation of the Chapters referred to in
Article 2.1(a)(iii), or of interest to a Party;
(c) identifying and recommending measures to promote further expansion of crossborder trade in services, investment, and the movement of natural persons among
the Parties;
(d) reviewing, where appropriate, the implementation of the Development and
Economic Cooperation Work Programme for the Chapters listed in Article
2.1(a)(iii); and
(e) reporting outcomes of discussions to the Joint Committee within a reasonable
time after the conclusion of each meeting.
CHAPTER 13
TRANSPARENCY
Article 1: Scope
1. This Chapter provides minimum standards on transparency that shall apply to any
matters covered by this Agreement. Other Chapters may include higher or more specific
standards that apply to their subject matter.
2. Any provisions in other Chapters addressing the same subject matter as this Chapter
shall apply in addition to and shall supplement the provisions of this Chapter.
Article 2: Publication
1. Each Party shall ensure, wherever possible, that its laws, regulations, procedures, and
administrative rulings of general application relating to any matter covered by this Agreement
are promptly published or otherwise made publicly accessible to interested persons.
2. To the extent possible, each Party shall make the measures referred to in paragraph 1
available in electronic form, or online.
3. To the extent possible, each Party shall:
(a) publish in advance any measure referred to in paragraph 1 that it proposes to
adopt; and
(b) where appropriate, provide all Parties with a reasonable opportunity to comment
on such proposed measures.1
Article 3: Notification and Provision of Information
1. To the extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Parties of any proposed or
actual measure that the Party considers might materially affect the operation of this
Agreement or otherwise substantially affect another Party’s interests under this Agreement.
2. On request of another Party, a Party shall provide information and respond to
questions pertaining to any actual or proposed measure that the requesting Party considers
might materially affect the operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect its
interests under this Agreement, regardless of whether the requesting Party has been
previously notified of that measure.

1
For greater certainty, a proposed measure may include a policy discussion document, a summary of proposed
regulations or the draft text of a law or regulation.
3. Parties shall provide any notification, request, information or response made under
this Article to the other Party through the relevant contact points.
4. Any notification, information or response provided under this Article shall be without
prejudice as to whether the measure in question is consistent with this Agreement.
CHAPTER 14
CONSULTATIONS AND DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Article 1: Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
Parties to the dispute means the complaining Party or Parties and the Party complained
against; and
third Party means any Party which has joined the proceedings under Article 5.8 or
Article 10.1.
Article 2: Objectives
The objective of this Chapter is to provide an effective, efficient and transparent process
for consultations and the settlement of disputes arising under this Agreement.
Article 3: Scope
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Chapter shall apply with respect
to the avoidance or settlement of disputes between the Parties concerning the operation,
implementation or application of this Agreement including wherever a Party considers that:
(a) a measure of another Party is inconsistent with its obligations under this
Agreement;
(b) another Party has failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement; or
(c) a benefit that the Party could reasonably have expected to accrue to it directly or
indirectly under this Agreement is being nullified or impaired.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to the settlement of disputes arising under Chapter 10
(Development and Economic Cooperation).
Article 4: General Provisions
1. This Agreement shall be interpreted in accordance with the customary rules of treaty
interpretation of public international law.
2. All notifications, requests and replies made pursuant to this Chapter shall be in
writing.
3. The Parties to the dispute shall, at every stage of a dispute, make every effort to reach
a mutually satisfactory solution. Where a mutually satisfactory solution is reached, the terms
and conditions of the agreement shall be notified to the other Parties.
4. In consultations and the settlement of disputes involving developing country Parties,
particular consideration shall be given to the special situation of those Parties. In this regard,
Parties shall exercise due restraint in raising matters under this Chapter.
5. Any time periods or other rules provided for in this Chapter, including Annex 14-A on
Model Rules of Procedure, may be modified by mutual agreement of the Parties to the
dispute. In this regard, special consideration shall be given to requests for the extension of
timeframes by developing country Parties.
Article 5: Consultations
1. Any Party may request consultations with any other Party with respect to any matter
referred to in Article 3.
2. During consultations, Parties should give special attention to the particular problems
and interests of developing country Parties.
3. Any request for consultations shall give the reasons for the request, including
identification of the measures at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint.
4. A copy of all requests for consultations shall be simultaneously provided to all Parties.
5. If a Party requests consultations, the other Party shall reply to the request for
consultations and circulate the reply to all Parties within 10 days of the request for
consultations, and enter into the consultations in good faith within 30 days of the request. In
cases of urgency, including perishable goods, the other Party shall reply and circulate the
reply to all Parties within 10 days, and enter into consultations in good faith within 10 days.
6. Consultations may be held in person or by any technological means available to the
consulting Parties. If in person, consultations shall be held in the capital of the Party to which
the request for consultations was made under paragraph 1, unless the consulting Parties agree
otherwise.
7. The Parties shall make every effort to reach a mutually satisfactory solution through
consultations. To this end, the Parties shall:
(a) provide sufficient information to enable a full examination of the matter,
including how the measures at issue might affect the implementation or
application of this Agreement;
(b) treat any confidential or proprietary information exchanged in the course of
consultations confidentially, in accordance with each Party’s domestic legislative
requirements; and
(c) endeavour to make personnel from its government agencies or other regulatory
bodies who have responsibility for or expertise in the matter under consultation
available for the consultations.
8. If a Party other than the Parties engaged in the consultations (Third Party) considers
that it has a substantial or systemic interest in the consultations, it may be joined in the
consultations upon notifying the Parties engaged in the consultations within 10 days of the
request for consultations of its desire to be joined in the consultations. Such notification shall
include an explanation of the Party's substantial or systemic interest in the matter and be
provided simultaneously to all Parties. Such Party shall be joined in the consultations if the
consulting Parties agree.
9. Consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to any proceedings under
this Chapter.
Article 6: Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation
1. The Parties to the dispute may at any time agree to good offices, conciliation or
mediation. Procedures for good offices, conciliation or mediation may begin at any time and
be terminated at any time.
2. If the Parties to the dispute agree, procedures for good offices, conciliation or
mediation may continue while the matter is being examined by a Panel established or reconvened under this Chapter.
3. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation or mediation and positions taken by
the Parties to the dispute during these proceedings shall be confidential and without prejudice
to the rights of any Parties to the dispute in any further or other proceedings.
4. The Secretary-General of the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat or their nominee may,
acting in an ex officio capacity, offer good offices, conciliation or mediation with a view to
assisting Parties to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.
Article 7: Choice of Forum
1. Where a dispute concerning any matter arises under this Agreement and under another
international agreement to which the Parties to the dispute are party, the complaining Party
may select the forum in which to address that matter and that forum shall be used to the
exclusion of other possible fora in respect of that matter.
2. For the purposes of this Article, the complaining Party shall be deemed to have
selected the forum in which to settle the dispute when it has requested the establishment of a
Panel pursuant to Article 8.1 or requested the establishment of, or referred a matter to, a
similar dispute settlement panel under another international agreement.
Article 8: Request for the Establishment of a Panel
1. The complaining Party may make a request to the Party complained against for the
establishment of a Panel to consider the dispute if:
(a) the Party complained against does not enter into consultations in accordance with
Article 5; or
(b) the consultations fail to resolve a dispute within 60 days, or 20 days in cases of
urgency including perishable goods, or such other period as the Parties may agree.
2. A request made pursuant to paragraph 1 shall identify the specific measures at issue and
provide details of the factual and legal basis of the complaint (including the provisions of this
Agreement to be addressed by the Panel) to present the problem clearly.
3. A copy of all such requests shall be provided simultaneously to all Parties. The Party
complained against shall immediately acknowledge receipt of the request by way of
notification to all Parties indicating the date on which the request was received.
Article 9: Procedures for Multiple Complainants
1. Where more than one Party requests the establishment of a Panel related to the same
dispute, a single Panel shall be established to examine these complaints, unless the Parties to
the dispute agree otherwise.
2. The single Panel shall organise its examination and present its findings in such a
manner that the rights which the Parties to the dispute would have enjoyed, had separate
panels examined the complaints, are in no way impaired.
Article 10: Third Parties
1. Any Party having a substantial interest in a matter before a Panel may notify the
Parties to the dispute of this interest within 14 days of the date of receipt by the Party
complained against of the request for the establishment of the Panel or the date of a request
for a Compliance Review Panel pursuant to Article 16. Such notification shall be
simultaneously provided to all Parties. Any Party notifying its substantial interest shall have
the rights and obligations of a Third Party as outlined in Annex 14-A on Model Rules of
Procedure.
2. The Parties to the dispute may agree to provide additional or supplemental rights to
Third Parties regarding participation in Panel proceedings. In providing additional or
supplemental rights, the Parties to the dispute may impose agreed conditions. Unless agreed
otherwise by the Parties to the dispute, the Panel shall not grant any additional or
supplemental rights to any Third Parties regarding participation in Panel proceedings.
Article 11: Establishment of Panels
1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, a Panel requested pursuant to Article 8.1 shall be
established in accordance with this Article.
2. The Panel shall consist of three panellists, including a chair.
3. Each Party to the dispute shall within 30 days of the date of the request for the
establishment of a Panel under Article 8.1, appoint one panellist who may be a national of the
Party to the dispute and propose up to three candidates to serve as the chair. If there is more
than one complaining Party, the complaining Parties shall jointly appoint one panellist. The
complaining Parties shall jointly propose up to three candidates to serve as the chair. The
chair of the Panel shall not be a national of a Party to the dispute and shall not have their usual
place of residence in the territory of a Party to the dispute.
4. The Parties to the dispute shall agree on and appoint the chair within 45 days of the
date of the request for the establishment of a Panel, taking into account the candidates
proposed in accordance with paragraph 3. If appropriate, the Parties to the dispute may
jointly consult the panellists appointed in accordance with paragraph 3.
5. If any of the three appointments have not been made within 45 days of the date of the
request for the establishment of a Panel, on request of any Party to the dispute, any remaining
panellists shall be appointed by lot from the list of the candidates proposed in accordance with
paragraph 3. The appointment by lot shall be undertaken within seven days of the date of the
request for appointment by lot, unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise. If more than
one panellist including a chair is to be selected by lot, the chair shall be selected first.
6. The date of establishment of the Panel shall be the date on which the last panellist is
appointed.
7. All panellists shall:
(a) have expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by
this Agreement, or the resolution of disputes arising under international trade
agreements;
(b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability, and sound judgement;
(c) be independent of, and not be employed by, affiliated with or take instructions
from, any Party to the dispute or Third Party;
(d) not have dealt with the matter in any capacity;
(e) disclose, to the Parties to the dispute or Third Party, information which may give
rise to justifiable doubts as to their independence or impartiality; and
(f) serve in their individual capacities and not as government representatives, nor as
representatives of any organisation.
8. If a panellist appointed under this Article resigns or becomes unable to act, a successor
panellist shall be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the appointment of the
original panellist and shall have all the powers and duties of the original panellist. The work
of the Panel shall be suspended during the appointment of the successor panellist.
9. If a Panel is reconvened under Article 16 or Article 17 the reconvened Panel shall, if
possible, have the same panellists as the original Panel. If this is not possible, the
replacement panellist(s) shall be appointed in the same manner as prescribed for the
appointment of the original panellist(s), and shall have all the powers and duties of the
original panellist(s).
Article 12: Functions of Panels
1. The Panel shall consult the Parties to the dispute, as appropriate, and provide adequate
opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory solution.
2. The Panel shall make an objective assessment of the dispute before it, including an
objective assessment of:
(a) the facts of the case;
(b) the applicability of the provisions of this Agreement cited by the Parties to the
dispute;
(c) whether:
(i) the Party complained against has failed to carry out its obligations under this
Agreement;
(ii) the measure at issue is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement;
(iii) the measure at issue applied by the Party complained against is causing the
nullification or impairment of any benefit described in Article 3.1(c); and
(d) any other matter that the Parties to the dispute have jointly requested that the
Panel address.
3. If the Panel makes a finding under paragraph 2(c), it shall issue a determination of the
reasonable period of time that the Party complained against shall have to comply with the
finding of the Panel, and the reasons for its determination, in accordance with Article 15.4.
4. The Panel shall take into account the interests of Third Parties as presented during
written or oral submissions.
5. Any Panel established or reconvened under this Chapter shall:
(a) make its findings by consensus; except where a Panel is unable to reach
consensus, it may make its findings by majority vote; and
(b) report its findings and recommendations in writing in accordance with this
Agreement. The findings and recommendations of the Panel cannot add to or
diminish the rights and obligations provided in this Agreement or any other
international agreement.
6. Unless the Parties agree otherwise within 20 days of the date of the delivery of the
request for the establishment of the Panel, the Panel’s terms of reference shall be:
“To examine, in light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement cited by the
Parties, the matter referenced in the request for the establishment of the Panel, to
make findings as provided by Article 12.5(a) and to report its findings and
recommendations in writing in accordance with Article 12.5(b).”
Article 13: Panel Procedures
1. The Panel proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and, unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, shall follow the Model Rules of
Procedure set out in Annex 14-A.
2. In examining a complaint against a developing country Party, the Panel shall accord
sufficient time for the developing country Party to prepare and present its arguments.
3. The Panel may, in consultation with the Parties to the dispute, adopt additional rules of
procedure which do not conflict with this Chapter or with Annex 14-A (Model Rules of
Procedure).
4. A Panel reconvened under Article 16 or Article 17 may establish its own procedures,
in consultation with the Parties to the dispute, which do not conflict with this Chapter or
Annex 14-A.
Article 14: Suspension and Termination of Proceedings
1. The Parties to the dispute may at any time agree that the Panel suspend its work for a
period not exceeding 12 months from the date of such agreement. In such an event the Parties
to the dispute shall jointly notify the chair of the Panel. The suspended Panel proceeding
shall be resumed on the request of any Party to the dispute. If the work of the Panel has been
continuously suspended for more than 12 months, the authority for establishment of the Panel
shall lapse, unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise.
2. The Parties to the dispute may agree to terminate the proceedings of a Panel in the
event that a mutually satisfactory solution has been found. In such event the Parties shall
jointly notify the chair of the Panel.
Article 14bis: Interim Reports
1. The Panel shall circulate the entirety of its interim report to the Parties to the dispute,
with a view to the correction of factual or clerical errors, 30 days prior to the presentation of
the final report of the Panel, or a period otherwise agreed by the Panel and the Parties to the
dispute. The Parties to the dispute shall provide written submissions to the Panel 30 days
after the interim report has been circulated if necessary.
2. After written submissions have been lodged with the Panel, a Party to the dispute may
request that the Panel hold meetings with the Parties to the dispute on the interim report
within 60 days, unless agreed otherwise by the Parties to the dispute. The Panel shall meet
with the Parties to the dispute at a time to be agreed by the Parties to the dispute.
3. The Panel shall consider the submissions by the Parties to the dispute and the
outcomes of any meetings before proceeding to finalise the report in accordance with
Article 15. The findings of the final report shall include a discussion of any comments made
by the Parties to the dispute.
Article 15: Implementation
1. The findings of the Panel shall be final and binding on the Parties to the dispute.
2. If the report of a Panel finds that:
(a) a measure is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or the Party
complained against has failed to carry out its obligations under this Agreement,
the Party complained against has an obligation to bring that measure into
conformity with the Agreement; or
(b) the measure is causing nullification and impairment in the sense of Article 3.1(c),
the Party complained against has an obligation to eliminate the nullification and
impairment or reach a mutually satisfactory solution with the complaining Party.
3. When implementing the findings of the Panel, particular attention should be paid to
matters affecting the interests1
of developing country Parties with respect to measures which
have been subject to dispute settlement.
4. Within 30 days of the date of the presentation of the Panel’s final report to the Parties
to the dispute, the Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party:

1
For greater certainty, interest may include the essential export interests of a developing country Party.
(a) of its intentions with respect to implementation, including an indication of
possible actions it may take to comply with the obligations in paragraph 1; and
(b) whether such implementation can take place immediately.
5. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise within 45 days of the presentation of
the final report, the determination made by the Panel in respect of the reasonable period of
time shall apply.
6. If a Party which requested the establishment of a Panel considers that an action
proposed or subsequently taken by the Party complained against does not comply with the
findings and recommendations of the Panel, the Parties shall enter into consultations with a
view to developing a mutually satisfactory solution.
Article 16: Compliance Review
1. If the Parties have entered into consultations in accordance with Article 15.6 and have
failed to agree on a mutually satisfactory solution within 30 days, or the Parties have not
entered into such consultations within 30 days of the request for consultations, the dispute
shall be decided through recourse to a Panel reconvened for this purpose (Compliance Review
Panel) in accordance with Article 11.9.
2. A Compliance Review Panel shall consult the Parties to the dispute, as appropriate, and
provide adequate opportunities for the development of a mutually satisfactory solution.
3. A Compliance Review Panel shall make an objective assessment of the matter or
complaint before it, including an objective assessment of:
(a) the factual aspects of any implementation action taken by the Party complained
against; and
(b) whether the Party complained against has complied with the obligation in
Article 15.1.
4. If a Compliance Review Panel is requested to reconvene in accordance with paragraph 1,
it shall reconvene within 30 days of the date of the request and fix the timetable for the
compliance review process, taking into account the time periods specified in this Chapter and
Annex 14-A.
Article 17: Compensation and Suspension of Concessions or Other Obligations
1. Neither compensation nor the suspension of concessions or other obligations is
preferred to compliance with the obligation under Article 15.1. Compensation is voluntary
and, if granted, shall be consistent with this Agreement.
2. The Party complained against shall, if so requested by the complaining Party, enter
into negotiations within 20 days of the date of the request with a view to agreeing upon
mutually satisfactory compensation if:
(a) the Party complained against has notified the complaining Party under Article
15.2 that it does not intend to comply with the obligation in Article 15.1;
(b) the Party complained against has not implemented the obligation in Article 15.1
within a reasonable period of time in accordance with Article 15.3; or
(c) a failure to comply with the obligation in Article 15.1 has been established in
accordance with Article 16.
3. If no satisfactory compensation has been agreed within 30 days of the date of a request
made under paragraph 2, the complaining Party may at any time thereafter notify the Party
complained against that it intends to suspend the application to the Party complained against
of concessions or other obligations, and shall have the right to begin suspending concessions
or other obligations 30 days after the date of notification.
4. The right to suspend concessions or other obligations arising under paragraph 3 shall
not be exercised if:
(a) a review is being undertaken pursuant to paragraph 9; or
(b) a mutually satisfactory solution has been agreed.
5. A notification made under paragraph 3 shall specify the level of concessions or other
obligations that the complaining Party proposes to suspend, and the relevant Chapter and
sector or sectors to which the concessions or other obligations are related. Any suspension of
benefits shall be restricted to benefits accruing to the Party complained against under this
Agreement.
6. In considering which concessions or other obligations to suspend, the complaining
Party shall apply the following principles:
(a) the complaining Party should first seek to suspend concessions or other
obligations in the same sector or sectors affected by the measure; and
(b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend
concessions or other obligations in the same sector, it may suspend concessions or
other obligations in other sectors.
7. The level of suspension of concessions or other obligations shall be equivalent to the
level of nullification and impairment that is attributable to the failure of the Party complained
against to implement the obligation in Article 15.1.
8. The suspension of concessions or other obligations shall be temporary and shall only
be applied until such time as the obligation in Article 15.1 has been complied with or a
mutually satisfactory solution is reached between the Parties to the dispute.
9. If the right to suspend concessions or other obligations has been exercised under this
Article, and the Party complained against considers that:
(a) the level of concessions or other obligations suspended by the complaining Party
is not equivalent to the level of the nullification and impairment; or
(b) any measure it has taken subsequent to the notification of the suspension of
benefits in paragraph 3 complies with the obligation in Article 15.1,
it may request the Panel to reconvene to examine the matter. The Panel shall reconvene
within 15 days of the date of the request, unless the original panellists are unavailable, in
which case the Panel shall reconvene in accordance with the procedure in Article 11.9.
10. If the Panel determines that the level of benefits suspended is excessive, it shall
determine the level of benefits it considers to be of equivalent effect to the level of
nullification or impairment found by the Panel, adjusted to reflect any loss sustained by a
Party as a result of excessive suspension. A report under Article 17.10 shall be final and
binding on the Parties.
Article 18: Expenses
1. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, each Party to the dispute shall bear
the costs of its own expenses and legal costs.
2. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the expenses of a Panel, including
the remuneration of the panellists, the costs of the chair, and other expenses associated with
the conduct of the proceedings shall be borne by the Parties to the dispute in equal shares.
ANNEX 14-A:
MODEL RULES OF PROCEDURE
1. Any reference made in these Rules to an Article is a reference to the appropriate
Article in Chapter 14 (Consultations and Dispute Settlement).
Timetable
2. After consulting the Parties to the dispute, a Panel shall, as soon as practicable and
whenever possible within 15 days of the establishment of the Panel, fix the timetable for the
Panel process. The Panel process, from the date of establishment until the date of the final
report shall, as a general rule, not exceed a period of 270 days, unless the Parties to the
dispute agree otherwise.
3. In determining the timetable for the Panel process, the Panel shall provide sufficient
time for the Parties to the dispute to prepare their respective submissions and for at least one
hearing for the Parties to present their case to the Panel. The Panel shall set precise deadlines
for written submissions by the Parties to the dispute and the Parties shall respect those
deadlines.
4. Any time period applicable to the Panel proceeding shall be suspended for a period
that begins on the date on which any panellist resigns or becomes unable to act and ends on
the date on which the successor panellist is appointed.
4bis. In fixing the timetable, positive consideration shall be given to requests by any
developing country Parties to the dispute for an extension of the time frames to enable them to
adequately prepare their submissions.
5. A Panel may, in consultation with the Parties to the dispute, modify any time period
applicable in the Panel proceeding and make such other procedural or administrative
adjustments as may be required in the proceeding, unless agreed otherwise by the Parties.
Operation of Panels
6. The chair of the Panel shall preside at all of its meetings. A Panel may delegate to the
chair authority to make administrative and procedural decisions.
7. Except as otherwise provided in these Rules, the Panel may conduct its business by
any means, including by telephone, facsimile, email and any other means of electronic
communication.
8. Only panellists may take part in the deliberations of the Panel. The Panel may, in
consultation with the Parties to the dispute, retain such number of assistants or designated
note takers as may be required for the proceeding and permit them to be present during its
deliberations. Any such arrangements established by the Panel may be modified by the
agreement of the Parties to the dispute.
9. The Panel’s deliberations shall be confidential. The panellists and the persons
retained by the Panel shall maintain the confidentiality of Panel proceedings and
deliberations. There shall be no ex parte communications with the Panel concerning matters
under consideration by it.
10. If a procedural question arises that is not addressed by these Rules, a Panel may, after
consulting the Parties, adopt an appropriate procedure that is consistent with this Agreement.
11. The interests of Third Parties and other Parties shall be fully taken into account during
the Panel proceedings. Any information or written submissions provided to the Panel by a
Party to the dispute or a Third Party shall be made available to the other Parties to the dispute.
Written Submissions and Other Documents
12. Each Party to the dispute shall deliver to the Panel a first submission in writing setting
out the facts of its case and its arguments. Unless the Parties to the dispute otherwise agree, a
complaining Party shall deliver its first submission to the Panel and to the Party complained
against within 14 days of the date of the establishment of the Panel. The Party complained
against shall deliver its first submission to the Panel and to the complaining Party within 21
days of the date of receipt of the first submission of the complaining Party. Any subsequent
written submissions shall be submitted simultaneously.
13. Any Third Party shall have an opportunity to make written submissions to the panel.
These submissions shall also be given to the parties to the dispute and shall be reflected in the
panel report.
14. A Party to the dispute shall deliver no less than four copies of its written submissions
to the Panel and one copy to the other Parties to the dispute. Third Parties shall receive the
submissions of the Parties to the dispute prior to the first substantive hearing.
15. In respect of any request, notice or other document related to the Panel proceeding that
is not covered by Rules 12 and 14, each Party to the dispute may deliver a copy of the
document to the other Party to the dispute by facsimile, email or other means of electronic
transmission.
16. A Party to the dispute may at any time correct minor errors of a clerical nature in any
request, notice, written submission or other document related to the Panel proceeding by
delivering a new document clearly indicating the changes.
Hearings
17. At the first substantive hearing of the Panel, each Party to the dispute shall present the
facts of its case and its arguments. The complaining Party shall present its position first. The
Parties to the dispute shall be given an opportunity for final statements, with the complaining
Party presenting its statement first. 
18. All Third Parties shall be invited to present their views during a separate session of the
first substantive hearing of the Panel set aside for that purpose. All Third Parties may be
present during the entirety of this session.
19. The Parties to the dispute and Third Parties shall make available to the Panel written
versions of their oral statements and responses to questions made in hearings with the Panel.
20. A Panel shall hold its hearings in open session, unless the Parties to the dispute agree
otherwise.
Availability of Information
21. Subject to Rules 22 and 23, each Party’s written submissions, written versions of its
oral statements, and written responses to questions from the Panel may be made available to
the public by the Parties to the dispute.
22. A Party may designate, for confidential treatment, specific information it includes in
its submissions, to the extent it considers strictly necessary to protect privacy or legitimate
commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private, or to address essential
confidentiality concerns.
23. The Parties to the dispute shall treat as confidential information submitted by another
Party which that Party has designated as confidential. If a Party designates information as
confidential, that Party shall, on request of another Party, provide the Panel and other Parties
to the dispute with a non-confidential summary of the information contained in its written
submissions that could be disclosed to the public.
24. The report presented to the Parties to the dispute in accordance with Article 12.2 and
any comments on it shall be confidential.
25. Each Party shall take such reasonable steps as are necessary to ensure that its
individuals involved in Panel proceedings, including its experts, interpreters, translators, and
court reporters (designated note takers) maintain the confidentiality of the Panel proceedings.
Information Gathering
26. The Parties to the dispute and Third Parties shall respond promptly and fully to any
request by the Panel for any information the Panel considers necessary and appropriate.
27. On the request of a Party to the dispute, or on its own initiative, the Panel may seek
information and technical advice from any individual or body which it deems appropriate.
However, before doing so the Panel shall seek the views of the Parties to the dispute. If the
Parties to the dispute agree that the Panel should not seek the additional information or
technical advice, the Panel shall not proceed to seek such information or technical advice.
The Panel shall provide the Parties to the dispute with any information or technical advice it
receives and an opportunity to provide comments.
Reports
28. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, a Panel shall base its report solely on
the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the submissions and arguments of the Parties to the
dispute, and other information provided to it in accordance with Rule 24. A Panel shall only
make the findings and recommendations provided for in this Agreement.
29. A Panel established in accordance with Article 11 shall set out in its report: a
descriptive section summarising the arguments of the Parties to the dispute and Third Parties;
and its findings, and reasons for its findings, under each relevant subparagraph of Article
12.2. The Panel may suggest ways in which the Party complained against could implement
the findings. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the Panel shall present to the
Parties to the dispute an interim report containing its initial assessment within 90 days of its
establishment, or within 45 days in cases of urgency, and a final report to the Parties to the
dispute within 30 days of presentation of the interim report. If the Panel finds that the Party
complained against is not in compliance with its obligations under this Agreement, the Panel
shall make a determination as to what constitutes a reasonable period of time for the Party
complained against to implement its obligations under this Agreement.
30. The interim report and final report of the Panel shall be drafted without the presence
of the Parties to the dispute. Opinions expressed in the reports of the Panel by its individual
members shall be anonymous.
31. The Parties to the dispute shall release the final report to the public within 15 days of
its presentation, subject to the protection of confidential information.
32. A Panel reconvened in accordance with Article 16 shall set out in its report: a
descriptive section summarising the arguments of the Parties to the dispute and Third Parties;
and its findings, and reasons for its findings, under each subparagraph of Article 16.3. Unless
the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the Panel shall present to the Parties to the dispute
an interim report containing its initial assessment within 60 days of the date it reconvened and
a final report to the Parties to the dispute within 30 days of presentation of the interim report.
33. A Panel reconvened in accordance with Article 17.9(a) shall provide its assessment to
the Parties to the dispute within 30 days of the date it reconvened, unless the Parties to the
dispute agree otherwise. Where a Panel reconvenes pursuant to Article 17.9(b), Article 16.2
and 16.3 shall apply.
Venue
34. The venue for the Panel hearings shall be decided by mutual agreement between the
Parties to the dispute. If there is no agreement, the venue shall alternate between the capitals
of the Parties to the dispute with the first hearing to be held in the capital of the Party
complained against.
Remuneration and Payment of Expenses
35. The Panel shall keep a record and render a final account of all general expenses
incurred in connection with the proceedings, including those paid to its assistants, designated
note takers or other individuals that it retains pursuant to Rule 8.
CHAPTER 15
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 1: Annexes, Appendices and Footnotes
The annexes, appendices and footnotes to this Agreement shall constitute an integral
part of this Agreement.
Article 2: Application
Each Party is fully responsible for the observance of all provisions in this Agreement
and shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to ensure their observance
by its regional and local governments and authorities and non-governmental bodies (in the
exercise of governmental powers delegated to them) within its territory.
Article 3: Relation to Other Agreements
1. In respect of matters within the scope of this Agreement, each Party reaffirms its
rights and obligations under other agreements to which one or more other Parties are party,
including under the WTO Agreement in the case of a WTO Member.
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to derogate from any right or obligation
a Party has under existing agreements to which one or more other Parties are party, including
under the WTO Agreement in the case of a WTO Member.
3. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any other agreement to
which two or more Parties are party, such Parties shall consult with a view to finding a
mutually satisfactory solution, taking into account applicable principles of international law.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the provisions of this Agreement, upon entry into
force, shall, as between the Parties hereto, prevail to the extent of any inconsistency over the
provisions of the South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Cooperation Agreement
(SPARTECA).1
4. Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent any Party from entering into any agreement
with one or more other Parties relating to trade in goods, trade in services, investment or other
areas of economic cooperation.
Article 4: Amended or Successor International Agreements
If any international agreement, or a provision therein, referred to in this Agreement (or

1
For greater certainty, the purpose of this article is to ensure consistency with Article 30 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (Application of Successive Treaties Relating to the Same Subject Matter).
incorporated into this Agreement) is amended, the Parties shall consult on whether it is
necessary to amend this Agreement, unless this Agreement provides otherwise.
Article 5: Disclosure of Information
Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, nothing in this Agreement shall be
construed to require any Party to provide or allow access to information, the disclosure of
which it considers would be contrary to the public interest as determined by its domestic law,
be contrary to any of its legislation, impede law enforcement, or prejudice legitimate
commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private.
Article 6: Confidentiality
Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, where a Party provides information to
another Party in accordance with this Agreement and designates the information as
confidential, the other Party shall maintain the confidentiality of the information. Such
information shall be used only for the purposes specified, and shall not be otherwise disclosed
without the specific permission of the Party providing the information, except to the extent
that the Party receiving the information is required to provide the information under its
domestic law.
Article 7: Amendments
This Agreement may be amended by agreement in writing by the Parties and such
amendments shall come into force on such date or dates as may be agreed among them.
Article 8: Entry into Force
1. This Agreement shall enter into force 60 days after the date on which no fewer than
eight negotiating Parties have notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of their
internal requirements.
2
2. After the date of entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with paragraph 1,
this Agreement shall enter into force for any other signatory 60 days after the date on which
such signatory has notified the Depositary in writing of the completion of its internal
requirements.

2
For greater certainty, the term “internal requirements” may include obtaining governmental approval or
parliamentary approval in accordance with domestic law.
Article 9: Accession
1. This Agreement shall be open to accession or association by a State, separate customs
territory or self-governing entity as the Parties may agree.
2. An applicant for accession shall accept all of the provisions of this Agreement and its
Annexes.
3. The applicant for accession shall enter into negotiations with the Parties on Schedules
of Commitments on Tariffs (Chapter 2), Trade in Services (Chapter 7), Movement of Natural
Persons (Chapter 8) and Investment (Chapter 9) on terms to be agreed between the Parties.
4. The Agreement shall enter into force for an accession applicant 60 days after it has
deposited an instrument of accession with the Depositary indicating that it accepts the terms
and conditions for the accession, and the Parties have notified the Depositary in writing of the
completion of their internal requirements with respect to the accession.
5. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3, Forum Island Countries which had participated
in the PACER Plus negotiations but were unable to sign by the time that the Agreement
entered into force, can accede to it on an expedited basis following agreement with the Parties
on its Schedules of Commitments on Tariffs (Chapter 2), Trade in Services (Chapter 7),
Movement of Natural Persons (Chapter 8) and Investment (Chapter 9).
Article 10: Depositary
1. Tonga shall be the Depositary for this Agreement.
2. The Depositary shall:
(a) register this Agreement pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations Charter;
(b) transmit certified copies of this Agreement to all of the Parties; and
(c) notify all of the Parties of signatures, acceptances, ratifications, accessions to, and
withdrawals from, this Agreement.
Article 11: Withdrawal and Termination
1. Any Party may withdraw from this Agreement by giving six months advance notice in
writing to the other Parties.
2. This Agreement shall terminate if, pursuant to paragraph 1, more than half of the
Parties have notified their withdrawal from it.
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised by their respective Governments,
have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Nuku'alofa the fourteenth day of June, two thousand and seventeen, in one copy in
the English language.
