Pacific Island Countries
Trade Agreement
(PICTA) 
PACIFIC ISLAND COUNTRIES TRADE AGREEMENT (PICTA)
The Parties to this Agreement:
MINDFUL of the close historical, political, economic, geographic and cultural links that
bind them;
DESIRING to foster and strengthen trade in the Pacific region;
BELIEVING that an expansion of trading links will bring economic and social benefits
and improve the living standards of all the peoples of the Pacific region;
RECOGNISIN G the desirability of a clearly established and secure framework of rules
for trade under conditions of fair competition in the Pacific region;
BEARING in mind their commitment to trade liberalisation and an outward looking
approach to trade;
TAKING into account the differing economic potentials and the special development
problems of some Parties to this Agreement; and
DESIRING to act consistently with their respective rights, obligations and undertakings
under the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, or other
multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements and arrangements to which they are party,
including the Melanesian Spearhead Group Trade Agreement and the Compacts of Free
Association between the United States of Ametica and Federated States of Micronesia,
Republic of the Marshall Islands, and Republic of Palau;
IN EXERCISE of their sovereign rights;
HAVE AGREED as follows:
PART I: DEFINITION AND OBJECTIVES
Article 1
Definitions
In this Agreement, unless the contrary intention appears:
"Agreement" means the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement and includes any
annexes or protocols to that Agreement, which shall be an integral part of that
Agreement;
"Area" means the free trade area established under Article 3;
1 
"Forum" means the Pacific Islands Forum, as referred to in the Agreement establishing
the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat;
"Forum Secretariat" means the Secretariat of the Forum;
"frontier traffic" means the non-commercial import and export of goods carried by
residents of the border area;
"Least Developed Country" means any Party to this Agreement that is for the time being
designated as a Least Developed Country by the United Nations;
"measure" includes any law, regulation, or administrative action or practice;
"originating goods" means goods which qualify as originating goods under the RuIes of
Origin set out in Annex I of this Agreement;
"Party" means a State, Territory or Self-Governing Entity which has signed and ratified
or acceded to this Agreement pursuant to Article 26 or which has acceded to this
Agreement pursuant to Article 27;
"Secretary General" means the Secretary General of the Forum Secretariat;
"Small Island State" means, on becoming a Party to this Agreement, the Cook Islands,
Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Republic of Marshall Islands, and Tuvalu, and any other State,
Territory or Self-Governing entity that becomes Party to this Agreement and is
designated as a SmaIl Island State by agreement of the Parties;
"tariff' includes any customs or import duty and any charge imposed in connection with
importing goods, including any import levy, surtax or surcharge, but does not include
any:
(a) fees or charges connected with importing goods which approximate the actual cost
of providing customs, quarantine and similar services provided that such fees or
charges do not represent an indirect form of trade protection or a taxation for
fiscal purposes; and
(b) internal duties, taxes or charges on goods, ingredients or components which do not
exceed the duties, taxes or charges applied to the same goods, ingredients or
components originating in the importing Party.
"territory" means a Party's land territory, internal waters, territorial waters, continental
shelf, archipelagic waters and exclusive economic or resource management zones
established in accordance with international law.
Article 2
Objectives
The objectives of the Parties in concluding this Agreement are to:
(a) strengthen, expand and diversify trade between the Parties;
2 
(b) promote and facilitate this expansion and diversification through the elimination of
tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade between the Parties in a gradual and
progressive manner, under an agreed timetable, and with a minimum of disruption;
(c) develop trade between the Parties under conditions of fair competition;
(d) promote and facilitate commercial, industrial, agricultural and technical cooperation between the Parties;
(e) further the development and use of the resources of the Pacific region with a view
to the eventual creation of a single regional market among the Pacific Island
economies in accordance with the respective social and economic objectives of the
Parties, including the advancement of indigenous peoples; and
(f) contribute to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade in goods
and services and to the progressive removal of barriers to it.
PART II: TRADE IN GOODS
Article 3
Free Trade Area
1 The Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement, with the understanding that Least Developed
Countries and Small Island States may be integrated in accordance with different
structures and by different time frames than other Parties. The Area shall consist of
the territories of the Parties to this Agreement.
2 The Parties may agree to extend the Area to include any other State, Territory or
Self-Governing Entity, subject to terms consistent with this Agreement which shall
be negotiated between the Parties and the other State, Territory or Self-Governing
Entity.
Article 4
Coverage of the Agreement
This Agreement shall apply to trade in originating goods exported from one Party to
another Party, in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.
3 
Article 5
Rules of Origin
1 Goods shall be treated as originating in a Party if they comply with the Rules of
Origin set out in Annex I of this Agreement, hereinafter "the Rules".
2 Each Party shall establish a mechanism to provide on request a binding ruling on
the originating status of goods to be imported, available at least six months in
advance of shipment of such goods, and valid for a period of at least six months
after the arrival of the first shipment.
3 The Parties shall establish a Rules of Origin Committee which shall consist of
representatives, whether from the public or private sector, from five Parties,
including at least one representative from a Least Devdoped Country or Small
Island State. The Committee members:
(a) shall initially be the representatives appointed by each of the first five Parties
to ratify this Agreement that are willing to provide such a representative, and
shall meet within 60 days of the entry into force of this Agreement;
(b) shall thereafter be the representatives of the five Parties which have been
decided by the consensus agreement of the Parties biannually; and
(c) may serve more than one term.
4 The Committee may act with a quorum of three, and where appropriate employ
the services of expert advisers.
5 The Forum Secretariat shall provide secretariat services to the Committee.
6 The functions of the Rules of Origin Committee shall be to:
(a) regularly review the implementation of the Rules to ensure that they are
applied effectively, uniformly and in accordance with this Agreement, and
report its findings and make appropriate recommendations to the Parties;
(b) regularly review the Rules to ensure that:
(i) they are fully supportive of the objectives of this Agreement; and
(n) if appropriate, they conform to the guidelines produced by bodies such
as the World Customs Organisation and the World Trade
Organisation;
and report its findings and recommend any desirable amendments to the
Parties;
(c) in consultation with the Parties, make recommendations on the adoption of
standardised operating and documentation procedures;
4 
(d) provide technical and investigative assistance to the Parties in respect of the
interpretation, implementation and operation of the Rules;
(e) receive from the parties requests for derogation, and approve as appropriate
those requests in accordance with Paragraph 7;
(f) provide, as appropriate, training to Parties on the application and operation
of the Rules;
(g) provide, if requested by the Parties, assistance, consultation or mediation to
assist in the resolution of disputes arising from, or related to the Rules;
(h) provide binding rulings on disputes related to the Rules or derogation from
them, if requested by the relevant Parties;
(i) notify the Parties of any disputes between the Parties and the results of any
consultation, mediation or rulings, pursuant to sub-paragraphs (g) and (h);
0) develop guidelines and procedures, consistent with international best
practices, to be used in determining "substantial transformation" for the
purposes of Paragraph 7 (c) (i), and notify these guidelines and procedures
and any subsequent changes to the Parties, which may make amendments as
appropriate;
(k) ensure that the Committee's operation is functional, transparent and within
the resources of the Parties;
(1) establish operating procedures for carrying out its functions, including by
means of remote communications where desirable, and notify these
procedures and any subsequent changes to the Parties, which may make
amendments as appropriate; and
(m) when making recommendations for future co-operation, have regard to the
resource and capacity constraints of the Parties, in particular the Small
Island States and Least Developed Countries.
7 Where origin cannot be achieved under the normal criteria, the Rules of Origin
Committee may permit the Rules to be derogated from where their operation in
specific cases is considered unduly restrictive of trade. Derogation from the Rules
shall be permitted where it has been established on the basis of objective evidence
that the derogation sought:
(a) will not have significant adverse effects, including arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination on any Parties; and
(b) relates to goods, which are not ordinarily produced or obtained in any Party
affected by the derogation; and
(c) relates to goods which,
5 
(i) have undergone substantial transformation in the territory of the
exporting Party; or
(ii) are temporarily unable to qualify as originating goods due to exceptional
circumstances.
Article 6
Most Favoured Nation Treatment
1 Each Party shall accord treatment to the other Parties which is no less favourable
than that accorded to any other State, Territory or Self-Governing Entity in respect
of all matters concerning:
(a) tariffs imposed on, or in connection with, importing or exporting goods, or
imposed on the international transfer of payments for imports or exports;
(b) the method of levying tariffs;
(c) the rules and formalities connected with importing or exporting goods;
(d) any internal taxes or charges imposed on, or in connection with, imported
goods;
(e) internal sale, offering for sale, purchase, distribution or use of imported
goods within its territory;
(f) restrictions or prohibitions on importing or exporting goods;
(g) the allocation of foreign exchange; and
(h) the administration of foreign exchange restrlctlons affecting transactions
involving the importing or exporting of any goods.
2 Paragraph 1 shall not apply to:
(a) advantages accorded by a Party to any State, Territory or Self-Governing
Entity to facilitate frontier traffic;
(b) tariff preferences or other advantages granted by a Party to another Party by
virtue of its membership in another free trade area or customs union, or an
interim agreement leading to the formation of another free trade area or
customs union; or
(c) any measures that a Party may take pursuant to a multilateral international
commodity agreement or arrangement.
3 If any Party commences negotiations for free trade arrangements with one or more
State, Territory or Self-Governing Entity which are not party to this Agreement,
6 
then that Party shall notify the Forum Secretariat and be prepared to undertake
consultations with the other Parties to this Agreement as soon as practicable.
Article 7
Tariffs
1 Each Party shall notify the other Parties of that Party's most-favoured nation tariff
rate on all goods in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement. The
norified tariffs shall be the base tariffs.
2 Originating goods which were free of tariffs on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement, or which subsequently become free of tariffs pursuant to the
obligations imposed by this Agreement on each Party, shall remain free of tariffs.
3 Tariffs on originating goods shall not be increased above the levels permitted by
this Agreement.
4 All ad valorem tariffs on originating goods, other than those on the Parties'
respective list of excepted imports, shall without further notice be reduced and
eliminated in accordance with the timetables set out in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of
Annex II.
5 Specific tariffs and fixed tariffs on ongmating goods may be converted to
ad valorem equivalent tariffs at the time this Agreement enters into force, at the
option of each Party. All tariffs so converted to ad valorem tariffs, other than those
on the Parties' respective lists of excepted imports, shall without further notice be
reduced and eliminated in accordance with the timetables set out in Paragraphs 1
and 2 of Annex II.
6 All specific and fixed tariffs on originating goods not converted to ad valorem
equivalents, other than those on goods on the Parties' respective list of excepted
imports, shall without further notice be reduced and eliminated, in accordance with
the timetables set out in Paragraphs 3 and 4 of Annex II.
7 Each Party undertakes to identify goods which are not ordinarily produced or
obtained in its own territory and eliminate tariffs on such goods as soon as
possible, consistent with the objectives to this Agreement relating to fair
competition. Each Party shall notify the other Parties of any tariffs reduced or
eliminated in accordance with this Paragraph.
8 Each Party may reduce or eliminate tariffs with respect to the other Parties on a
non-discriminatory basis more rapidly than is provided for in this Article.
9 Unless the contrary intention appears, any reference to tariffs rates or levels in
Article 9 and Annexes II to IV are to ad valorem tariffs.
7 
Article 8
Excepted Imports
1 Upon signature, or deposit of instrument of accession, a Party may provide a list of
goods to be excepted from the operation of Paragtaphs 4, 5 and 6 of Article 7.
2 The Parties' lists of excepted imports and the tariffs applicable to such imports
shall be attached to this Agteement as Annex III. The tariff applicable to any
excepted import shall not exceed the base tariff as defined in Paragtaph 1 of
Article 7.
3 No Party shall list any of the following goods as excepted imports:
(a) goods exported from that Party in the usual and ordinary course of its ttade;
(b) goods not ordinarily produced or obtained in that Party; or
(c) goods not ordinarily produced or obtained in any other Party.
4 When listing any goods as excepted imports, each Party shall have due regard to
the objectives of this Agteement, in particular the desirability of developing fair
competition in ttade between the Parties.
5 Upon entty into force of this Agteement each Party shall notify the other Parties in
writing of its reasons for including specific goods in its list and offer to undertake
consultations with the other Parties with a view to reducing or eIiminating the
proposed lists of excepted imports.
6 The Parties shall reduce all tariffs on their excepted imports, as contained in Annex
III, in accordance with the timetables set out in Annex IV.
7 Where goods on the lists of excepted imports are subject to ad valorem tariffs,
these tariffs shall be reduced in accordance with the timetables set out in
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of Annex IV.
8 Where goods on the lists of excepted imports are subject to specific tariffs or fixed
tariffs, these tariffs shall be reduced in accordance with the timetables set out in
Paragraphs 3 and 4 of Annex IV.
9 Each Party may reduce the tariffs on its excepted imports more rapidly than is
required under this Article.
10 Where a good listed as an excepted import becomes an impermissible excepted
import in accordance with Paragtaph 3, that good shall immediately be removed
from the list of excepted imports.
11 Each Party shall notify the other Parties when any goods are removed from that
Party's list of excepted imports in Annex III.
8 
12 Goods which have been removed from a Party's list of excepted imports in Annex
III shall be treated as goods that were never listed in Annex III, and the tariffs on
such goods shall be reduced and eliminated in accordance with Annex II.
13 With the exception of Paragraph 1, the provisions of Article 7 do not apply to
goods covered by Chapters 22 and 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description
and Coding System. Within two years of this Agreement entering into force the
Parties shall consider at the Forum Trade Ministers' Meeting or otherwise as
appropriate rules to govern trade in such goods within the Area. These rules shall
be contained in Annex VI.
Article 9
Trade Distorting Measures
1 All import or export prohibitions or restrictions on trade in originating goods,
other than tariffs, customs duties and taxes, whether effected through quotas,
import or export licences or other similar measures, shall be eliminated upon the
entry into force of this Agreement. No new such measures shall be introduced.
2 No Party shall seek, take or maintain any voluntary export restraints, orderly
markering arrangements or any other similar measures on any trade in originating
goods.
3 Originating goods imported into the territory of any Party shall not be subject,
either directly or indirectly, to internal taxes or other internal charges of any kind in
excess of those applied, directly or indirectly, to like domestic products.
4 Originating goods imported into the tertitory of any Party shall be accorded
treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like domestic products in
respect of all laws, regulations and requirements affecting their internal sale,
offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use.
5 Notwithstanding Paragraphs 1 and 2, where any measures prohibited by
Paragraphs 1 and 2 restricting imports into any Party are identified that Party may
within six months from the day on which this Agreement comes into force convert
such measures into the equivalent tariffs. Where any Party converts import
restrictions into tariffs pursuant to this Paragraph that Party shall immediately
notify the other Parties of the import restriction, the equivalent tariff, and the
method by which the equivalent tariff was calculated. Such tariffs shall be reduced
and eliminated in accordance with the timetables set out in Annex II to this
Agreement. The time periods within which such tariffs shall be reduced and
eliminated shall be calculated on the basis of the dates provided in Annex II to this
Agreement.
6 If any Party considers that another Party has failed to carry out its obligations
under Paragraphs 1 to 5 and that failure has nullified or impaired any benefit
accruing directly or indirectly to the first Party that Party may initiate consultations
under Article 21.
9 
7 The provIsions of this Article shall not prevent the payment of subsidies not
prohibited or countervailable under Article 12.
8 The provisions of this Article shall not apply to measures pertaining to government
procurement, which shall be subject exclusively to the provisions of Article 15.
9 The Parties shall periodically review the implementation of this Article 111
accordance with Article 23, with a view to ensurmg that all trade distorting
measures in the Area have been eliminated.
Article 10
Emergency Action
1 For the purposes of Articles 10 to 13:
"domestic industry" means:
(a) the producers of a given product, or like or direcdy competitive products,
operating within the territory of a Party, or
(b) those whose collective output of relevant products constitutes a major
proporrion of the total domestic production of those products;
"emergency action" means any measures taken by a Party pursuant to Articles 11, 12
or 13, and includes provisional emergency action;
"serious injury" means a significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry;
"threat of serious injury" means serious injury that is clearly imminent.
2 Consistent with the objectives of this Agreement, the Parties shall endeavour to
avoid taking emergency action unless all other reasonable courses of action have
been exhausted. No Party shall take emergency action unless it has fully complied
with:
(a) the requirements set out in this Article;
(b) the requirements set out in Articles 11, 12 or 13 of this Agreement, as
relevant; and
(c) any other requirements imposed on a Party by virtue of being a member of
the World Trade Organization.
3 A Party shall immediately notify the other Parties upon:
(a) initiating an investigation in relation to the taking of emergency action;
(b) making a finding that emergency action is justified;
10 
(c) deciding to take provisional emergency action; and
(d) deciding to take or extend emergency action.
4 A notification under Paragraph 3 shall include, as appropriate, the proposed action,
the proposed date of introduction, expected duration, timetable for progressive
liberalisation of the action, and all other relevant information. The Parties may, in
accordance with Article 20, request any additional information they consider
necessary.
5 A Party proposing to take or extend emergency action shall provide adequate
opportunity for prior consultations with other Parties, with a view to reviewing the
information provided W1der Paragraph 4, exchanging views on the emergency action,
and reaching a mutually satisfactory resolution of the situation. Where prior
consultations cannot be held in cases of provisional emergency action, the Party shall
enter into consultations immediately after taking provisional emergency action.
6 A Party wishing to take emergency action pursuant to Articles 11, 12 or 13 shall first
conduct a public investigation to determine whether such action is justified W1der this
Agreement. The investigation shall include reasonable public notice to all interested
persons, and an inquiry where importers, exporters and other interested persons can
present evidence and make submissions, respond to the presentations of other
persons, and submit their views as to whether the proposed emergency action would
be in the public interest.
7 In its investigation to determine whether emergency action is justified, the Party
shall evaluate all relevant factors of an objective and quantifiable nature having a
bearing on the situation of that industry.
8 The Party shall prompdy publish a detailed report setting out its findings, the
evidence on which its findings are based, and reasoned conclusions reached on all
pertinent issues of fact and law.
9 In critical circumstances where delay would cause the adverse effects that justify
emergency action under Article 11, 12 or 13, a Party may take provisional
emergency action pursuant to a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence
that emergency action is justified. The duration of such action shall not exceed
200 days, during which period the procedures set out in this Article shall be met. The
duration of such action shall be cOW1ted as a part of the initial period of the
emergency action and any extensions referred to in Articles 10 to 13.
lOA Party shall take emergency action only for such period of time and to the extent
necessary to prevent the adverse effects that justify emergency action under Article
11, 12 or 13. In so doing, Parties shall take emergency action that minimises
restriction or distortion of trade and that is, as far as possible, consistent with the
objectives of this Agreement.
11 A Party may extend emergency action, provided that it has conducted a further
investigation and determined, in accordance with the procedures set out in this
Article, that the emergency action continues to be justified W1der Article 11, 12 or
13.
11 
12 In the case of action under Articles 11 or 13, where the expected duration of
emergency action is over one year, the Party taking the action shall progressively
liberalise it at regular intervals during the period of application. If the duration of the
action exceeds three years, the Party taking such action shall review the situation not
later than the mid-term of the action and, if appropriate, withdraw it or increase the
pace of liberalisation. Action extended under Paragraph 11 shall not be more
restrictive than it was at the end of the initial period, and shall continue to be
liberalised.
Article 11
Safeguard Measures
1 Where a Party has conducted an investigation under Article 10 and has determined
that a product is being imported into its tertitory from another Party in such
quantities, absolute or relative to domestic production, and under such conditions as
to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the domestic industry which produces
like or directly competitive products, the first Party may apply a safeguard measure to
that product.
2 No Party shall apply a safeguard measure unless its investigation under Article 10
demonstrates, on the basis of objective evidence, the existence of the causal link
between imports of the product concerned and serious injury or threat of serious
injury. When factors other than imports are causing injury to the domestic industry at
the same time, the safeguard measure may only be taken proportionate to the injury
caused by the imports.
3 Any provisional safeguard measures shall take the form of tariff increases. If the
investigation required by Article 10 does not determine that increased imports have
caused or threaten to cause serious injury to a domestic industry provisional
safeguard measures shall be promptly rescinded and any increased tariffs paid shall be
promptly refunded or, where agreed to by the importer, credited.
4 A Party may apply a safeguard measure to a product by imposing or increasing
tariffs for the minimum period and to the minimum extent necessary to prevent
the serious injury caused by imports, provided that where the Party has goods
listed as excepted imports in Annex III the Party at the same time removes
sufficient goods from its list of excepted imports to compensate for the increased
restriction on trade provided by the safeguard measure.
5 The initial period of application of a safeguard measure shall not exceed four years.
The total period of application of a safeguard measure, including any extensions,
shall not exceed eight years. Safeguard measures may not be extended unless there is
evidence that they continue to be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury and
the domestic industry is continuing to adjust to the situation.
6 No safeguard measure shall be applied to the import of a product before the greater
of:
12 
(a) two years; or
(b) the total period of time, including any extension, during which the safeguard
measure was applied
has elapsed since a safeguard measure was in effect in relation to the same or like
products.
7 Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 6, a safeguard measure with a duration
of 180 days or less may be applied again to the import of a product if:
(a) at least one year has elapsed since the date of introduction of a safeguard
measure on the import of that product; and
(b) a safeguard measure has not been applied on the same product more than
twice in the five year period immediately preceding the introduction of the
measure.
8 No Party shall apply a safeguard measure to the import of a product until two years
have elapsed following the completion or termination of measures taken to protect
the domestic industry of that Party producing like or directly competitive goods
under Article 14.
9 No Party shall apply a safeguard measure to the import of a product listed in that
Party's list of excepted imports or a product removed from that Party's list of
excepted imports less than two years ago.
Article 12
Dumped or subsidised imports
1 Where a Party has conducted an investigation under Article 10 and has determined
that goods being imported into it from another Party, or other Parties, are being
dumped, as defined in Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
and the World Trade Organization Agreement on Implementation of Article VI, so
as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to a domestic industry producing like
or directly competitive goods or to materially retard the establishment of a
domestic industry to produce like or directly competitive goods, it shall enter into
consultations with the other Party or Parties, in accordance with Article 21, with a
view to agreeing on measures to reduce or prevent injury or retardation which are
consistent with the objectives of this Agreement.
2 Where a Party has conducted an investigation under Article 10 and has determined
that goods being imported into it from another Party, or other Parties, are
subsidised by the Party or Parties so as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury
to a domestic industry producing like or directly competitive goods or to materially
retard the establishment of a domestic industry to produce like or directly
competitive goods, it shall enter into consultations with the other Party or Parties,
in accordance with Article 21, with a view to agreeing on measures to reduce or
13 
prevent injury or retardation which are consistent with the objectives of this
Agreement.
3 Where a mutually acceptable solution to the problem is not achieved within 60
days of the commencement of consultations under Paragraph 1 or 2, the first Party
shall give notice to the other Party, or Parties, of its intention to levy anti-dumping
or countervailing duties on the goods.
4 No agreed solution shall be inconsistent with the provisions of Paragraph 2 of
Article 9.
5 If further consultations between the Parties fail to resolve the issue, the first Party
may, pursuant to Paragraph 10 of Article 10, no earlier than 60 days after notice
was given to the other Party or Parties, levy anti-dumping or countervailing duties
on the dumped or subsidised products. Such duties shall not exceed the rate of
dumping or subsidisation.
6 Duties levied pursuant to Paragraph 5 shall be reviewed by the Party imposing the
duties, after one year, and annually thereafter, to determine whether the conditions
necessary for the imposition of anti-dumping or countervailing duties under this
Article, still apply. If the review determines that dumping or subsidisation has ceased,
the duties shall be immediately eliminated. If the review determines otherwise the
duties may continue to be applied, but shall not exceed the rate of dumping or
subsidisation found to exist at the time of the review.
7 The Parties agree to eliminate any subsidies that cause or threaten to cause serious
injury to a domestic industry producing like or directly competitive goods, or to
materially retard the establishment of a domestic industry to produce like or
directly competitive goods, in another Party. Such Parties shall enter into
consultations, in accordance with Article 21, with a view to agreeing on measures
to reduce or prevent injury or retardation which are consistent with the objectives
of this Agreement.
Article 13
Balance of Payments
1 Where a Party has conducted an investigation under Article 10 and has determined
that:
(a) there is a senous decline or an imminent threat of serious decline 111 its
monetary reserves; or
(b) in the case of a Party with very low monetary reserves, its monetary reserves
have failed to achieve a reasonable rate of increase;
that Party may impose or increase tariffs for the minimum period necessary and to
the minimum extent necessary to arrest or prevent the serious decline in reserves or
to enable reserves to increase at a reasonable rate.
14 
2 Parties applying restrictions under this Article may determine the incidence of the
restrictions on imports of different products or classes of products in such a way as
to give priority to the importation of those products which are more essential.
3 In applying restrictions under this Article, Parties shall:
(a) avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial or economic interests of any
other Party;
(b) not prevent unreasonably the importing of any goods in minimum commercial
quantities, the exclusion of which would impair regular channels of trade; and
(c) not prevent the importing of commercial samples or prevent compliance with
patent, trade mark, copyright, or similar procedures.
4 If there is a persistent and widespread application of restrictions under this Article,
indicating the existence of a general disequilibrium which is restricting international
trade, the Parties shall review the Agreement to consider whether other measures
might be taken to remove the underlying causes of the disequilibrium.
Article 14
Protection of Developing Industries
1 Notwithstanding Article 7, where a Party has determined that a product is being
imported into its territory from another Party in such quantities and under such
conditions as to materially retard the establishment of a domestic industry in like or
directly competitive products in the first Party, the first Party may raise tariffs
where permitted by Paragraph 2. Before raising tariffs, that Party shall notify the
other Parties of its intention to do so, in accordance with Article 20.
2 No Party shall raise tariffs under this Article uu1ess it can demonstrate, on the basis
of objective evidence, the existence of the causal link between imports of the good
concerned and the material retardation of the establishment of the domestic
industry. Tariffs shall not be raised further than necessary to prevent the material
retardation caused by the imports.
3 Subject to Paragraph 4, the initial period of action taken under this Article shall not
exceed five years, or ten years in the case of measures taken by Small Island States or
Least Developed Countries. This period shall not be extended unless the domestic
industry has been established and there is evidence that the action continues to be
necessary in order for it to adjust to competition. The total period of action taken
under this Article shall not exceed ten years, or fifteen years in the case of measures
taken by Small Island States or Least Developed Countries.
4 Where the expected duration of action taken under this Article is over one year, the
Party taking the action shall review the necessity of such action every two years and
promptly notify all Parties of the results of this review.
15 
5 No tariffs shall be raised under this Article before the developing domestic
industry has commenced production.
6 The Parties shall, in accordance with Article 23, periodically review the operation
of this Article and the time limits provided therein, with a view to preventing
unjustifiable restrictions on trade between the Parties and ensuring that the
objectives of this Agreement on fair competition in trade between the Parties are
being achieved.
PART III: GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
Article 15
Prindples Governing Government Procurement
1 The Parties are committed to the objective of liberalising government procurement
within the Area as soon as possible.
2 In order to achieve this objective, the Parties agree:
(a) to identify existing measures and practices which prohibit or restrict the
achievement of the objective set out in Paragraph 1;
(b) to adopt transparent measures and practices in respect of contract valuations,
technical specifications, qualification and performance requirements,
tendering procedures, and invitation, selection and challenge processes;
(c) that each Party shall, as soon as possible, take appropriate measures needed
to minimise and remove the measures and practices identified in Paragraph
2(a);
(d) within two years of the entry into force of this Agreement, to conclude
arrangements for detailed rules on government procurement. Those rules
shall be included as a protocol to this Agreement;
(e) in accordance with Article 23, to periodically reVIew progress made in
liberalising government procurement and shall endeavour to resolve any
problems arising in respect of the implementation of this Article.
16 
PART IV: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 16
Exceptions
1 Provided that such measures are not used as a means of arbittary or unjustifiable
discrimination between the Parties, or as a disguised resttiction on ttade between
the Parties, nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the adoption or enforcement
by a Party of measures:
(a) necessary to protect public morals;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) relating to ttade in gold or silver;
(d) necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement;
(e) necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement relating to the protection
of patents, ttade marks and copyrights, and the prevention of deceptive
practices;
(f) necessary for the prevention of disorder or crime;
(g) relating to products of prison labour;
(b) imposed for the protection of national tteasures of arnsnc, historical,
anthropological, palaeontological, archaeological or other cultural or
scientific value;
(i) necessary to reserve for approved purposes the use of Royal Arms or
national, state, provincial and territorial arms, flags, crests and seals;
G) necessary to protect its indigenous flora and fauna;
(k) undertaken in pursuance of its rights and obligations under a multilateral
international commodity agreement or arrangement;
~) necessary to prevent or relieve shortages of foodstuffs or other essential
goods; or
(m) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures
are made effective in conjunction with resttictions on domestic production
or consumption.
2 Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the adoption and enforcement by a Party
of measures:
17 
(a) necessary to protect its essential security interests or implement its
international obligations or national policies:
(i) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons,
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;
(li) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, and to
such traffic in other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly
or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military esrablishment; or
(iii) in time of war or other serious international tension.
(b) to prevent any Party from raking any action in pursuance of its obligations
under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of peace and security.
Article 17
Transparency
1 Each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency situations, at the latest
by the time of their entry into force, all measures, including judicial decisions and
administrative rulings, of general application which pertain to or affect the
operation of this Agreement.
2 Each Party shall endeavour to provide as much opportunity as possible for
interested parties and persons to comment on proposed measures that may affect
trade or government procurement.
3 Nothing in Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be interpreted as requiring a Party to disclose
confidential information contrary to its national security or the public interest, or
to prejudice legitimate commercial interests.
4 Each Party shall administer in a uniform, impartial and reasonable manner all
measures of general application pertaining to trade and government procurement.
Article 18
Measures to Facilitate Trade
1 The Parties shall endeavour to implement measures which will facilitate trade
within the Area and, where appropriate, shall encourage government bodies and
other organisations and institutions to work towards the implementation of such
measures.
2 The Parties shall examine the scope for taking action to facilitate trade within the
Area by harmonising their laws, regulations and administrative practices.
18 
3 Where possible, trade facilitation initiatives shall be co-ordinated with wider
regional and international initiatives.
4 Where a Party believes harmonisation of measures, or their implementation, will
facilitate trade or reduce or eliminate distortions of trade, it may notify any other
Party of its wish to enter into consultations. The Party so requested shall enter into
consultations in good faith, and as soon as possible, with a view to seeking a
mutually satisfactory solution.
Article 19
Evolving Relationship
1 Where a Party considers it is desirable to extend the matters covered by this
Agreement, or extend the territotial scope of this Agreement, or otherwise develop
or deepen the relationship established by this Agreement, it may notify the other
Parties of its wish to enter into consultations with a view to negotiating the terms and
conditions of the extension.
2 The Parties undertake to periodically review the status of the relationship
established by this Agreement, in accordance with Article 23.
Article 20
Notification
1 Each Party shall give the other Parties notice of any proposed or actual measure
which might materially affect trade or government procurement in the Area.
2 The notice referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be given as soon as possible, but in any
event not later than 15 days after implementing the measure or taking the action.
3 Each Party shall, on another Party's request, promptly provide information and
respond to questions pertaining to any actual or proposed measure or action which
might materially affect trade or government procurement in the Area.
4 The provisions of Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 are to be interpreted as widely as possible
consistent with not requiring a Party to disclose confidential information contrary
to its national security or the public interest, or to prejudice legitimate commercial
interests.
5 Any notice given in terms of this Agreement shall be ill writing and shall be
effective from the date on which it is received.
6 Where this Agreement requires a Party to notify the other Parties it shall be
sufficient for that Party to notify the Forum Secretariat. The Forum Secretariat
shall immediately disseminate the notice to all other Parties. Notifications which
are made directly to other Parties shall also be made to the Forum Secretariat.
19 
Article 21
Consultations
1 If a Party considers that:
(a) an obligation under this Agreement has not been, or is not being, fulfilled;
(b) any benefit conferred upon it by this Agreement is being, or may be, denied;
(c) the achievement of any objective of this Agreement is being, or may be,
frustrated;
(d) a case of difficulty has arisen or may arise; or
(e) a change in circumstances necessitates, or might necessitate, an amendment
of this Agreement;
it may notify any other Party of its wish to enter into consultations. The Party so
requested shall enter into consultations in good faith and as soon as possible, with
a view to seeking a mutually satisfactory solution.
2 For the purposes of this Agreement, consultations between the Parties shall be
considered to have commenced on the day on which notice requesting the
consultations is received.
Article 22
Dispute Resolution
1 The Parties shall endeavour, as far as is possible, to settle any differences
concerning the interpretation, implementation or operation of this Agreement
through amicable consultations in accordance with Article 21. Such consultations
shall be undertaken with appropriate regard to relevant cultural values and
customary procedures for resolving differences in the Pacific region.
2 Where the consultations referred to in Paragraph 1 have failed within 60 days to
resolve the dispute between the Parties, any Party to the dispute may notify the
Secretary General and the other Parties to the dispute of its wish to resolve the
dispute by mediation. The Parties may agree on a mediator or request the Secretary
General to appoint a mediator. Any costs relating to such mediation shall be borne
by the Parties to the dispute in equal shares.
3 Where the mediation process referred to in Paragraph 2 has failed within 60 days,
or such time period as agreed to by the Parties to the dispute, to resolve the
dispute between the Parties, any Party to the dispute may notify the Secretary
General and the other Parties to the dispute of its decision to submit the dispute to
arbitration, pursuant to the provisions of Annex V.
20 
4 The Secretary General in consultation with the Parties, shall develop, maintain and,
from time to time, amend a list of individuals who may be designated as
Arbitrators for the purpose of this Article and Annex V. The Parties, in
consultation with Secretary General, shall establish the criteria for individuals to be
included in the list of potential arbitrators.
5 The list described in the preceding Paragraph shall identify each individual,
including that individual's nationality, and briefly describe the individual's
experience with respect to both international trade and international arbitration,
the individual's training or qualifications for services as an arbitrator, and any areas
of special expertise which the individual possesses.
6 Where a Party fails to comply with the arbitrator's award, any Party affected by this
failure may enter into consultations with the other Parties with a view to
persuading the defaulting Party to comply. Where such consultations are
unsuccessful within 60 days, any affected Party may suspend the application to the
defaulting Party of concessions or the performance of any other obligations under
this Agreement, until such time as the defaulting Party complies with the
arbitrator's award. The level of the suspension of concessions or performance of
other obligations by the affected Party shall be equivalent to the level of
nullification or impairment of benefits under this Agreement to that Party caused
by the defaulting Party.
7 Once the defaulting Party complies with the decision of the Arbitrator, all action
taken under the preceding Paragraph shall be terminated.
Article 23
Review
1 The Parties shall meet at the time of the Forum Trade Ministers' Meeting or
otherwise as appropriate to review relevant aspects of the implementation and
operation of this Agreement.
2 The Parties undertake to conduct a general review of the operation of this
Agreement no later than five years after it enters into force, and thereafter at no
later than five-yearly intervals. Under the general review, the Parties shall:
(a) monitor progress made in implementing this Agreement, and in particular,
progress made in:
(i) ensuring the effectiveness and appropriateness of the Rules (Article 5);
(ii) implementing timetables for reduction and elimination of tariffs
(Article 7);
(iii) removing goods from the lists of excepted imports (Article 8);
(iv) eliminating measures distorting trade in goods (Article 9);
21 
(v) liberalising developing industries (Article 14);
(vi) liberalising government procurement (Article 15);
(vii) implementing measures to facilitate trade and harmonise business laws
and other measures (Article 18); and
(viii) broadening and deepening the relationship established by this
Agreement (Article 19);
(b) assess whether the Agreement is operating effectively;
(c) evaluate the need for additional measures or modifications to increase its
effectiveness;
(d) endeavour, in the spirit of this Agreement, to identify ways to accelerate the
time frames for liberalisation, including the removal of items from their lists
of exempted imports; and
(e) consider any other matter relating to the implementation of this Agreement
or trade within the Area or in the Pacific region.
PART V: FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 24
Effect on other Agreements
1 This Agreement shall not exempt any Party from its obligations, or abrogate the
rights of any Party, under any existing international agreements to which it is Party.
2 N otbing in this Agreement shall prevent Parties from enteting into any other
agreements relating to the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free
trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that those agreements are
consistent with the terms and objectives of this Agreement.
Article 25
Amendments
1 With the exception of the lists of excepted imports in Annex III which may be
amended only in accordance with Articles 8 and 11 and the rules governing trade
in alcohol and tobacco products which may be agreed in accordance with
Paragraph 13 of Article 8, this Agreement may be amended at any time by the
unanimous agreement of the Parties.
22 
2 Unless a contrary intention appears, amendments shall enter into force 30 days
after acceptance by all the Parties has been notified to the Secretary General.
Article 26
Signature, Ratification and Accession
1 This Agreement shall be open for signature, subject to ratification, or accession by
the Governments of the Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji Islands,
Kiribati, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Republic of Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
2 This Agreement shall remain open for signature for one year from 18 August 2001
to 17 August 2002.
3 Notwithstanding Paragraph 2, provided the Governments of Federated States of
Micronesia, Republic of the Marshall Islands and Republic of Palau make
reasonable efforts to secure a waiver of their obligation to provide most-favoured
nation treatment to the United States of America, this Agreement shall remain
open for signature at the Forum Secretariat in Suva by these Governments for a
period of up to 3 years following entry into force of this Agreement.
4 If a Forum Island Country ratifies this Agreement after it enters into force, that
Party shall reduce and eliminate tariffs to the same extent as if that Party had been
a Party at the time this Agreement entered into force.
5 Instruments of ratification or accession shall be deposited with the Secretary
General.
6 The Parties shall accept this Agreement in its entirety and no reservations shall be
permitted.
Article 27
Accession by Other States, Territories or Self-Governing Entities
1 By unanimous agreement the Parties may permit any State, Territory or SelfGoverning Entity not listed in Paragraph 1 of Article 26 to accede to this
Agreement.
2 The terms of such accession shall be negotiated between the Parties and the State,
Territory or Self-Governing Entity desiring to accede to this Agreement pursuant
to Paragraph 1 of this Article.
Article 28
Duration, Withdrawal and Termination
1 This Agreement is of a perpetual nature.
23 
2 Any Party wishing to withdraw from this Agreement shall give notice of its
intention to do so to the Secretary General, who shall notify the other Parties
accordingly. The Party giving notice shall cease to be a Party to this Agreement 180
days from the date on which notice is given to the Secretary General, unless the
Party has withdrawn its notice in the meantime, in which case it shall continue to
be a Party to this Agreement.
3 This Agreement shall terminate 180 days after all the Parties have given notice to
the Secretary General of their intention to withdraw from this Agreement.
Article 29
Entty into Force
1 This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after the date of deposit of the sixth
instrument of ratification or accession, and thereafter for each Party 30 days after
the date of deposit of its instrument of ratification or accession.
2 Subject to the terms of accession, a State, Territory or Self-Governing Entity
acceding pursuant to Article 27 shall become a Party to this Agreement 30 days
after the date of the deposit of an instrument of accession.
Article 30
Functions of the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
1 The Parties agree that Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat shall provide secretariat
services for this Agreement.
2 Subject to the direction of the Parties, the functions of the Forum Secretariat in
respect of this Agreement shall include:
(a) the preparation and transmission of documentation, including annual
reports, required under this Agreement, including the transmission of
communications between the Parties to this Agreement;
(b) the provision of administrative support for meetings convened to review this
Agreement or conduct negotiations or consultations under this Agreement;
(c) the provision of administrative support for the operation of financial and
technical assistance;
(d) liasing, as appropriate, between the Parties or with any other organisation;
(e) the provision of technical support to the Parties in the gathering and
dissemination of information relevant to this Agreement;
(f) the provision of technical support to the Parties in the implementation of
their obligations under this Agreement; and
24 
(g) the provision of other administrative or technical support as determined by
the Parties in respect of matters that relate to trade facilitation.
Article 31
Depositary Functions
1 The Secretary Genetal shall be the Depositary of this Agreement and any protocols
thereto.
2 The Secretary General shall:
(a) register this Agreement and its protocols pursuant to Article 102 of the
Chatter of the United Nations;
(b) transmit certified copies of this Agreement and its protocols to all of the
Parties to this Agreement and its protocols; and
(c) notify all the Parties to this Agreement and its protocols of signatures,
acceptances, ratifications and accessions to the Agreement and its protocols.
25 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto by their
respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Nauru this 18th day of August 2001 in a single original in the English language.

ANNEX TEXT:

ANNEX I
RULES OF ORIGIN
1 In this Annex, unless the contrary intention appears:
"Factory" means the place in the territory of a Party where a process of manufacture
occurs.
"Factory cost" means the total cost of the goods in their finished state following a
process of manufacture, excluding any profit, marketing costs, taxes and Other duties.
"Inner containers" includes any container or containers into which, or on which, any
goods are packed for sale, but excludes any shipping container, pallet or similar article
used for the purposes of carriage on any ship or aircraft.
"Labour costs" means:
(a) salaries, wages, bonuses, productivity payments and other employment
related benefits incurred in connection with a process of manufacture in the
territory of a Party; and
(b) other labour costs incurred at a Factory in connection with the
manufacturing process in the territory of a Party, including:
(i) management of the process of manufacture;
(ii) receipt of Materials;
(iii) storage of Materials;
(iv) supervision of the process;
(v) training in relation to the manufacture of goods;
(vi) quality control;
(vii) packing into inner containers; and
(viii) handling the storage of goods in the Factory.
"Material" means all inputs, other than labour and overheads, into a process of
manufacture in the form they are received at a Factory, including:
(a) an input that is itself a result of an earlier process of manufacture;
(b) natural elements that are used in that process of manufacture; and
(c) inner containers.
29 
"Originating Material costs" in relation to any process of manufacture means:
(a) the total cost of Wholly produced or obtained goods used in that process of
manufacture; or
(b) the cost of Material used in that process of manufacture that is wholly
produced or obtained in the territory of a Party, excluding Labour costs and
Overhead costs from an earlier process of manufacture if:
(i) that earlier process of manufacture has taken place outside the territory
of a Party; or
(ii) the total expenditure on Material that is wholly produced or obtained,
and on labour and overhead that is incurred, in the territory of that
Party, is less than 40 per cent of the factory cost of that process of
manufacture.
"Other duties" includes goods and services taxes, sales taxes, value added taxes, excise
taxes, anti-dumping duties and countervailing duties.
"Overhead costs" includes any of the following costs where incurred in connection with
the final process of manufacture in the territory of a Party:
(a) inspecting and testing Materials and goods;
(b) insuring real property, plant, equipment and Materials used in the production
of the goods, work in progress and ftnished goods;
(c) liability insurance, accident compensation, and insurance against
consequential loss from accident to plant and equipment;
(d) dies, moulds, and tooling, whether or not these items originate within the
territory of a Party;
(e) depreciation, maintenance and repair of plant and equipment;
(f) interest payments for plant and equipment;
(g) research, development, design, engineering and creative work;
(b) rent, leasing, mortgage interest, depreciation on buildings, maintenance,
repair, rates and taxes for real property used in the production of the goods;
(i) leasing of plant and equipment, whether or not these items originated within
a territory of a Party;
G) Materials and supplies utilised in the manufacturing process, but not direcdy
incorporated into the manufactured goods, including energy, fuel, water,
lighting, lubricants and rags, whether or not these items originated within the
Party;
30 
(k) storage of Material and goods at the Factory;
(1) royalties, licences or fees in respect of patented machines or processes used
in the manufacture of the goods, or in respect of the right to manufacture
the goods, or intellectual property rights;
(m) subscriptions to standards institutions and industry and research associations;
(n) Factory security, provision of medical care, including first aid kits and
medical supplies, cleaning services, cleaning materials and equipment,
tra1111flg materials, disposal of waste, safety and protective clothing and
equipment, and the subsidisation of a Factory cafeteria to the extent not
recovered by returns;
(0) computer facilities allocated to the process of manufacture of the goods;
(P) contracting out part of the manufacturing process within the territory of a
Party;
(q) employee transport and Factory vehicle expenses; and
(r) any tax in the nature of a fringe benefit tax payable on a cost in respect of
labour or overheads.
"Overhead costs" does not include:
(a) costs for telephone, mail and other means of communication;
(b) the cost of shipping and airfreight containers;
(c) the cost of conveying, insuring, or shipping the goods after their
manufacture is completed;
(d) royalty payments relating to a licensing agreement to distribute or market the
goods;
(e) rent, mortgage interest, depreciation on buildings, property insurance
premiums, maintenance, repair, taxes and rates for real property used by
personnel charged with administrative functions;
(f) international travel expenses, including fares and accommodation;
(g) manufacturer's profits, or the profit or remuneration of any trader, agent,
broker or other person dealing in the goods after their manufacture;
(h) costs relating to the general expense of doing business, such as the cost of
providing executive, financial, sales, advertising, marketing, accounting and
legal services, and insurance;
31 
(i) any other costs and expenses incurred after the completion of the
manufacture of the goods.
''Wholly produced or obtained goods" means:
(a) live animals born and raised in the territory of a Party;
(b) animals obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering or capturing in the
territory of a Party;
(c) products obtained from live animals born and raised in the territory of a
Party;
(d) plants and plant products harvested, picked or gathered in the territory of a
Party;
(e) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the
territory of a Party, where the Party is the country of registration of the
vessel that carries out those operations;
(f) minerals and other naturally occurring substances extracted from soil, the
waters, the seabed, or beneath the seabed of the territory of a Party;
(g) scrap and waste derived from manufacturing operations in the territory of a
Party which are only fit for disposal or for the recovery of raw Materials;
(h) scrap and waste derived from articles collected or consumed in the territory
of a Party which are only fit for the recovery of raw Materials;
(i) products taken from the area of the seabed outside the territory of that Party,
pursuant to rights held by that Party and recognised under international law;
or
G) goods produced in the territory of a Party exclusively from products referred
to in sub-paragraph (a)-(i).
2 For the purposes of Paragraph 3 of this Annex, goods are indirecdy exported if the
goods do not enter the commerce of a State, Territory, or Self-Governing Entity
which is not a Party. Goods do not enter the commerce of a non-Party if:
(a) a transit entry is justified for geographical reasons or transport requirements;
and
(b) the goods have only undergone an operation required for unloading or
reloading, or any operation required to keep them in good condition.
3 Goods exported from one Party to any other Party, whether direcdy or indirecdy,
shall be treated as goods originating in the territory of the first Party if these goods
are:
32 
(a) wholly produced or obtained in the territory of that Parry; or
(b) the result of the final process of manufacture performed in the territory of
that Party, and the total expenditure on Originating Material costs, Labour
costs and Overhead costs is not less than 40 per cent of the total expenditure
on Material, labour and overheads, whether or not incurred in the territory
of that Party.
4 If difficulties arise, from unforeseen circumstances of a short term nature, resulting
in an individual shipment of goods failing to qualify for origin under Paragraph
(3) (b), then the exporting and importing Parties may agree to apply a margin of
tolerance of up to 2% of the qualifying expenditure. These Parries shaii apply this
tolerance for a limited period of time only.
5 Minimal operations or processes that are only performed to:
(a) ensure the preservation of goods in good condition for the purposes of
transport or storage;
(b) facilitate shipment or transportation; or
(c) package or present the goods for sale;
shall not, alone or in combination with each other, confer origin on goods under
any other rule.
33 
ANNEX II
TIMETABLES FOR REDUCTION AND ELIMINATION OF TARIFFS
1 Ad valorem tariffs on originating goods which are imported into Parties, other
than Small Island States and Least Developed Countries, shall be reduced and
eliminated according to the following timetable: 
ANNEX V
ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
1 Unless the Parties to the dispute referred to arbitration in accordance with Article
22 of this Agreement otherwise agree, the arbitration procedure shall be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of this Annex.
2 The claimant Party shall notify the Secretary General and the other Parties to the
dispute of its decision to submit the dispute to arbitration and shall include in its
notice a brief statement of claim setting out the subject matter and issues in
dispute. The Secretary General shall forward this notice to the other Parties to the
Agreement.
3 The relevant Parties shall agree upon and name an individual to serve as arbitrator
to their dispute. If the relevant Parties cannot agree on an individual to serve as an
arbitrator, the Secretary General shall select an arbitrator from the list of potential
arbitrators maintained pursuant to Paragraph 4 of Article 22 of this Agreement. In
selecting an arbitrator, the Secretary General shall give due consideration to the
special expertise any potential arbitrator may have regarding the subject matter of
the dispute and any possible conflicts of interest which the potential arbitrator may
have.
4 Not later than the first meeting of the Parties under Paragraph 1 of Article 23 of
this Agreement, the Parties shall adopt governing principles for the rules of
procedure to be applied to any arbitration under this Annex and Article 22 of this
Agreement. Such principles shall be consistent with relevant international law, due
process, and the objectives of this Agreement.
5 Upon being named, and before undertaking substantive consideration of the
dispute, the arbitrator shall adopt and inform the relevant Parties of rules of
procedure to be followed over the course of arbitration. The rules so adopted shall
be consistent with the principles set by the Parties to this Agreement pursuant to
Paragraph 4 of this Annex.
6 After consultation with the Parties to the dispute, the Secretary General shall
appoint an appropriate arbitrator within 30 days of receiving the claimant Party's
notice. The arbitrator shall not be a citizen of, or be ordinarily resident in, any of
the Parties to the dispute, nor be employed by any of them, nor have dealt with the
dispute in any other capacity.
7 The arbitrator may take all appropriate measures in order to establish the facts. The
. arbitrator may, at the request of one of the Parties, recommend essential interim
measures of protection. The Parties to the dispute shall provide all facilities
necessary for the effective conduct of the proceedings. The absence or default of a
Party to the dispute shall not constitute an impediment to the proceedings.
8 The arbitrator may hear and determine counter-claims arising directly out of the
subject matter of the dispute.
43 
9 The arbitrator shall keep a record of all costs and shall furnish a final statement
thereof to the Parties.
10 Any Party that has an interest of a legal nature in the subject matter of the dispute
which may be affected by the arbitrator's decision may intervene in the
proceedings with the arbitrator's consent.
11 The arbitrator shall render his or her award within 180 days from the date of his or
her appointment, unless it is necessary to extend this time limit for a further period
which shall not exceed 180 days.
12 The arbitrator's award shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons, and shall be
final and binding on the Parties to the dispute.
13 Any dispute which may arise between the Parties concerning the interpretation or
execution of the award may be submitted by any Party to the dispute to the
arbitrator who made the award or, if the arbitrator cannot be seised thereof, to
another arbitrator appointed for this purpose in the same manner as the first. 