Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material
I. The Title of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material adopted on
26 October 1979 (hereinafter referred to as "the Convention") is replaced by the following
title:
CONVENTION ON THE PHYSICAL PROTECTION OF NUCLEAR MATERIAL
AND NUCLEAR FACILITIES
2. The Preamble of the Convention is replaced by the following text:
THE STATES PARTIES TO THIS CONVENTION,
RECOGNIZING the right of all States to develop and apply nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes and their legitimate interests in the potential benefits to be derived from the
peaceful application of nuclear energy,
CONVINCED of the need to facilitate international co-operation and the transfer of
nuclear technology for the peaceful application of nuclear energy,
BEARJNG IN MIND that physical protection is of vital importance for the protection of
public health, safety, the environment and national and international security,
HA YING IN MIND the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
concerning the maintenance of international peace and security and the promotion of
good-neighbourliness and friendly relations and co-operation among States,
CONSIDERING that under the terms of paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, "All members shall refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any
state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations,"
RECALLING the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism,
annexed to General Assembly resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994,
DESIRING to avert the potential dangers posed by illicit trafficking, the unlawful
taking and use of nuclear material and the sabotage of nuclear material and nuclear
facilities, and noting that physical protection against such acts has become a matter of
increased national and international concern,
DEEPLY CONCERNED by the worldwide escalation of acts of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, and by the threats posed by international terrorism and
organized crime,
BELIEVING that physical protection plays an important role in supporting nuclear nonproliferation
and counter-terrorism objectives,
DESIRING through this Convention to contribute to strengthening worldwide the
physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities used for peaceful purposes,
CONVINCED that offences relating to nuclear material and nuclear facilities are a
matter of grave concern and that there is an urgent need to adopt appropriate and
effective measures, or to strengthen existing measures, to ensure the prevention,
detection and punishment of such offences,
DESIRING to strengthen further international co-operation to establish, in conformity
with the national law of each State Party and with this Convention, effective measures
for the physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities,
CONVINCED that this Convention should complement the safe use, storage and
transport of nuclear material and the safe operation of nuclear facilities,
RECOGNIZING that there are internationally formulated physical protection
recommendations that are updated from time to time which can provide guidance on
contemporary means of achieving effective levels of physical protection,
RECOGNIZING also that effective physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear
facilities used for military purposes is a responsibility of the State possessing such
nuclear material and nuclear facilities, and understanding that such material and
facilities are and will continue to be accorded stringent physical protection,
HA VE AGREED as follows:
3. In Article I of the Convention, after paragraph (c), two new paragraphs are added as
follows:
(d) "nuclear facility" means a facility (including associated buildings and
equipment) in which nuclear material is produced, processed, used, handled,
stored or disposed of, if damage to or interference with such facility could lead
to the release of significant amounts of radiation or radioactive material;
(e) "sabotage" means any deliberate act directed against a nuclear facility or nuclear
material in use, storage or transport which could directly or indirectly endanger
the health and safety of personnel, the public or the environment by exposure to
radiation or release of radioactive substances.
4. After Article I of the Convention, a new Article IA is added as follows:
Article IA
The purposes of this Convention are to achieve and maintain worldwide effective
physical protection of nuclear material used for peaceful purposes and of nuclear
facilities used for peaceful purposes; to prevent and combat offences relating to such
material and facilities worldwide; as well as to facilitate co-operation among States
Parties to those ends.
5 . Article 2 o f the Convention is replaced b y the following text:
1 . This Convention shall apply to nuclear material used for peaceful purposes in use,
storage and transport and to nuclear facilities used for peaceful purposes, provided,
however, that articles 3 and 4 and paragraph 4 of article 5 of this Convention shall only
apply to such nuclear material while in international nuclear transport.
2. The responsibility for the establishment, implementation and maintenance of a
physical protection regime within a State Party rests entirely with that State.
3 . Apart from the commitments expressly undertaken by States Parties under this
Convention, nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as affecting the sovereign
rights of a State.
4. (a) Nothing in this Convention shall affect other rights, obligations and
responsibilities of States Parties under international law, in particular the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian law.
(b) The activities of armed forces during an armed conflict, as those terms are
understood under international humanitarian law, which are governed by that law, are
not governed by this Convention, and the activities undertaken by the military forces of
a State in the exercise of their official duties, inasmuch as they are governed by other
rules of international law, are not governed by this Convention.
(c) Nothing in this Convention shall be construed as a lawful authorization to
use or threaten to use force against nuclear material or nuclear facilities used for
peaceful purposes.
(d) Nothing in this Convention condones or makes lawful otherwise unlawful
acts, nor precludes prosecution under other laws.
5. This Convention shall not apply to nuclear material used or retained for military
purposes or to a nuclear facility containing such material.
6. After Article 2 of the Convention, a new Article 2A is added as follows :
Article 2A
1 . Each State Party shall establish, implement and maintain an appropriate physical
protection regime applicable to nuclear material and nuclear facilities under its
jurisdiction, with the aim of:
(a) protecting against theft and other unlawful taking of nuclear material in use,
storage and transport;
(b) ensuring the implementation of rapid and comprehensive measures to locate
and, where appropriate, recover missing or stolen nuclear material ; when the
material is located outside its territory, that State Party shall act in
accordance with article 5 ;
(c) protecting nuclear material and nuclear facilities against sabotage; and
( d) mitigating or minimizing the radiological consequences of sabotage.
2 . In implementing paragraph I, each State Party shall:
(a) establish and maintain a legislative and regulatory framework to govern
physical protection;
(b) establish or designate a competent authority or authorities responsible for
the implementation of the legislative and regulatory framework; and
(c) take other appropriate measures necessary for the physical protection of
nuclear material and nuclear facilities.
3 . In implementing the obligations under paragraphs 1 and 2, each State Party shall,
without prejudice to any other provisions of this Convention, apply insofar as is
reasonable and practicable the following Fundamental Principles of Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE A: Responsibility of the State
The responsibility for the establishment, implementation and maintenance of a physical
protection regime within a State rests entirely with that State.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE B: Responsibilities During International Transport
The responsibility of a State for ensuring that nuclear material is adequately protected
extends to the international transport thereof, until that responsibility is properly
transferred to another State, as appropriate.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE C: Legislative and Regulatory Framework
The State is responsible for establishing and maintaining a legislative and regulatory
framework to govern physical protection. This framework should provide for the
establishment of applicable physical protection requirements and include a system of
evaluation and licensing or other procedures to grant authorization. This framework
should include a system of inspection of nuclear facilities and transport to verify
compliance with applicable requirements and conditions of the license or other
authorizing document, and to establish a means to enforce applicable requirements and
conditions, including effective sanctions.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE D: Competent Authority
The State should establish or designate a competent authority which is responsible for
the implementation of the legislative and regulatory framework, and is provided with
adequate authority, competence and financial and human resources to fulfill its assigned
responsibilities. The State should take steps to ensure an effective independence
between the functions of the State' s competent authority and those of any other body in
charge of the promotion or utilization of nuclear energy.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE E: Responsibility of the License Holders
The responsibilities for implementing the various elements of physical protection within
a State should be clearly identified. The State should ensure that the prime
responsibility for the implementation of physical protection of nuclear material or of
nuclear facilities rests with the holders of the relevant licenses or of other authorizing
documents (e.g., operators or shippers).
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE F: Security Culture
All organizations involved in implementing physical protection should give due priority
to the security culture, to its development and maintenance necessary to ensure its
effective implementation in the entire organization .
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE G: Threat
The State's physical protection should be based on the State' s current evaluation of the
threat.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE H: Graded Approach
Physical protection requirements should be based on a graded approach, taking into
account the current evaluation of the threat, the relative attractiveness, the nature of the
material and potential consequences associated with the unauthorized removal of
nuclear material and with the sabotage against nuclear material or nuclear facilities.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE I: Defence in Depth
The State' s requirements for physical protection should reflect a concept of several
layers and methods of protection (structural or other technical, personnel and
organizational) that have to be overcome or circumvented by an adversary in order to
achieve his objectives.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE J: Quality Assurance
A quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and
implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all
activities important to physical protection are satisfied.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE K: Contingency Plans
Contingency (emergency) plans to respond to unauthorized removal of nuclear material
or sabotage of nuclear facilities or nuclear material, or attempts thereof, should be
prepared and appropriately exercised by all license holders and authorities concerned.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE L: Confidentiality
The State should establish requirements for protecting the confidentiality of
information, the unauthorized disclosure of which could compromise the physical
protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities.
4. (a) The provisions of this article shall not apply to any nuclear material which
the State Party reasonably decides does not need to be subj ect to the physical protection
regime established pursuant to paragraph I , taking into account the nature of the
material, its quantity and relative attractiveness and the potential radiological and other
consequences associated with any unauthorized act directed against it and the current
evaluation of the threat against it.
(b) Nuclear material which is not subject to the provisions of this article
pursuant to sub-paragraph (a) should be protected in accordance with prudent
management practice.
7. Article 5 of the Convention is replaced by the following text:
I . States Parties shall identify and make known to each other directly or through the
International Atomic Energy Agency their point of contact in relation to matters within
the scope of this Convention.
2. Tn the case of theft, robbery or any other unlawful taking of nuclear material or
credible threat thereof, States Parties shall, in accordance with their national law,
provide co-operation and assistance to the maximum feasible extent in the recovery and
protection of such material to any State that so requests. In particular:
(a) a State Party shall take appropriate steps to inform as soon as possible other
States, which appear to it to be concerned, of any theft, robbery or other
unlawful taking of nuclear material or credible threat thereof, and to inform,
where appropriate, the International Atomic Energy Agency and other
relevant international organizations;
(b) in doing so, as appropriate, the States Parties concerned shall exchange
information with each other, the International Atomic Energy Agency and
other relevant international organizations with a view to protecting
threatened nuclear material, verifying the integrity of the shipping container
or recovering unlawfully taken nuclear material and shall:
(i) co-ordinate their efforts through diplomatic and other agreed channels;
(ii) render assistance, if requested;
(iii) ensure the return of recovered nuclear material stolen or missing as a
consequence of the above-mentioned events.
The means of implementation of this co-operation shall be determined by the States
Parties concerned.
3. In the case of a credible threat of sabotage of nuclear material or a nuclear facility
or in the case of sabotage thereof, States Parties shall, to the maximum feasible extent,
in accordance with their national law and consistent with their relevant obligations
under international law , co-operate as follows:
(a) if a State Party has knowledge of a credible threat of sabotage of
nuclear material or a nuclear facility in another State, the former shall
decide on appropriate steps to be taken in order to inform that State as soon
as possible and, where appropriate, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and other relevant international organizations of that threat, with a view to
preventing the sabotage;
(b) in the case of sabotage of nuclear material or a nuclear facility in a
State Party and if in its view other States are likely to be radiologically
affected, the former, without prejudice to its other obligations under
international law, shall take appropriate steps to inform as soon as possible
the State or the States which are likely to be radiologically affected and to
inform, where appropriate, the International Atomic Energy Agency and
other relevant international organizations, with a view to minimizing or
mitigating the radiological consequences thereof;
(c) if in the context of sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), a State Party requests
assistance, each State Party to which a request for assistance is directed shall
promptly decide and notify the requesting State Party, directly or through
the International Atomic Energy Agency, whether it is in a position to
render the assistance requested and the scope and terms of the assistance
that may be rendered;
(d) co-ordination of the co-operation under sub-paragraphs (a) to (c) shall
be through diplomatic or other agreed channels. The means of
implementation of this co-operation shall be determined bilaterally or
multilaterally by the States Parties concerned.
4. States Parties shall co-operate and consult, as appropriate, with each other directly
or through the International Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant international
organizations, with a view to obtaining guidance on the design, maintenance and
improvement of systems of physical protection of nuclear material in international
transport.
5 . A State Party may consult and co-operate, as appropriate, with other States Parties
directly or through the International Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant
international organizations, with a view to obtaining their guidance on the design,
maintenance and improvement of its national system of physical protection of nuclear
material in domestic use, storage and transport and of nuclear facilities.
8. Article 6 of the Convention is replaced by the following text:
I . States Parties shall take appropriate measures consistent with their national law to
protect the confidentiality of any information which they receive in confidence by virtue
of the provisions of this Convention from another State Party or through participation in
an activity carried out for the implementation of this Convention. If States Parties
provide information to international organizations or to States that are not parties to this
Convention in confidence, steps shall be taken to ensure that the confidentiality of such
information is protected. A State Party that has received information in confidence from
another State Party may provide this information to third parties only with the consent
of that other State Party.
2. States Parties shall not be required by this Convention to provide any information
which they are not permitted to communicate pursuant to national law or which would
jeopardize the security of the State concerned or the physical protection of nuclear
material or nuclear facilities.
9 . Paragraph I o f Article 7 o f the Convention is replaced by the following text:
I . The intentional commission of:
(a) an act without lawful authority which constitutes the receipt, possession,
use, transfer, alteration, disposal or dispersal of nuclear material and which causes
or is likely to cause death or serious injury to any person or substantial damage to
property or to the environment;
(b) a theft or robbery of nuclear material;
(c) an embezzlement or fraudulent obtaining of nuclear material;
(d) an act which constitutes the carrying, sending, or moving of nuclear material
into or out of a State without lawful authority;
(e) an act directed against a nuclear facility, or an act interfering with the
operation of a nuclear facility, where the offender intentionally causes, or where
he knows that the act is likely to cause, death or serious injury to any person or
substantial damage to property or to the environment by exposure to radiation or
release of radioactive substances, unless the act is undertaken in conformity with
the national law of the State Party in the territory of which the nuclear facility is
situated;
(f) an act constituting a demand for nuclear material by threat or use of force or
by any other form of intimidation;
(g) a threat:
(i) to use nuclear material to cause death or serious injury to any person
or substantial damage to property or to the environment or to commit
the offence described in sub-paragraph (e), or
(ii) to commit an offence described in sub-paragraphs (b) and (e) in order
to compel a natural or legal person, international organization or State
to do or to refrain from doing any act;
(h) an attempt to commit any offence described in sub-paragraphs (a) to (e);
(i) an act which constitutes participation in any offence described in subparagraphs
(a) to (h);
(j) an act of any person who organizes or directs others to commit an offence
described in sub-paragraphs (a) to (h); and
(k) an act which contributes to the commission of any offence described in subparagraphs
(a) to (h) by a group of persons acting with a common purpose; such
act shall be intentional and shall either:
(i) be made with the aim of furthering the criminal activity or criminal
purpose of the group, where such activity or purpose involves the
commission of an offence described in sub-paragraphs (a) to (g), or
(ii) be made in the knowledge of the intention of the group to commit an
offence described in sub-paragraphs (a) to (g)
shall be made a punishable offence by each State Party under its national law.
10. After Article 11 of the Convention, two new articles, Article 11A and Article 11 B , are
added as follows:
Article 11A
None of the offences set forth in article 7 shall be regarded for the purposes of
extradition or mutual legal assistance, as a political offence or as an offence connected
with a political offence or as an offence inspired by political motives. Accordingly, a
request for extradition or for mutual legal assistance based on such an offence may not
be refused on the sole ground that it concerns a political offence or an offence
connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by political motives.
Article 11B
Nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as imposing an obligation to extradite or
to afford mutual legal assistance, if the requested State Party has substantial grounds for
believing that the request for extradition for offences set forth in article 7 or for mutual
legal assistance with respect to such offences has been made for the purpose of
prosecuting or punishing a person on account of that person's race, religion, nationality,
ethnic origin or political opinion or that compliance with the request would cause
prejudice to that person' s position for any of these reasons.
1 1 . After Article 13 of the Convention, a new Article 13A is added as follows:
Article 13A
Nothing in this Convention shall affect the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes that is undertaken to strengthen the physical protection of nuclear material and
nuclear facilities.
1 2. Paragraph 3 of Article 14 of the Convention is replaced by the following text:
3 . Where an offence involves nuclear material in domestic use, storage or transport,
and both the alleged offender and the nuclear material remain in the territory of the
State Party in which the offence was committed, or where an offence involves a nuclear
facility and the alleged offender remains in the territory of the State Party in which the
offence was committed, nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as requiring that
State Party to provide information concerning criminal proceedings arising out of such
an offence.
13. Article 16 of the Convention is replaced by the following text:
1 . A conference of States Parties shall be convened by the depositary five years after
the entry into force of the Amendment adopted on 8 July 2005 to review the
implementation of this Convention and its adequacy as concerns the preamble, the
whole of the operative part and the annexes in the light of the then prevailing situation.
2. At intervals of not less than five years thereafter, the majority of States Parties
may obtain, by submitting a proposal to this effect to the depositary, the convening of
further conferences with the same objective.
14. Footnote b/ of Annex II of the Convention is replaced by the following text:
b/ Material not irradiated in a reactor or material irradiated in a reactor but with a
radiation level equal to or less than 1 gray/hour ( 1 00 rads/hour) at one metre unshielded.
1 5. Footnote e/ of Annex II of the Convention is replaced by the following text:
e/ Other fuel which by virtue of its original fissile material content is classified as
Category I and II before irradiation may be reduced one category level while the
radiation level from the fuel exceeds 1 gray/hour (I 00 rads/hour) at one metre
unshielded.
