PROTOCOL CONCERNING REGIONAL CO-OPERATION IN COMBATING POLLUTION 
BY OIL AND OTHER HARMFUL SUBSTANCES IN CASES OF EMERGENCY

Jeddah, 14 February 1982


The Contracting Parties,

Being Parties to the Regional Convention for the Conservation of 
the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Environment (hereinafter referred to 
as "the Convention"),

Conscious of the ever-present potentiality of emergencies which 
may result in substantial pollution by oil and other harmful 
substances, and of the need to provide co-operative and effective 
measures to deal with them,

Being aware that appropriate measures for responding to 
pollution emergencies need to be enhanced on a national and 
regional basis to deal with this problem in a comprehensive 
manner for the benefit of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden 
environment,

Have agreed as follows:


Article I

For the purposes of this Protocol the following terms and 
expressions have the meanings indicated below, except when 
otherwise inferred from the text:

1. "Appropriate Authority": either the "National Authority" 
defined in article I of the Convention, or the authority or 
authorities within the Government of a Contracting Party, 
designated by the National Authority and responsible for:

(a) Combating or otherwise operationally responding to marine 
emergencies;

(b) Receiving and co-ordinating information on marine 
emergencies;

(c) Co-ordinating available national capabilities for dealing 
with marine emergencies in general within its own Government and 
with other Contracting Parties.

2. "Marine Emergency": any casualty, incident, occurrence or 
situation, however caused, resulting in substantial pollution or 
imminent threat of substantial pollution to the marine 
environment by oil or other harmful substances and includes 
collisions, strandings and other incidents involving ships, 
including tankers, blow-outs arising from petroleum drilling and 
production activities, and the presence of oil or other harmful 
substances arising from the failure of industrial installations.

3. "Marine Emergency Contingency Plan": a plan or plans, prepared 
on a national, bilateral or multilateral basis, designed to 
co-ordinate the deployment, allocation and use of personnel,
material, resources and equipment for the purpose of responding 
to marine emergencies.

4. "Marine Emergency Response": any activity intended to prevent, 
mitigate or eliminate pollution by oil or other harmful 
substances or threat of such pollution resulting from marine 
emergencies.

5. "Related Interests": the interests of a Contracting Party 
directly or indirectly affected or threatened by a marine 
emergency such as:

(a) Maritime, coastal, port or estuary activities, including 
fisheries activities;

(b) Historic and tourist attractions;

(c) The health of the coastal population and the conservation of 
living marine resources and of wildlife;

(d) Industrial activities which rely upon intake of water, 
including distillation plants, and industrial plants using 
circulating water.

6. "Convention": the Regional Convention for the Conservation of 
the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Environment.

7. "Council": the organ of the Regional Organization for 
Conservation of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Environment 
established under article XVI of the Convention.

8. "Centre": the Marine Emergency Mutual Aid Centre established 
under article III, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol.


Article II

1. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate in taking the 
necessary and effective measures to protect the coastline and 
related interests of one or more of the Parties from the threat 
and effects of pollution due to the presence of oil or other 
harmful substances in the marine environment resulting from 
marine emergencies.

2. The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to maintain and 
promote, either individually or through bilateral or multilateral 
co-operation, their contingency plans and means for combating 
pollution in the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden by oil and other 
harmful substances. These means shall include, in particular, 
available equipment, ships, aircraft and manpower prepared for 
operation in cases of emergency.


Article III

1. The Contracting Parties hereby establish the Marine Emergency 
Mutual Aid Centre.

2. The objectives of the Centre shall be:

(a) To strengthen the capacities of the Contracting Parties and 
to facilitate co-operation among them in order to combat 
pollution by oil and other harmful substances in cases of marine 
emergencies;

(b) To assist Contracting Parties, which so request, in the 
development of their own national capabilities to combat 
pollution by oil and other harmful substances and to co-ordinate 
and facilitate information exchange, technological co-operation 
and training;

(c) A later objective, namely, the possibility of initiating 
operations to combat pollution by oil and other harmful 
substances at the regional level, may be considered. This 
possibility should be submitted to approval by the Council after 
evaluating the results achieved in the fulfilment of the previous 
objectives and in the light of financial resources which could be 
made available for this purpose.

3. The functions of the Centre shall be:

(a) To collect and disseminate to the Contracting Parties 
information concerning matters covered by this Protocol, 
including:

      (i)     Laws, regulations and information concerning appropriate 
              authorities of the Contracting Parties and marine
              emergency contingency plans referred to in article V of
              this Protocol;

      (ii)    Information available to the Contracting Parties
              concerning methods, techniques and research relating to
              marine emergency responses referred to in article VI of
              this Protocol; and

      (iii)   List of experts, equipment and materials available for 
              marine emergency responses by the Contracting Parties;

(b) To assist the Contracting Parties, as requested:

      (i)     In the preparation of laws and regulations concerning 
              matters covered by this Protocol and in the establishment
              of appropriate authorities;

      (ii)    In the preparation of marine emergency contingency plans;

      (iii)   In the establishment of procedures under which personnel,
              equipment and materials involved in marine emergency
              responses may be expeditiously transported into, out of,
              and through the territories of the Contracting Parties;

      (iv)    In the transmission to the Contracting Parties of reports
              concerning marine emergencies; and

      (v)     In promoting and developing training programmes for 
              combating pollution;

(c) To co-ordinate training programmes for combating pollution 
and prepare comprehensive anti-pollution manuals;

(d) To develop and maintain a communication/information system 
appropriate to the needs of the Contracting Parties and the 
Centre for the prompt exchange of information concerning marine 
emergencies required by this Protocol;

(e) To prepare inventories of the available personnel, materials, 
vessels, aircraft, and other specialized equipment for marine 
emergency responses;

(f) To establish and maintain liaison with competent regional and 
international organizations, particularly the Inter-Governmental 
Maritime Consultative Organization, for the purposes of obtaining 
and exchanging scientific and technological information and data, 
particularly with regard to any new technology which may assist 
the Centre in the performance of its functions;

(g) To prepare periodic reports on marine emergencies for 
submission to the Council; and

(h) To perform any other functions assigned to it either by this 
Protocol or by the Council.

4. The Centre may fulfil additional functions necessary for 
initiating operations to combat pollution by oil and other 
harmful substances on a regional level, when authorized by the 
Council, in accordance with paragraph 2(c) above.


Article IV

1. The present Protocol shall apply to the Sea Area specified in 
paragraph 1 of article II of the Convention.

2. For the purposes of dealing with a marine emergency, internal 
waters, including ports, harbours, estuaries, bays and lagoons, 
may be treated as part of the Sea Area if the Contracting Party 
concerned so decides.


Article V

Each Contracting Party shall provide the Centre and the other 
Contracting Parties with information concerning:

(a) Its appropriate authority;

(b) Its laws, regulations, and other legal instruments relating 
generally to matters addressed in this Protocol, including those 
concerning the structure and operation of the authority referred 
to in paragraph (a) above;

(c) Its national marine emergency contingency plans.


Article VI

Each Contracting Party shall provide the other Contracting 
Parties and the Centre with information concerning:

(a) Existing and new methods, techniques, materials, and 
procedures relating to marine emergency responses;

(b) Existing and planned research, their results and development 
in the areas referred to in paragraph (a) above.


Article VII

1. Each Contracting Party shall direct its appropriate officials 
to require masters of ships, pilots of aircraft and persons in 
charge of offshore platforms and other similar structures 
operating in the marine environment and under its jurisdiction to 
report the existence of any marine emergency in the Sea Area to 
the appropriate national authority and to the Centre.

2. Any Contracting Party receiving a report pursuant to paragraph 
1 above shall promptly inform the following of the marine 
emergency:

(a) The Centre;

(b) All other Contracting Parties;

(c) The flag State of any foreign ship involved in the marine 
emergency concerned.

3. The content of the reports, including supplementary reports 
where appropriate, referred to in paragraph 1 above should 
conform to the form to be adopted by the Centre.

4. Any Contracting Party which submits a report pursuant to 
paragraphs 2 (a) and 2 (b) above, shall be exempted from the 
obligations specified in paragraph 2 of article IX of the 
Convention.


Article VIII

The Centre shall promptly transmit information and reports which 
it receives from a Contracting Party pursuant to articles V, VI 
and paragraph 2 of article VII of this Protocol to all other 
Contracting Parties.


Article IX

Any Contracting Party which transmits information pursuant to 
this Protocol may specifically restrict its dissemination. In 
such a case, any Contracting Party to which this information has 
been transmitted, or the Centre, shall not divulge it to any 
other person, Government, or to any public or private 
organization without the specific authorization of the former 
Contracting Party.


Article X

Any Contracting Party faced with a marine emergency situation 
shall:

(a) Take every appropriate measure to combat pollution and/or to 
rectify the situation;

(b) Immediately inform all other Contracting Parties, either 
directly or through the Centre, of any action which it has taken 
or intends to take to combat the pollution. The Centre shall 
promptly transmit any such information to all other Contracting 
Parties;

(c) Make an assessment of the nature and extent of the marine 
emergency, either directly or with the assistance of the Centre;

(d) Determine the necessary and appropriate action to be taken 
with respect to the marine emergency, in consultation with other 
Contracting Parties, affected States and the Centre.


Article XI 

1. Any Contracting Party requiring assistance in a marine 
emergency response may call for assistance directly from any 
other Contracting Party or through the Centre. Where the services 
of the Centre are utilized, the Centre shall promptly transmit 
requests received to all other Contracting Parties. The 
Contracting Parties to whom a request is made pursuant to this 
paragraph shall use their best endeavours within their 
capabilities to render the assistance requested.

2. The assistance referred to in paragraph 1 above may include:

(a) Personnel, material, and equipment, including facilities or 
methods for the disposal of recovered pollutants;

(b) Surveillance and monitoring capacity;

(c) Facilitation of the transfer of personnel, material and 
equipment into, out of and through the territories of the 
Contracting Parties.

3. The services of the Centre may be utilized by the Contracting 
Parties to co-ordinate any marine emergency response in which 
assistance is called for pursuant to paragraph 1 above.

4. Any Contracting Party calling for assistance pursuant to 
paragraph 1 above shall report the activities undertaken with 
this assistance and its results to the Centre. The Centre shall 
promptly transmit any such report to all other Contracting 
Parties.

5. In cases of special marine emergencies, the Centre may call 
for the mobilization of resources made available by the 
Contracting Parties to combat pollution by oil and other harmful 
substances.


Article XII

1. Having due regard to the functions assigned to the Centre 
under this Protocol, each Contracting Party shall establish and 
maintain an appropriate Authority to carry out fully its 
obligations under this Protocol. With the assistance of the 
Centre, the appropriate authority of each Contracting Party shall 
co-operate and co-ordinate its activities with counterparts in 
the other Contracting Parties.

2. Among other matters with respect to which cooperation and 
co-ordination efforts shall be directed under paragraph 1 above 
are the following:

(a) Distribution and allocation of stocks of materials and 
equipment;

(b) Training of personnel for marine emergency responses;

(c) Marine pollution surveillance and monitoring activities;

(d) Methods of communication in respect of marine emergencies;

(e) Facilitation of the transfer of personnel, equipment and 
materials involved in marine emergency responses into, out of, 
and through the territories of the Contracting Parties;

(f) Other matters to which this Protocol applies.


Article XIII

The Council shall:

(a) Review periodically the activities of the Centre performed 
under this Protocol;

(b) Decide on the degree to which, and stages by which, the 
functions of the Centre set out in article III will be 
implemented;

(c) Determine the financial, administrative and other support to 
be provided by the Contracting Parties to the Centre for the 
performance of its functions.

This Protocol, considered an integral part of the Convention, 
shall be deposited with the Government of Saudi Arabia who shall 
act as Depositary pursuant to article XXIX of the Convention and 
who shall transmit certified copies of it to the Contracting 
Parties. Certified copies of this Protocol shall be deposited, 
together with the Convention, with the General Secretariat of the 
League of Arab States in accordance with article 17 of the 
Charter of the Arab League and registered with the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations in accordance with 
Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.

In witness whereof the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly 
authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this 
Protocol.

Done at the City of Jeddah on Sunday the twentieth of the month 
Rabie Althani of the year A.H. 1402, corresponding to 14 Shabat 
(February) of the year A.D. 1982.



PROTOCOL CONCERNING MEDITERRANEAN SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS*

* Convention for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea Against 
Pollution, Barcelona, 1976.

Geneva, 3 April 1982


The Contracting Parties to the present Protocol,

Being Parties to the Convention for the Protection of the 
Mediterranean Sea against Pollution, adopted at Barcelona on 16 
February 1976,

Conscious of the danger threatening the environment of the 
Mediterranean Sea Area as a whole, in view of the increasing 
human activities in the region,

Taking into account the special hydrographic and ecological 
characteristics of the Mediterranean Sea Area,

Stressing the importance of protecting and, as appropriate, 
improving the state of the natural resources and natural sites of 
the Mediterranean Sea, as well as of their cultural heritage in 
the region, among other means by the establishment of specially 
protected areas including marine areas and their environment,

Desirous of establishing close co-operation among themselves in 
order to achieve that objective,

Have agreed as follows:


Article 1

1. The Contracting Parties to this Protocol (hereinafter referred 
to as "the Parties") shall take all appropriate measures with a 
view to protecting those marine areas which are important for the 
safeguard of the natural resources and natural sites of the 
Mediterranean Sea Area, as well as for the safeguard of their 
cultural heritage in the region.

2. Nothing in this Protocol shall prejudice the codification and 
development of the law of the sea by the United Nations 
Conference on the Law of the Sea convened pursuant to resolution 
2750 C (XXV) of the General Assembly of the United Nations, nor 
the present or future claims and legal views of any State 
concerning the law of the sea and the nature and extent of 
coastal and flag State jurisdiction.


Article 2

For the purposes of the designation of specially protected areas 
(hereinafter referred to as "protected areas"), the area to which 
this Protocol applies shall be the Mediterranean Sea Area as 
defined in article 1 of the Convention for the Protection of the 
Mediterranean Sea against Pollution (hereinafter referred to as 
"the Convention"); it being understood that, for the purposes of 
the present Protocol, it shall be limited to the territorial 
waters of the Parties and may include waters on the landward side 
of the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is 
measured and extending, in the case of watercourses, up to the 
freshwater limit. It may also include wetlands or coastal areas 
designated by each of the Parties.


Article 3

1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, establish protected 
areas and shall endeavour to undertake the action necessary in 
order to protect those areas and, as appropriate, restore them, 
as rapidly as possible.

2. Such areas shall be established in order to safeguard in 
particular:

(a) sites of biological and ecological value;
_ the genetic diversity, as well as satisfactory population 
levels, of species, and their breeding grounds and habitats;
_ representative types of ecosystems, as well as ecological 
processes;

(b) sites of particular importance because of their scientific, 
aesthetic, historical, archaeological, cultural or educational 
interest.


Article 4

The Parties to this Protocol shall, at their first meeting, 
formulate and adopt, if necessary in cooperation with the 
competent international organizations, common guidelines and, if 
needed, standards or criteria dealing in particular with:

(a) the selection of protected areas;

(b) the establishment of protected areas;

(c) the management of protected areas;

(d) the notification of information on protected areas .


Article 5 

The Parties may strengthen the protection of a protected area by 
establishing, within the area to which this Protocol applies, one 
or more buffer areas in which activities are less severely 
restricted while remaining compatible with the purposes of the 
protected area.


Article 6

1. If a Party intends to establish a protected area contiguous to 
the frontier or to the limits of the zone of national 
jurisdiction of another Party, the competent authorities of the 
two Parties shall endeavour to consult each other with a view to 
reaching agreement on the measures to be taken and shall, among 
other things, examine the possibility of the establishment by the 
other Party of a corresponding protected area or the adoption by 
it of any other appropriate measure.

2 If a Party intends to establish a protected area contiguous to 
the frontier or to the limits of the zone of national 
jurisdiction of a State which is not a party to this Protocol, 
the Party shall endeavour to work together with the competent 
authorities of that State with a view to holding the 
consultations referred to in the preceding paragraph.

3. If contiguous protected areas are established by two Parties, 
or by one Party and by a State which is not a party to this 
Protocol, special agreements may provide for the means whereby 
the consultation or the collaboration contemplated in paragraphs 
1 and 2 respectively may take place.

4. If a State which is not a party to this Protocol intends to 
establish a protected area contiguous to the frontier or to the 
limits of the zone of national jurisdiction of a Party to this 
Protocol, the latter shall endeavour to work together with that 
State with a view to holding consultations, and possibly 
concluding a special agreement as referred to in paragraph 3.


Article 7

The Parties, having regard to the objectives pursued and taking 
into account the characteristics of each protected area, shall, 
in conformity with the rules of the international law, 
progressively take the measures required, which may include:

(a) the organization of a planning and management system;

(b) the prohibition of the dumping or discharge of wastes or 
other matter which may impair the protected area;

(c) the regulation of the passage of ships and any stopping or 
anchoring;

(d) the regulation of fishing and hunting and of the capture of 
animals and harvesting of plants;

(e) the prohibition of the destruction of plant life or animals 
and of the introduction of exotic species;

(f) the regulation of any act likely to harm or disturb the fauna 
or flora, including the introduction of indigenous zoological or 
botanical species;

(g) the regulation of any activity involving the exploration or 
exploitation of the sea-bed or its subsoil or a modification of 
the sea-bed profile;

(h) the regulation of any activity involving a modification of 
the profile of the soil or the exploitation of the subsoil of the 
land part of a marine protected area;

(i) the regulation of any archaeological activity and of the 
removal of any object which may be considered as an 
archaeological object;

(j) the regulation of trade in and import and export of animals, 
parts of animals, plants, parts of plants and archaeological 
objects which originate in protected areas and are subject to 
measures of protection;

(k) any other measure aimed at safeguarding ecological and 
biological processes in protected areas.


Article 8

1. The Parties shall give appropriate publicity to the 
establishment of protected areas, as well as of the areas 
provided for in article 5, and to their markings and the 
regulations applying thereto.

2. The information referred to in the preceding paragraph shall 
be notified to the Organization designated in article 13 of the 
Convention (hereinafter referred to as "the Organization") which 
shall compile and keep up to date a directory of protected areas 
in the area to which this Protocol applies. The Parties shall 
supply the Organization with all the information necessary for 
that purpose.


Article 9

1. The Parties shall, in promulgating protective measures, take 
into account the traditional activities of their local 
populations. To the fullest extent possible, no exemption which 
is allowed for this reason shall be such as:

(a) to endanger either the maintenance of ecosystems protected 
under the terms of the present Protocol or the biological 
processes contributing to the maintenance of those ecosystems;

(b) to cause either the extinction of, or any substantial 
reduction in, the number of individuals making up the species or 
animal and plant populations within the protected ecosystems, or 
any ecologically connected species or populations, particularly 
migratory species and rare, endangered or endemic species.

2. Parties which allow exemptions with regard to protective 
measures or do not apply such measures strictly shall inform the 
Organization accordingly.


Article 10

The Parties shall encourage and develop scientific and technical 
research on their protected areas and on the ecosystems and 
archaeological heritage of those areas.


Article 11

The Parties shall endeavour to inform the public as widely as 
possible of the significance and interest of the protected areas 
and of the scientific knowledge which may be gained from them 
from the point of view of both nature conservation and 
archaeology. Such information should have an appropriate place in 
education programmes concerning the environment and history. The 
Parties should also endeavour to promote the participation of 
their public and their nature conservation organizations in 
appropriate measures which are necessary for the protection of 
the areas concerned.


Article 12

The Parties shall, to the extent possible, establish a 
co-operation programme to co-ordinate the establishment, 
planning, management and conservation of protected areas, with a 
view to creating a network of protected areas in the 
Mediterranean region, taking fully into account existing 
networks, especially that of biosphere reserves of UNESCO. There 
shall be regular exchanges of information concerning the 
characteristics of the protected areas, the experience acquired 
and the problems encountered .


Article 13

The Parties shall. in accordance with the procedures set forth 
in article 14, exchange scientific and technical information 
concerning current or planned research and the results expected. 
They shall, to the fullest extent possible, co-ordinate their 
research. They shall, moreover, endeavour to define jointly or to 
standardize the scientific methods to be applied in the 
selection, management and monitoring of protected areas.


Article 14

1. In applying the principles of co-operation set forth in 
articles 12 and 13, the Parties shall forward to the 
Organization:

(a) comparable information for monitoring the biological 
development of the Mediterranean environment:

(b) reports, publications and information of a scientific, 
administrative and legal nature, in particular:

 -  on the measures taken by the Parties in pursuance of this        
    Protocol for the protection of the protected areas;
 -  on the species present in the protected areas;
 -  on any threats to those areas, especially those which may come
    from sources of pollution outside their control.

2. The Parties shall designate persons responsible for protected 
areas. Those persons shall meet at least once every two years to 
discuss matters of joint interest and especially to propose 
recommendations concerning scientific, administrative and legal 
information as well as the standardization and processing of 
data.


Article 15

1. The Parties shall, directly or with the assistance of 
competent regional or other international organizations or 
bilaterally, co-operate, on the entry into force of this 
Protocol, in formulating and implementing programmes of mutual 
assistance and of assistance to those developing countries which 
express a need for it in the selection, establishment and 
management of protected areas.

2. The programmes contemplated in the preceding paragraph should 
relate, in particular, to the training of scientific and 
technical personnel, scientific research, and the acquisition, 
utilization and production by those countries of appropriate 
equipment on advantageous terms to be agreed among the Parties 
concerned.


Article 16

Changes in the delimitation or legal status of a protected area 
or the suppression of all or part of such an area may not take 
place except under a similar procedure to that followed for its 
establishment.


Article 17

1. The ordinary meetings of the Parties to this Protocol shall be 
held in conjunction with the ordinary meetings of the Contracting 
Parties to the Convention held pursuant to article 14 of the 
Convention. The Parties may also hold extraordinary meetings in 
conformity with that article.

2. It shall be the function of the meetings of the Parties to 
this Protocol, in particular:

(a) to keep under review the implementation of this Protocol;

(b) to consider the efficacy of the measures adopted, having 
regard in particular to the area to which the Protocol applies, 
and to examine the need for other measures, in particular in the 
form of annexes, or for envisaging, if necessary, an alteration 
to that area, in conformity with the provisions of article 16 of 
the Convention;

(c) to adopt, review and amend as required any annex to this 
Protocol;

(d) to monitor the establishment and development of the network 
of protected areas provided by article 12, and to adopt 
guidelines to facilitate the establishment and development of 
that system and to increase co-operation among the Parties;

(e) to consider the recommendations made by the meetings of the 
persons responsible for the protected areas, as provided by 
article 14, paragraph 2;

(f) to consider reports transmitted by the Parties to the 
Organization under article 20 of the Convention and any other 
information which the Parties may transmit to the Organization or 
to the meeting of the Parties.

Article 18

1. The provisions of the Convention relating to any protocol 
shall apply with respect to the present Protocol.

2. The rules of procedure and the financial rules adopted 
pursuant to article 18, paragraph 2, of the Convention shall 
apply with respect to this Protocol, unless the Parties to this 
Protocol agree otherwise.

3. This Protocol shall be open for signature, at Geneva on 3 and 4 
April 1982, and at Madrid from 5 April 1982 to 2 April 1983 by 
any Contracting Party to the Convention and any State invited to 
the Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Protocol concerning 
Mediterranean Specially Protected Areas held at Geneva on 2 and 3 
April 1982. It shall also be open for signature from 5 April 1982 
to 2 April 1983 by any regional economic grouping of which at 
least one member is a coastal State of the Mediterranean Sea Area 
and which exercises competence in fields covered by this 
Protocol.

4. This Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or 
approval. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval 
shall be deposited with the Government of Spain, which will 
assume the functions of Depositary.

5. As from 3 April 1983, this Protocol shall be open for 
accession by the Contracting Parties to the Convention and by any 
State or grouping referred to in paragraph 3.

6. This Protocol shall enter into force on the thirtieth day 
following the deposit of at least six instruments of 
ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the 
Protocol.

In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized, have 
signed this Protocol.

Done at Geneva on this third day of April one thousand nine 
hundred and eighty-two in a single copy in the Arabic, English, 
French and Spanish languages, the four texts being equally 
authoritative.

