CONVENTION ON ROAD TRAFFIC. SIGNED AT GENEVA, ON
19 SEPTEMBER 1949
The Contracting States, desirous of promoting the development and safety
of international road traffic by establishing certain uniform rules,
Have agreed upon the following provisions:
CHAPTER I
General Provisions
ARTICLE 1
1. While reserving its jurisdiction over the use of its own roads, each
Contracting State agrees to the use of its roads for international traffic under
the conditions set out in this Convention.
2. No Contracting State shall be required to extend the benefit of the
provisions of this Convention to any motor vehicle or trailer, or to any driver
having remained within its territory for a continuous period exceeding one year.
ARTICLE 2
1. The annexes to this Convention shall be considered as integral parts
of the Convention; it being understood, however, that any State may on signature
or ratification of, or accession to, the Convention, or at any time thereafter, by
declaration exclude annexes 1 and 2 from its application of the Convention.
2. Any Contracting State may at any time give notice to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations that it will be bound, as from the date of the said
notification, by annexes 1 and 2 as excluded under the terms of paragraph 1
of this article.
ARTICLE 3
1. Measures which all the Contracting States or certain of them may
have agreed, or shall in the future agree, to put into effect with a view to facilitating
international road traffic by simplifying customs, police, health or other
requirements will be regarded as being in conformity with the object of this
Convention.
2. (a) A bond or other form of security guaranteeing payment of any
import duties and import taxes which would, in the absence of such security,
be chargeable on the importation of any motor vehicle admitted to international
traffic may be required by any Contracting State.
(b) A Contracting State shall accept for the purposes of this article the
guarantee of an organization established in its own territory affiliated to an
international association which has issued a valid international customs pass for
the motor vehicle (such as a carnet de passages en douane).
3. For the fulfilment of the requirements provided for in this Convention
the Contracting States will endeavour to keep open during the same hours
customs offices and posts next to each other on the same international road.
ARTICLE 4
1. For the purpose of this Convention the following expressions shall
have the meanings hereby assigned to them:
" International traffic " means any traffic which crosses at least one frontier;
" Road " means any way open to the public for the circulation of vehicles;
" Carriageway " means that portion of a road normally used by vehicular
traffic;
" Lane " means any one of the parts into which the carriageway is divisible,
each sufficient in width for one moving line of vehicles;
" Driver " means any person who drives a vehicle, including cycles, or
guides draught, pack or saddle animals or herds or flocks on a road, or who is
in actual physical control of the same;
" Motor vehicle " means any self-propelled vehicle normally used for the
transport of persons or goods upon a road, other than vehicles running on rails
or connected to electric conductors. Any State bound by annex 1 shall exclude
from this definition cycles fitted with an auxiliary engine of the type described
in that annex;
" Articulated vehicle " means any motor vehicle with a trailer having no
front axle and so attached that part of the trailer is superimposed upon the
motor vehicle and a substantial part of the weight of the trailer and of its load
is borne by the motor vehicle. Such a trailer shall be called a " semi-trailer ";
Trailer " means any vehicle designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle;
Cycle " means any cycle not self-propelled. Any State bound by annex 1
shall include in this definition cycles fitted with an auxiliary engine of the
type described in that annex;
" Laden weight " of a vehicle means the weight of the vehicle and its
load when the vehicle is stationary and ready for the road, and shall include the
weight of the driver and of any other persons carried for the time being;
" Maximum load " means the weight of the load declared permissible by
the competent authority of the country of registration of the vehicle;
" Permissible maximum weight " of a vehicle means the weight of the
vehicle and its maximum load when the vehicle is ready for the road.
ARTICLE 5
This Convention is not to be taken as authorizing the carriage of persons
for hire or reward or the carriage of goods other than the personal baggage
of the occupants of the vehicle; it being understood that these matters and all
other matters not provided for in this Convention remain within the competence
of domestic legislation, subject to the application of other relevant international
conventions or agreements.
CHAPTER II
Rules of the road
ARTICLE 6
Each Contracting State shall take appropriate measures to ensure the
observance of the rules set out in this chapter.
ARTICLE 7
Every driver, pedestrian or other road user shall conduct himself in such
a way as not to endanger or obstruct traffic; he shall avoid all behaviour that
might cause damage to persons, or public or private property.
ARTICLE 8
1. Every vehicle or combination of vehicles proceeding as a unit shall
have a driver.
2. Draught, pack or saddle animals shall have a driver, and cattle shall
be accompanied, except in special areas which shall be marked at the points
of entry.
3. Convoys of vehicles and animals shall have the number of drivers
prescribed by domestic regulations.
4. Convoys shall, if necessary, be divided into sections of moderate length,
and be ufficiently spaced out for the conv nience of traffic. This provision does
not apply to regions where migration of nomads occurs.
5. Drivers shall at all times be able to control their vehicles or guide their
animals. When approaching other road users, they shall take such precautions
as may be required for the safety of the latter.
ARTICLE 9
1. All vehicular traffic proceeding in the same direction on any road shall
keep to the same side of the road, which shall be uniform in each country for
all roads. Domestic regulations concerning one-way traffic shall not be affected.
2. As a general rule and whenever the provisions of article 7 so require,
every driver shall:
(a) On two-lane carriageways intended for two-way traffic, keep his vehicle in
the lane appropriate to the direction in which he is travelling;
(b) On carriageways with more than two lanes, keep his vehicle in the lane
nearest to the edge of the carriageway appropriate to the direction in which
he is travelling.
3. Animals shall be kept as near as possible to the edge of the road in
accordance with domestic regulations.
ARTICLE 10
The driver of a vehicle shall at all times have its speed under control and
shall drive in a reasonable and prudent manner. He shall slow down or stop
whenever circumstances so require, and particularly when visibility is not good.
ARTICLE 11
1. Drivers when meeting or being overtaken shall keep as close as practicable
to the edge of the carriageway on the side appropriate to the direction in
which they are traveling. In overtaking, a driver shall pass on the left or
the right of the overtaken vehicle or animal according to the rule observed in the
country concerned. These rules shall not necessarily apply in the case of
tramcars, trains on roads, and certain mountain roads.
2. On the approach of any vehicle or accompanied animal, drivers shall:
(a) When meeting, leave sufficient space for the vehicle or accompanied animal
coming from the opposite direction;
(b) When being overtaken, keep as close as practicable to the appropriate edge
of the carriageway and not accelerate.
3. Drivers intending to overtake shall make sure that there is sufficient
room-and sufficient visibility ahead to permit overtaking without danger. After
overtaking they shall bring their vehicles back to the right or left hand side
according to the rule observed in the country concerned, but only after making
sure that this will not inconvenience the vehicle, pedestrian or animal overtaken.
ARTICLE 12
1. Every driver approaching a fork, crossroad, road junction or levelcrossing
shall take special precautions to avoid accidents.
2. Priority of passage may be accorded at intersections on certain roads
or sections of road. Such priority shall be marked by signs and every driver
approaching such a road or section of road shall be bound to yield the right of
way to drivers travelling along it.
3. The provisions of annex 2 regarding the priority of passage at intersections
not covered by paragraph 2 of this article shall be applied by the States
bound by the said annex.
4. Every driver before starting to turn into a road shall:
(a) Make sure that he can do so without danger to other road users;
(b) Give adequate notice of his intention to turn;
(c) Move over as far as practicable to the edge of the carriageway on the side
appropriate to the direction in which he is travelling if he wishes to turn
off the road on that side;
(d) Move as near as practicable towards the middle of the carriageway if he
wishes to leave the road and turn to the other side, except as provided for
in paragraph 2 of article 16;
(e) In no case hamper the traffic coming from the opposite direction.
ARTICLE 13
1. Stationary vehicles or animals shall be kept off the carriageway if
feasible, or, if not, as close as practicable to the edge of the carriageway. Drivers
shall not leave vehicles or animals until they have taken all necessary precautions
to avoid an accident.
2. Vehicles and animals shall not be left waiting where they are likely to
cause danger or obstruction, and in particular at or near a road intersection,
a bend or the top of a hill.
ARTICLE 14
All necessary precautions shall be taken to ensure that the load of a vehicle
shall not be a cause of damage or danger.
ARTICLE 15
1. From nightfall and during the night, or when atmospheric conditions
render it necessary, every vehicle or combination of vehicles on a road shall
show at least one white light in front and at least one red light in the rear.
When a vehicle, other than a cycle or a motor-cycle without sidecar, is
provided with only one white light in front, this shall be placed on the side
nearest to traffic coming from the opposite direction.
In countries where two white front lights are obligatory, such lights shall
be placed one on the right and one on the left of the vehicle.
The red light may be produced either by a device distinct from that which
produces the white light or lights in front or by the same device when the vehicle
is short enough and so arranged as to permit this.
2. In no case shall a vehicle have a red light or a red reflector directed to
the front or a white light or a white reflector directed to the rear. This provision
shall not apply to a white or yellow reversing light in cases where the domestic
legislation of the country of registration of the vehicle permits such lights.
3. Lights and reflex reflectors shall be such as to ensure that the vehicle
is clearly indicated to other road users.
4. Any Contracting State or subdivision thereof may, provided that all
measures are taken to guarantee normal conditions of safety, exempt from certain
provisions of this article :
(a) Vehicles used for special purposes or under special conditions;
(b) Vehicles of special shape and kind;
(c) Stationary vehicles on adequately lighted roads.
ARTICLE 16
1. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to trolleybuses.
2. (a) Cyclists shall use cycle tracks where there is an obligation to do
so indicated by an appropriate sign, or where such obligation is imposed by
domestic regulations;
(b) Cyclists shall proceed in single file where circumstances so require
and, except in special cases provided for in domestic regulations, shall never
proceed more than two abreast on the carriageway;
(c) Cyclists shall not be towed by vehicles;
(d) The provisions of paragraph 4 (d) of article 12 shall not apply to cyclists
where domestic regulations provide otherwise.
CHAPTER III
Signs and signals
ARTICLE 17
1. With a view to ensuring a homogeneous system, the road signs and
signals adopted in each Contracting State shall, as far as possible, be the only
ones to be placed on the roads of that State. Should it be necessary to introduce
any new sign, the shape, colour and type of symbol employed shall conform
with the system in use in that State.
2. The number of approved signs shall be limited to such as may be
strictly necessary. They shall be placed only at points where they are essential.
3. The danger signs shall be placed at a sufficient distance from the object
indicated to give road users adequate warning.
4. The affixing to an approved sign of any notice not related to the purpose
of such sign and liable to obscure it or to interfere with its character shall be
prohibited.
5. All boards and notices which might be confused with the approved
signs or make them more difficult to read shall be prohibited.
CHAPTER IV
Provisions applicable to motor vehicles and trailers in international traffic
ARTICLE 18
1. In order to be entitled to the benefits of this Convention, a motor vehicle
shall be registered by a Contracting State or subdivision thereof in the manner
prescribed by its legislation.
2. A registration certificate containing at least the serial number, known
as the registration number, the name or the trade mark of the maker of the
vehicle, the maker's identification or serial number, the date of first registration
and the full name and permanent place of residence of the applicant for the
said certificate shall be issued either by the competent authority or by an association
duly empowered to do so.
3. This certificate shall be accepted by all Contracting States as prima
facie evidence of the information entered thereon.
ARTICLE 19
1. Every motor vehicle shall display at least at the back on a special plate
or on the vehicle itself, a registration number issued or allotted by the competent
authority. In the case of a motor vehicle drawing one or more trailers the single
trailer or the last trailer shall display the registration number of the drawing
vehicle or its own registered number.
2. The composition of the registration number and the manner in which
it is displayed shall be as set out in annex 3.1
ARTICLE 20
1. Every motor vehicle shall in addition to the registration number display
at the back, inscribed on a plate or on the vehicle itself, the distinguishing sign
of the place of registration of this vehicle. This sign shall indicate either a
State or a territory which constitutes a distinct unit from the point of view
of registration. In the case of a motor vehicle drawing one or more trailers
this sign shall also be displayed at the back of the single trailer or of the last
trailer.
2. The composition of the distinguishing sign and the manner in which
it is displayed shall be as set out in annex 4.
ARTICLE 21
Every motor vehicle and trailer shall carry the identification marks set out
in annex 5.
ARTICLE 22
1. Every motor vehicle and trailer shall be in good working order and in
such safe mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver, other occupants
of the vehicle or any person upon the road, or cause damage to public or private
property.
2. In addition, every motor vehicle, or trailer, and its equipment shall
conform to the provisions of annex 6 and the driver of every motor vehicle
shall observe the rules set out therein.
3. The provisions of this article shall apply to trolleybuses.
ARTICLE 23
1. The maximum dimensions and weights of vehicles permitted to travel
on the roads of each Contracting State or subdivision thereof shall be matters
for domestic legislation. On certain roads designated by States Parties to
regional agreements or, in the absence of such agreements, by a Contracting
State, the permissible maximum dimensions and weights shall be those set out
in annex 7.
2. The provisions of this article shall apply to trolleybuses.
CHAPTER V
Drivers of motor vehicles in international traffic
ARTICLE 24
1. Each Contracting State shall allow any driver admitted to its territory
who fulfils the conditions which are set out in annex 8 and who holds a valid
driving permit issued to him, after he has given proof of his competence, by the
competent authority of another Contracting State or sub-division thereof, or
by an association duly empowered by such authority, to drive on its roads without
further examination motor vehicles of the category or categories defined in
annexes 9 and 10 for which the permit has been issued.
2. A Contracting State may however require that any driver admitted to
its territory shall carry an international driving permit conforming to the model
contained in annex 10, especially in the case of a driver coming from a country
where a domestic driving permit is not required or where the domestic permit
issued to him does not conform to the model contained in annex 9.
3. The international driving permit shall, after the driver has given proof
of his competence, be delivered by the competent authority of a Contracting
State or subdivision thereof, or by a duly authorized association, and sealed or
stamped by such authority or association. The holder shall be entitled to
drive in all Contracting States without further examination motor vehicles
coming within the categories for which the permit has been issued.
4. The right to use the domestic as well as the international driving permit
may be refused if it is evident that the conditions of issue are no longer fulfilled.
5. A Contracting State or a subdivision therof may withdraw from the
driver the right to use either of the above-mentioned permits only if the driver
has committed a driving offence of such a nature as would entail the forfeiture
of his driving permit under the legislation and regulations of that Contracting
State. In such an event, the Contracting State or subdivision thereof withdrawing
the use of the permit may withdraw and retain the permit until the
period of the withdrawal of use expires or until the holder leaves the territory
of that Contracting State, whichever is the earlier, and may record such withdrawal
of use on the permit and communicate the name and address of the
driver to the authority which issued the permit.
6. During a period of five years beginning with the entry into force of
this Convention, any driver admitted to international traffic under the provisions
of the International Convention relative to Motor Traffic signed at Paris on
24 April 1926, or of the Convention on the Regulation of Inter-American
Automotive Traffic opened for signature at Washington on 15 December 1943,
and holding the documents required thereunder, shall be considered as fulfilling
the requirements of this article.
ARTICLE 25
The Contracting States undertake to communicate to each other such
information as will enable them to establish the identity of persons holding
domestic or international driving permits when they are liable to proceedings
for a driving offence. They further undertake to make known the information
required to establish the identity of the owner or the person in whose name a
foreign vehicle which has been involved in a serious accident is registered.
CHAPTER VI
Provisions applicable to cycles in international traffic
ARTICLE 26
Every cycle shall be equipped with:
(a) At least one efficient brake;
(b) An audible warning device consisting of a bell, to the exclusion of any other
audible warning device, capable of being heard at a reasonable distance;
(c) A white or yellow light in front and a red light or a red reflex reflector in
the rear from nightfall and during the night or when atmospheric conditions
render it necessary.
CHAPTER VII
Final provisions
ARTICLE 27
1. This Convention shall be open, until 31 December 1949, for signature
by all States Members of the United Nations and by every State invited to attend
the United Nations Conference on Road and Motor Transport held at Geneva
in 1949.
2. This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. From 1 January 1950, this Convention shall be open for accession by
those of the States referred to in paragraph 1 of this article which have not
signed this Convention and by any other State which the Economic and Social
Council may by resolution declare to be eligible. It shall also be open for
accession on behalf of any Trust Territory of which the United Nations is the
Administering Authority.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
ARTICLE 28
1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession, or at
any time thereafter, declare, by notification addressed to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, that the provisions of this Convention will be applicable
to all or any of the territories for the international relations of which it is responsible.
These provisions shall become applicable in the territories named in
the notification thirty days after the date of receipt of such notification by the
Secretary-General or, if the Convention has not entered into force at that time,
then upon the date of its entry into force.
2. Each Contracting State, when circumstances permit, undertakes to
take as soon as possible the necessary steps in order to extend the application
of this Convention to the territories for the international relations of which it is
responsible, subject, where necessary for constitutional reasons, to the consent
of the governments of such territories.
3. Any State which has made a declaration under paragraph 1 of this
article applying this Convention to any territory for the international relations
of which it is responsible may at any time thereafter declare by notification
given to the Secretary-General that the Convention shall cease to apply to any
territory named in the notification and the Convention shall, after the expiration
of one year from the date of the notification, cease to apply to such territory.
ARTICLE 29
This Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after the date
of the deposit of the fifth instrument of ratification or accession. This Convention
shall enter into force for each State ratifying or acceding after that date
the thirtieth day after the deposit of its instrument of ratification or accession.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify each of the
signatory or acceding States and every other State invited to attend the United
Nations Conference on Road and Motor Transport of the date on which this
Convention enters into force.
ARTICLE 30
This Convention shall terminate and replace, in relations between the Contracting
States, the International Convention relative to Motor Traffic and the
International Convention relative to Road Traffic signed at Paris on 24 April
1926, and the Convention on the Regulation of Inter-American Automotive
Traffic opened for signature at Washington on 15 December 1943.
ARTICLE 31
1. Any amendment to this Convention may be proposed by any Contracting
State. The text of such proposed amendment shall be communicated
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations who shall transmit it to each
Contracting State with a request that such State reply within four months
stating whether it:
(a) Desires that a conference be convened to consider the proposed amendment;
or
(b) Favours the acceptance of the proposed amendment without a conference;
or
(c) Favours the rejection of the proposed amendment without a conference.
The proposed amendment shall also be transmitted by the Secretary-
General to all States, other than .Contracting States, invited to attend the United
Nations Conference on Road and Motor Transport.
2. The Secretary-General shall convene a conference of the Contracting
States to consider the proposed amendment, if the convening of a conference
is requested :
(a) By at least one-quarter of the Contracting States in the case of a proposed
amendment to any part of the Convention other than the annexes;
(b) By at least one-third of the Contracting States in the case of a proposed
amendment to an annex other than annexes 1 and 2;
(c) In the case of annexes 1 and 2 by at least one-third of the States bound
by the annex to which an amendment has been proposed.
The Secretary-General shall invite to the Conference such States, other than
Contracting States, invited to attend the United Nations Conference on Road
and. Motor Transport or whose participation would, in the opinion of the Economic
and Social Council, be desirable.
The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply in cases where an amendment
to the Convention has been adopted in accordance with paragraph 5 of
this article.
3. Any amendment to this Convention which shall be adopted by a twothirds
majority vote of a conference shall be communicated to all Contracting
States for acceptance. Ninety days after its acceptance by two-thirds of the
Contracting States each amendment to the Convention, except for those to annexes
1 and 2, shall enter into force for all the Contracting States except those
which, before it enters into force, make a declaration that they do not adopt the
amendment.
For the entry into force of any amendment to annexes 1 and 2 the majority
shall be two-thirds of the States bound by the amended annex.
4. The Conference may by a two-thirds majority vote determine at the
time of the adoption of an amendment to this Convention, except for those to
annexes 1 and 2, that the amendment is of such a nature that any Contracting
State which has made a declaration that it does not accept the amendment and
which then does not accept the amendment within a period of twelve months after
the amendment enters into force shall, upon the expiration of this period, cease
to be a party to the Convention.
5. In the event of a two-thirds majority of the Contracting States informing
the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 1 (b) of this article that they
favour the acceptance of the amendment without a conference, notification of
their decision shall be communicated by the Secretary-General to all the Contracting
States. The amendment shall upon the expiration of ninety days from
the date of such notification become effective as regards all the Contracting
States except those States which notify the Secretary-General that they object
to such an amendment within that period.
6. As regards amendments to annexes 1 and 2, and any amendment not
within the scope of paragraph 4 of this article, the existing provisions shall
remain in force in respect of any Contracting State which has made a declaration
or lodged an objection with respect to such an amendment.
7. A Contracting State which has made a declaration in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph 3 of this article, or has lodged an objection in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 5 of this article to an amendment, may
withdraw such declaration or objection at any time by notification addressed to
the Secretary-General. The amendment shall be effective as regards that State
upon receipt of such notification by the Secretary-General.
ARTICLE 32
This Convention may be denounced by means of one year's notice given
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall notify each signatory
or acceding State thereof. After the expiration of this period the Convention
shall cease to be in force as regards the Contracting State which denounces it.
ARTICLE 33
Any dispute between any two or more Contracting States concerning the
interpretation or application of this Convention, which the Parties are unable
to settle by negotiation or by another mode of settlement, may be referred by
written application from any of the Contracting States concerned to the International
Court of Justice for decision.
ARTICLE 34
Nothing in this Convention shall be deemed to prevent a Contracting State
from taking action compatible with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and limited to the exigencies of the situation which it considers necessary
for its external or internal security.
ARTICLE 35
1. The Secretary-General shall, in addition to the notifications provided
for in article 29, paragraphs 1, 3 and 5 of article 31 and article 32, notify the
States referred to in paragraph 1 of article 27 of the following :
(a) Declarations by Contracting States that they exclude annex 1, annex 2, or
both of them, from the application of the Convention in accordance with
paragraph 1 of article 2;
(b) Declarations by Contracting States that they shall be bound by annex 1,
annex 2, or both of them, in accordance with paragraph 2 of article 2;
(c) Signatures, ratifications and accessions in accordance with article 27;
(d) Notifications with regard to the territorial application of the Convention in
accordance with article 28;
(e) Declarations whereby States accept amendments to the Convention in
accordance with paragraph 3 of article 31;
(f) Objections to amendments to the Convention communicated by States to
the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 5 z~f article 31;
(g) The date of entry into force of amendments to the Convention in accordance
with paragraphs 3 and 5 of article 31;
(h) The date on which a State has ceased to be a Party to the Convention, in
accordance with paragraph 4 of article 31;
(i) Withdrawals of objections to an amendment in accordance with paragraph
7 of article 31;
(j) The list of States bound by any amendment to the Convention;
(k) Denunciations of the Convention in accordance with article 32;
(1) Declarations that the Convention has ceased to apply to a territory in
accordance with paragraph 3 of article 28;
(m) Notifications with respect to distinctive letters made by States in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 3 of annex 4.
2. The original of this Convention shall be deposited with the Secretary-
General who will transmit certified copies thereof to the States referred to in
paragraph 1 of article 27.
3. The Secretary-General is authorized to register this Convention upon
its entry into force.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned representatives, after having communicated
their full powers, found to be in good and due form, have signed this
Convention.
DONE at Geneva, in a single copy, in the English and French languages,
both texts authentic, this nineteenth day of September, one thousand nine
hundred and forty-nine.



ANNEXES
ANNEX 1
ADDITIONAL PROVISION CONCERNING DEFINITIONS
OF MOTOR VEHICLE AND CYCLE
Cycles fitted with an auxiliary internal combustion engine having a maximum
cylinder capacity of 50 cm3 (3.05 cu. in.) shall not be considered as motor vehicles,
provided that they retain all the normal characteristics of cycles with respect to their
structure.
ANNEX 2
PRIORITY OF PASSAGE
1. When any two vehicles are simultaneously approaching a road intersection by
roads of which one does not enjoy priority over the other, the vehicle approaching from
the left in countries where the direction of traffic is on the right, and from the right
in countries where the direction of traffic is on the left, shall yield the right of way to
the other vehicle.
2. The right of priority shall not necessarily apply in the case of tramcars and
trains on roads.
ANNEX 3
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF VEHICLES IN
INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC
1. The registration number of a vehicle shall consist either of figures or of figures
and letters. The figures shall be in Arabic numerals as used in United Nations documents
and the letters in Latin characters. When other numerals or characters are
used, they shall be repeated in the numerals or characters of the types mentioned above.
2. The number shall be legible in normal daylight at a distance of 20 m (65 feet).
3. When the registration number is displayed on a special plate, this plate shall
be fixed in a vertical or nearly vertical position and in a plane perpendicular to the
longitudinal axis of the vehicle itself. When the number is fixed to or painted on the
vehicle itself, this shall be done on a vertical or nearly vertical surface at the back of the
vehicle.
4. The rear registration number shall be illuminated as prescribed in annex 6.
ANNEX 4
DISTINGUISHING SIGN OF VEHICLES IN
INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC
1. The distinguishing sign shall be composed of one to three letters in capital
Latin characters. The letters shall have a minimum height of 80 mm (3.1 in.) and
their strokes a width of 10 mm (0.4 in.). The letters shall be painted in black on a
white ground of elliptical form with the major axis horizontal.
2. If the distinguishing sign is composed of three letters, the dimensions of the
ellipse shall be at least 240 mm (9.4 in.) in width and 145 mm (5.7 in.) in height. The
dimensions may be reduced to 175 mm (6.9 in.) in width and 115 mm (4.5 in.) in height
if the sign carries less than three letters.
As regards the distinguishing signs for motorcycles, the dimensions of the ellipse,
whether the sign is composed of one, two or three letters, may be reduced to 175 mm
(6.9 in.) in width and 115 mm (4.5 in.) in height.
3. The distinctive letters for the different States and territories are as follows
Any State which has not already done so shall, on signature or ratification of, or
accession to, this Convention, notify the Secretary-General of the distinctive letters
selected by that State.
4. When the distinguishing sign is carried on a special plate this plate shall be
fixed in a vertical or nearly vertical position and in a plane perpendicular to the longitudinal
axis of the vehicle itself. When the sign is fixed to or painted on the vehicle
itself, this shall be done on a vertical or nearly vertical surface at the back of the vehicle.
ANNEX 5
IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF VEHICLES IN
INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC
1. The identification marks shall comprise:
(a) In the case of a motor vehicle
(i) The name or the trade mark of the maker of the vehicle,
(ii) On the chassis or, in the absence of a chassis, on the body, the maker's identification
or serial number,
(iii) On the engine, the maker's engine number if such a number is placed thereon
by the maker;
(b) In the case of a trailer, either the information referred to in (i) and (ii) above
or an identification mark issued for the trailer by the competent authority.
2. The marks mentioned above shall be placed in accessible positions and shall
be in a form easily legible and not capable of being easily removed or altered.
ANNEX 6
TECHNICAL CONDITIONS CONCERNING THE EQUIPMENT OF MOTOR
VEHICLES AND TRAILERS IN INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC
I. BRAKING
(a) Braking of motor vehicles other than motor cycles with or without sidecars
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with brakes capable of controlling the movement
of and of stopping the vehicle in an efficient, safe and rapid way under any conditions
of loading on any up or down gradient on which the vehicle is operated.
The braking shall be operated by means of two devices so constructed that, in the
event of failure of one of the braking devices, the other shall be capable of stopping the
vehicle within a reasonable distance.
For the purpose of this annex, one of these braking devices will be called the
" service brake " and the other one the " parking brake "
The parking brake shall be capable of being secured, even in the absence of the
driver, by direct mechanical action.
Either means of operation shall be capable of applying braking force to wheels
symmetrically placed on each side of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
The braking surfaces shall always be connected with the wheels of the vehicle
in such a way that it is not possible to disconnect them otherwise than momentarily
by means of a clutch, gear box or free wheel.
One at least of the braking devices shall be capable of acting on braking surfaces
directly attached to the wheels of the vehicle or attached through parts not liable to
failure.
(b) Braking of trailers
Every trailer having a permissible maximum weight exceeding 750 kg (1,650 lbs.)
shall be equipped with at least one braking device acting on wheels placed symmetrically
on each side of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle and acting on at least half the number
of wheels.
The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall be required, however, in respect
of trailers if the permissible maximum weight does not exceed 750 kg (1,650 lbs.) but
exceeds one-half of the unladen weight of the drawing vehicle.
The braking device of trailers with a permissible maximum weight exceeding
3,500 kg (7,700 lbs.) shall be capable of being operated by applying the service brake
from the drawing vehicle. When the permissible maximum weight of the trailer does
not exceed 3,500 kg (7,700 lbs.) its braking device may be brought into action merely
by the trailer moving upon the drawing vehicle (overrun braking).
The braking device of the trailer shall be capable of preventing the rotation of the
wheels when the trailer is uncoupled.
Any trailer equipped with a brake shall be fitted with a device capable of automatically
stopping the trailer if it becomes detached whilst in motion. This provision
shall not apply to two-wheeled camping trailers or light luggage trailers whose weight
exceeds 750 kg (1,650 lbs.) provided that they are equipped in addition to the main
attachment with a secondary attachment which may be a chain or a wire rope.
(c) Braking of articulated vehicles and combinations of motor vehicles and trailers
(i) Articulated vehicles
The provisions of paragraph (a) of this part shall apply to every articulated vehicle.
A semi-trailer having a permissible maximum weight exceeding 750 kg (1,650 lbs.)
shall be equipped with at least one braking device capable of being operated by applying
the service brake from the drawing vehicle.
The braking device of the semi-trailer shall, in addition, be capable of preventing
the rotation of the wheels when the semi-trailer is uncoupled.
When required by domestic regulations a semi-trailer equipped with a brake shall
be fitted with a device capable of stopping automatically the semi-trailer if it becomes
detached whilst in motion.
(ii) Combinations of motor vehicles and trailers
Every combination of a motor vehicle and one or more trailers shall be equipped
with brakes capable of controlling the movement of and of stopping the combination
in an efficient, safe and rapid way under any conditions of loading on any up or down
gradient on which it is operated.
(d) Braking of motor cycles with or without sidecars
Every motor cycle shall be equipped with two braking devices which may be operated
by hand or foot, capable of controlling the movement of and of stopping the motor
cycle in an efficient, safe and rapid way.
II. LIGHTING
(a) Every motor vehicle other than a motor cycle with or without sidecar and
capable of exceeding 20 km (12 miles) per hour on the level shall be equipped with
at least two white or yellow driving lights, fitted in front, capable of adequately illuminating
the road for a distance of 100 m (325 feet) in front of the vehicle at night time in"
clear weather.
(b) Every motor vehicle other than a motor cycle with or without sidecar and capable
of exceeding 20 km (12 miles) per hour on the level shall be equipped with two white
or yellow passing lights fitted at the front of the vehicle and capable when necessary
of adequately illuminating the road at night in clear weather in front of the vehicle for
a distance of 30 m (100 feet) without causing glare or dazzle to other road users whatever
the direction of the traffic may be.
Passing lights shall be used instead of driving lights in all cases when the use of
lights causing no dazzle or glare is necessary or compulsory.
(c) Every motor cycle with or without sidecar shall have at least one driving light
and one passing light conforming to the provisions of (a) and (b) of this part. However,
motor cycles with an engine of a maximum cylinder capacity of 50 cm 3 (3.05 cu. in.)
may be excluded from this obligation.
(d) Every motor vehicle other than a motor cycle without sidecar shall be equipped
with two white position (side) lights at the front. These lights shall be clearly visible
at night time in clear weather at a distance of 150 m (500 feet) from the front of the vehicle
without causing any glare or dazzle to other road users.
The part of the illuminating surface of these lights furthest from the longitudinal
axis of the vehicle shall be as near as possible to and in no case further than 400 mm
(16 in.) from the extreme outer edges of the vehicle.
Position (side) lights shall be shown at night time in all cases when the use of such
lights is compulsory and at the same time as the passing lights if no part of the illuminating
surface of the lamps of the passing lights is within 400 mm (16 in.) of the extreme outer
edges of the vehicle.
(e) Every motor vehicle and every trailer at the end of a combination of vehicles
shall be equipped at the rear with at least one red light visible at night time in clear
weather at a distance of 150 m (500 feet) from the rear of the vehicle.
(f) The registration number displayed at the rear of a motor vehicle or a trailer
shall be capable of illumination at night time in such a manner that it can be read in
clear weather at a distance of 20 m (65 feet) from the rear.
(g) The red rear light or lights and the light for the rear registration number shall
be shown at the same time as any of the following: position (side) lights, passing lights
or driving lights.
(h) Every motor vehicle other than a motor cycle without sidecar shall be equipped
with two red reflex reflectors preferably of other than triangular form, fitted symmetrically
at the rear and on opposite sides of the vehicle. The outer edges of each of these reflectors
must be as near as possible to and in no case further than 400 mm (16 in.) from the outer
edges of the vehicle. These reflectors may be incorporated in the rear red lamps if
these lamps comply with the above requirements. These reflectors shall be visible
at night time in clear weather from a distance of at least 100 m (325 feet) when illuminated
by means of two driving lights.
(i) Every motor cycle without sidecar shall be equipped with a red reflex reflector
preferably of other than triangular form, fitted at the rear of the vehicle, either incorporated
in, or separate from, the rear red lamp and shall comply with the conditions
of visibility mentioned under paragraph (h) of this part.
(j) Every trailer and every articulated vehicle shall be equipped with two red reflex
reflectors, preferably triangular in shape, fitted symmetrically at the rear and on opposite
sides of the vehicle. These reflectors shall be visible at night time in clear weather
from a distance of a least 100 m (325 feet) when illuminated by means of two driving
lights. r
When the reflectors are triangular in shape, the triangle shall be equilateral, with
sides of at least 150 mm (6 in.) and shall be upright in position. The outer corner of
each of these reflectors shall be as near as possible to and in no case further than 400 mm
(16 in.) from the extreme outer edges of the vehicle.
(k) With the exception of motor cycles, every motor vehicle and every trailer at
the end of a combination of vehicles shall be equipped with at least one stop light at the
rear showing a red or amber light. This light shall be actuated upon application of the
service brake of the motor vehicle. If the stop light is red in colour and is either incorporated
in, or associated with, the rear red light, its intensity shall be greater than that
of the rear red light. The stop light shall not be required on trailers and semi-trailers
when their dimensions are such that the stop light of the drawing vehicle remains
visible from the rear.
(1) When a motor vehicle is equipped with direction indicators, such indicators
shall be one of the following:
(i) A moveable arm protruding beyond each side of the vehicle and illuminated
by a steady amber light when the arm is in the horizontal position;
(ii) A constantly blinking or flashing amber light affixed to each side of the vehicle;
(iii) A constantly blinking or flashing light placed at each side of the front and rear
of the vehicle. The colour of such lights shall be white or orange towards
the front and red or orange towards the rear.
(m) No lights, with the exception of direction indicators, shall be flashing or blinking
lights.
(n) If a vehicle is equipped with several lights of the same kind, they shall be of
the same colour and, except in the case of motor cycles with sidecars, two of these lights
shall be placed symmetrically to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
(o) Several lights may be incorporated in the same lighting device provided each
of these lights complies with the appropriate provisions of this part.
III. OTHER CONDITIONS
(a) Steering apparatus
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a strong steering apparatus which will
allow the vehicle to be turned easily, quickly and with certainty.
(b) Driving mirror
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with at least one driving mirror of adequate
dimensions so placed as to enable the driver to view from his seat the road to the rear
of the vehicle. However, this provision shall not be compulsory for motor cycles with
or without sidecar.
(c) Warning devices
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with at least one audible warning device
of sufficient strength which shall not be a bell, gong, siren or other strident toned device.
(d) Windscreen wiper
Every motor vehicle fitted with a windscreen shall have at least one efficient windscreen
wiper functioning without requiring constant control by the driver. However,
this provision shall not be compulsory for motor cycles with or without sidecars.
(e) Windscreens
Windscreens shall be made of a stable substance, transparent and not likely to
produce sharp splinters if broken. The objects seen through this substance shall not
appear distorted.
(f) Reversing device
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a reversing device controlled from the
driver's seat if the weight of the motor vehicle when empty exceeds 400 kg (900 lbs.).
(g) Exhaust silencer
Every motor vehicle shall have an exhaust silencer in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise, the working of which cannot be interrupted by the driver
while on the road.
(h) Tires
The wheels of motor vehicles and their trailers shall be fitted with pneumatic tires,
or with some other tires of equivalent elasticity.
(i) Device to prevent a vehicle from running down a gradient
When travelling in a mountainous region of a country where it is required by
domestic regulations, any motor vehicle of which the permissible maximum weight
exceeds 3,500 kg (7,700 lbs.) shall carry a device, such as a scotch or chock, which can
prevent the vehicle from running backwards or forwards.
(j) General provisions
(i) In so far as possible the machinery or accessory equipment of any motor vehicle
shall not entail a risk of fire or explosion, nor cause the emission of noxious gases or
offensive odours or produce disturbing noises, nor be a source of danger in case of
collision.
(ii) Every motor vehicle shall be so constructed that the driver shall be able to see
ahead, to the right and to the left, clearly enough to enable him to drive safely.
(iii) The provisions relating to braking and lighting shall not apply to invalid carriages
which comply with the domestic regulations in the country of registration as regards
brakes, lights and reflectors. For the purpose of this paragraph " invalid carriage "
shall mean a motor vehicle whose unladen weight does not exceed 300 kg (700 lbs.),
whose speed does not exceed 30 km (19 miles) per hour, and which is specially designed
and constructed (and not merely adapted) for the use of a person suffering from some
physical defect or disability and is normally used by such person.
IV. COMBINATION OF VEHICLES
(a) A " combination of vehicles " may be composed of a drawing vehicle and one
or two trailers. An articulated vehicle may draw a trailer, but if such articulated vehicle
is used for the carriage of passengers, the trailer shall have not more than one axle and
shall not carry passengers.
(b) Any Contracting States may, however, indicate that it will only permit that one
trailer be drawn by a vehicle and that it will not permit an articulated vehicle to draw
a trailer. It may also indicate that it will not permit articulated vehicles for the transport
of passengers.
V. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
The provisions of parts I, II and paragraph (e) of part III of this annex shall apply
to any motor vehicle first registered at any time subsequent to a date two years after
the entry into force of this Convention, and to any trailer drawn thereby. The said
provisions shall apply five years after the entry into force of this Convention to any
motor vehicle first registered at any time previous to a date two years after the entry
into force of this Convention, and to any trailer.
In the meantime the following provisions shall apply:
(a) Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with either two systems of brakes, independent
of each other, or one system of brakes with two independent means of operation,
of which one means of operation will function, even if the other fails to function,
provided that in all cases the system used is really effective and rapid in action.
(b) Every motor vehicle travelling alone shall, during the night and from sunset,
be fitted in front with at least two white lights placed one on the right and the other on
the left, and, at the back, with a red light.
For motor cycles unaccompanied by a sidecar, the number of lights in front may
be reduced to one.
(c) Every motor vehicle shall also be equipped with one or more devices capable
of effectively illuminating the road for a sufficient distance ahead unless the two white
lights prescribed above already fulfil this condition.
If the vehicle is capable of proceeding at a speed greater than 30 km (19 miles)
an hour this distance shall not be less than 100 m (325 feet).
(d) Lamps which may produce a dazzling effect shall be provided with means for
eliminating the dazzling effect when other users of the road are met, or on any occasion
when such elimination would be useful. The elimination of the dazzling effect shall,
however, leave sufficient light to illuminate the road clearly for at least 25 m (80 feet).
(e) Motor vehicles drawing trailers shall be subject to the same regulations as
separate motor vehicles in so far as forward lighting is concerned; the rear red light
shall be carried on the back of the trailer.
ANNEX 7
DIMENSIONS AND WEIGHTS OF VEHICLES
IN INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC
1. This annex applies to highways designated in accordance with article 23.
2. On these roads the permissible maximum dimensions and weights, unladen
or with load, provided that no vehicle shall carry a maximum load in excess of that
declared permissible by the competent authority of the country in which it is registered,
shall be as follows:
ANNEX 8
CONDITIONS TO BE FULFILLED BY DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES
IN INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC
The minimum age for driving a motor vehicle under the conditions set out in
article 24 of the Convention shall be eighteen years.
Any Contracting State or subdivision thereof may, however, recognize the driving
permits issued by other Contracting States to drivers of motor cycles and invalid carriages
of a lower age than eighteen years.

