agreement between the federal republic of germany, belgium, denmark, france, the netherlands and the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland relating to the international convention for regulating the police of the north sea fisheries signed at the hague on 6 may 1882source: https://iea.uoregon.edu/marinemammals/engine/documents/2-0475-0476.htmlthe governments signatory to the present agreement;in order that effect may be given in respect of the federal republic of germany to the international convention for regulating the police of north sea fisheries signed at the hague on may 6, 1882;have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 11. the supervision of fisheries pursuant to the international convention for regulating the police of the north sea fisheries signed at the hague on may 6, 1882 shall be exercised by ships belonging to the naval forces of the signatory governments.2. if the necessity should arise, these ships may be replaced by other state-owned ships commanded by an officer specially appointed for the purpose by the government concerned and able to produce his commission on demand ARTICLE 2the present agreement shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the netherlands ministry of foreign affairs, which shall notify all signatory governments of each such deposit ARTICLE 3the present agreement shall come into force on the deposit of the sixth instrument of ratification. the agreement shall, however, be provisionally applied as from the date of its signature, so far as it is possible to do so under the constitutional systems of the signatory governments.in witness whereof the undersigned, having been duly authorised thereto by their respective governments, have signed the present agreement.done at the hague, 3 june 1955, in the english and french languages, both texts being equally authentic, in a single original, which shall be deposited in the archives of the government of the netherlands, which shall transmit certified copies thereof to each signatory government.for the federal republic of germany: (signed) h. muhlenfeld for belgium: (signed) l. couvreur for denmark: (signed) wilhelm eickhoff for france: (signed) j. p. garnier for the netherlands: (signed) j. w. beyen (signed) j. luns for the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland: (signed) paul mason
