AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS ON COOPERATION
IN STUDIES OF THE WORLD OCEAN
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;
Recognizing the importance of comprehensive studies of the World Ocean for
peaceful purposes and for the well-being of mankind;
Striving for more complete knowledge and rational utilization of the World
Ocean by all nations through broad international cooperation in oc anographie in
vestigation and research;
Aware of the capabilities and resources of both countries for studies of the
World Ocean and the extensive history and successful results of previous coopera
tion between them;
Desiring to combine their efforts in the further investigation of the World
Ocean and to use the results for the benefit of the peoples of both countries and of
all mankind; and
In pursuance and further development of the Agreement between the Govern
ment of the United States of America and the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics on cooperation in the fields of science and technology of May 24,
1972, 2 and in accordance with the Agreement on exchanges and cooperation in
scientific, technical, educational, cultural and other fields of April 11, 1972, 3 and in
accordance with the Agreement on cooperation in the field of environmental protec
tion of May 23, 1972; 4
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. The Parties will develop and carry out cooperation in studies of the
World Ocean on the basis of equality, reciprocity and mutual benefit.
Article 2. In their studies of the World Ocean, the Parties will direct
cooperative efforts to the investigation and solution of important basic and applied
research problems. Initially, cooperation will be implemented in the following areas:
a. Large-scale ocean-atmosphere interaction, including laboratory studies, oceanic
experiments, and mathematical modeling of the ocean-atmosphere system.
b. Ocean currents of planetary scale and other questions of ocean dynamics.
c. Geochemistry and marine chemistry of the World Ocean.
d. Geological and geophysical investigations of the World Ocean, including deep
sea drilling for scientific purposes.
e. Biological productivity of the World Ocean and the biochemistry of the func
tioning of individual organisms and whole biological communities in the World
Ocean.
/. Intercalibration and standardization of oc anographie instrumentation and
methods.
Other areas of cooperation may be added by mutual agreement.
Article 3. Cooperation provided for in the preceding articles may take the
following forms:
a. Joint planning, development, and implementation of research projects and pro
grams;
b. Exchange of scientists, specialists, and advanced students;
c. Exchange of scientific and technical information, documentation, and ex
perience, including the results of national oc anographie studies;
d. Convening of joint conferences, meetings, and seminars of specialists;
e. Appropriate participation by both countries in multilateral cooperative ac
tivities sponsored by international scientific organizations;
/. Facilitation by both Parties, in accordance with laws, rules and regulations of
each country and relevant bilateral agreements, of use of appropriate port
facilities of the two countries for ships' services and supplies, including provi
sion for rest and changes of ships' personnel, in connection with carrying out
cooperative activities.
Other forms of cooperation may be added by mutual agreement.
Article 4. In furtherance of the aims of this Agreement, the Parties will, as
appropriate, encourage, facilitate and monitor the development of cooperation and
direct contacts between agencies, organizations and firms of the two countries, in
cluding the conclusion, as appropriate, of implementing agreements for carrying out
specific projects and programs under this Agreement.
Article 5. 1. For implementation of this agreement, there shall be established
a US-USSR Joint Committee on Cooperation in World Ocean Studies. This Joint
Committee shall meet, as a rule, once a year, alternately in the United States and the
Soviet Union, unless otherwise mutually agreed.
2. The Joint Committee shall take such action as is necessary for effective im
plementation of this Agreement including, but not limited to, approval of specific
projects and programs of cooperation; designation of appropriate agencies and
organizations to be responsible for carrying out cooperative activities; and making
recommendations, as appropriate, to the Parties.
3. Each Party shall designate its Executive Agent which will be responsible for
carrying out this Agreement. During the period between meetings of the Joint Com
mittee, the Executive Agents shall maintain contact with each other and coordinate
and supervise the development and implementation of cooperative activities con
ducted under this Agreement.
Article 6. Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted to prejudice other
agreements between the Parties or commitments of either Party to other interna
tional oc anographie programs.
Article 7. Each Party, with the consent of the other Party, may invite third
countries to participate in cooperative activities engaged in under this Agreement.
Article 8. 1. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and remain
in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the
Parties.
2. The termination of the Agreement shall not affect the validity of implement-
ing agreements concluded under this Agreement between interested agencies,
organizations and firms of the two countries.
DONE at Washington, this 19th day of June, 1973, in duplicate, in the English
and Russian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of the United States of America:
William P. Rogers
For the Government of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics:
A. Gromyko

