AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
AND THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS ON
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION IN THE
FIELD OF PEACEFUL USES OF ATOMIC ENERGY
The United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;
Attaching great importance to the problem of satisfying the rapidly
growing energy demands in both countries as well as in other countries of the
world;
Desiring to combine the efforts of both countries toward the solution of
this problem through the development of highly efficient energy sources;
Recognizing that solutions to this problem may be found in more rapid
development of certain nuclear technologies already under study, such as
controlled thermonuclear fusion and fast breeder reactors, as well as in
additional basic research on the fundamental properties of matter;
Noting with satisfaction the successful results of previous cooperation
between the Parties in the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy;
Wishing to establish a more stable and long-term basis for cooperation in
this field for the benefit of both their peoples and of all mankind;
In accordance with and in further development of the Agreement between
the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on cooperation in the fields of science and
technology of May 24, 1972; 2 the Memorandum on Cooperation in the
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy of September 28,1972, between the US Atomic
Energy Commission and the USSR State Committee for the Utilization of
Atomic Energy; and the General Agreement between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on contacts, exchanges
and cooperation of June 19, 1973; 3
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. The Parties will expand and strengthen their cooperation in
research, development and utilization of nuclear energy, having as a primary
objective the development of new energy sources. This cooperation will be
carried out on the basis of mutual benefit, equality and reciprocity.
Article 2. 1. Cooperation will be concentrated in the following three
areas:
a. CONTROLLED THERMONUCLEAR FUSION
The aim of cooperation in this area is the eventual development of
prototype and demonstration-scale thermonuclear reactors. Cooperation may
include theoretical, calculational, experimental and design-construction studies
at all stages up to industrial-scale operations.
b. FAST BREEDER REACTORS
Cooperation in this area will be directed toward finding solutions to
mutually agreed basic and applied problems connected with the design,
development, construction and operation of nuclear power plants utilizing fast
breeder reactors.
c. RESEARCH ON THE FUNDAMENTAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
Cooperation in this area will include joint theoretical and experimental
studies on mutually agreed subjects, and particularly in high, medium and low
energy physics, through utilization of accelerators, data processing equipment
and other facilities of the two countries. Cooperation may also be undertaken
on the design, planning and construction of joint facilities to be used in this area
of research.
2. Further details of cooperation in each of these three areas will be
arranged through individual implementing protocols.
3. Other areas of cooperation may be added by mutual agreement.
4. Cooperation under this Agreement shall be in accordance with the laws
of the respective countries.
Article 3. 1. Cooperation provided for in the preceding articles may take
the following forms:
a. Establishment of working groups of scientists and engineers for design and
execution of joint projects;
b. Joint development and construction of experiments, pilot installations and
equipment;
c. Joint work by theoretical and experimental scientists in appropriate research
centers of the two countries;
d. Organization of joint consultations, seminars and panels;
e. Exchanges of appropriate instrumentation, equipment and construction
materials;
/. Exchanges of scientists and specialists; and
g. Exchanges of scientific and technical information, documentation and results
of research.
2. Other forms of cooperation may be added by mutual agreement.
Article 4. In furtherance of the aims of this Agreement, the Parties will,
as appropriate, encourage, facilitate and monitor the development of
cooperation and direct contacts between organizations and institutions of the
two countries, including the conclusion, as appropriate, of implementing
protocols and contracts for carrying out cooperative activities under this
Agreement.
Article 5. 1. For the implementation of this Agreement, there shall be
established a US-USSR Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses
of Atomic Energy. Meetings will be convened once a year in the United States
and the Soviet Union alternately, unless otherwise mutually agreed.
2. The Joint Committee shall take such action as is necessary for effective
implementation of this Agreement including, but not limited to, approval of
specific projects and programs of cooperation; designation of appropriate
participating organizations and institutions responsible for carrying out
cooperative activities; and making recommendations, as appropriate, to the two
Governments.
3. The Executive Agents of this Agreement shall be, for the United States
of America, the US Atomic Energy Commission, and for the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the USSR State Committee for the Utilization of Atomic
Energy. The Executive Agents, on their respective sides, shall be responsible for
the operation of the Joint Committee and shall coordinate and supervise the
development and implementation of cooperative activities conducted under this
Agreement.
Article 6. Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted to prejudice
other agreements concluded between the Parties.
Article 7. 1. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and
shall remain in force for ten years. It may be modified or extended by mutual
agreement of the Parties.
2. The termination of this Agreement shall not affect the validity of
implementing protocols and contracts concluded under this Agreement between
interested organizations and institutions of the two countries.
DONE at Washington, this 21st day of June, 1973, in duplicate, in the
English and Russian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the United States of America:
Richard Nixon
President of the United States of America
For the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:
L. I. Brezhnev
General Secretary of the Central Committee, CPSU
