AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS RELATING TO
FISHING FOR KING AND TANNER CRAB
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Having considered in a spirit of mutual understanding their problems relating
to the king and tanner crab fisheries on the continental shelf in light of their
ratifications of the Convention on the Continental Shelf adopted at Geneva, 1958, 2
Taking into account the existing fishery of the Soviet Union for king and
tanner crab in the eastern Bering Sea, and
Desiring to adopt the necessary measures for conserving the stocks of king
crab and tanner crab in the fisheries areas provided for by the Agreement,
Have agreed as follows:
1. The king crab and tanner crab are natural resources of the continental shelf
over which the coastal state exercises sovereign rights for the purposes of explora
tion and exploitation in accordance with the provisions of article 2 of the
Convention on the Continental Shelf.
2. Nationals and vessels of the Soviet Union may continue to carry out fishing
for king and tanner crab on the continental shelf of the United States for a period of
two years in that area of the eastern Bering Sea described in the appendix to this
Agreement, provided that the annual commercial catch of king crab and tanner
crab by Soviet nationals and vessels in such area shall not exceed 260,000 king crabs
and 4.2 million tanner crabs each in 1973 and 1974.
3. Each Government will apply the measures specified in paragraphs 3 and 4
of the appendix to this Agreement to its nationals and vessels engaged in the king
and tanner crab fisheries in the eastern Bering Sea. Either Government shall, if
requested by the other Government, provide opportunity for observation of the
conduct of enforcement of the provisions of this Agreement and for that purpose
shall permit duly authorized officers of the other Government to board its vessels
engaged in the king and tanner crab fisheries in the eastern Bering Sea. These
officers will make a report on the results of their observations; the report will be
forwarded to the flag Government for appropriate action, if such action should be
necessary.
4. The two Governments will continue and intensify their study of the king
and tanner crab resources in the eastern Bering Sea and will exchange annually by
November 30 the data resulting from such study including also, to the extent
possible, an estimate of the maximum sustainable yield of the resources. The data to
be furnished by each Government may be prepared in accordance with its own
methodology and shall include, but not be limited to, the categories of data
described in the appendix to this Agreement. The two Governments will also
provide for the exchange of scientific personnel engaged in the study of the king
crab and tanner crab resources.
5. This Agreement shall replace the Agreement of February 5, 1965' between
the two Governments relating to fishing for king crab, as amended and extended by
the Agreements of February 13, 1967;2 January 31, 1969;3 and February 12, 1971;4
and extended by an exchange of notes dated December 31, 1972. It shall enter in
force upon signature and shall remain in force for two years. At the request of
either Government, representatives of the two Governments will meet at a mutually
convenient time with a view to modifying the present Agreement. In any event,
representatives of the two Governments will meet at a mutually convenient time
prior to the expiration of the period of validity of this Agreement to review the
operation of the Agreement and to decide on future arrangements.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized for this purpose,
have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Moscow, February 21, 1973, in duplicate, in the English and Russian
languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For Government of the United States of America:
Donald L. McKernan
For the Government of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics:
V. M. Kamentsev

APPENDIX
1. The area referred to in paragraph 2 of the Agreement is that portion of the
southeastern Bering Sea lying seaward of the nine-mile zone contiguous to the territorial sea
of the United States west of 160 West Longitude.
2. The annual commercial catch of king crab and tanner crab by Soviet nationals and
vessels referred to in paragraph 2 of the Agreement shall not exceed:
a. 100,000 king crabs and 1.8 million tanner crabs in the area lying within the following
designated boundaries: a line running from Cape Newenham on the Bering Sea coast of
western Alaska, southwest to position 57 00' North Latitude, 168 00' West Longitude,
thence due south to position 54 36' North Latitude, 168 00' West Longitude, and thence
east to Cape Sarichef on the west coast of Unimak Island, Alaska;
b. 160,000 king crabs and 2.4 million tanner crabs in the area adjacent to the coast of the
United States north and west of the area designated in subparagraph a.
3. a. Female king and tanner crabs, king crabs less than 15.8 cms. in maximum
carapace width, and soft-shelled king and tanner crabs shall not be retained and used. Any
such crabs taken incidentally, any king crabs taken in excess of the agreed quotas in each of
the areas, and any tanner crabs taken in excess of the agreed quotas in each of the areas shall
be returned immediately to the sea with a minimum of injury.
b. King crabs and tanner crabs shall not be taken by means of fishing gear other than
pots.
4. Unless otherwise agreed by the two Governments, only pots may be used to capture
king crabs and tanner crabs for commercial purposes and no trawling may be conducted for
other species in that area lying seaward of the nine-mile zone contiguous to the territorial sea
of the United States within the following boundaries: a line running from a point on the
Bering, Sea coast of the Alaska Peninsula due west along 55 54' North Latitude to its
intersection with a line connecting two points 56 20' North Latitude, 163 00' West
Longitude, and 55 16' North Latitude, 166 10' West Longitude, thence southwesterly along
the said line to its intersection with a line passing between Cape Navarin and Cape Sarichef
at 55 16' North Latitude, 166 10' West Longitude, thence southeasterly along the Cape
Navarin-Sarichef line to Cape Sarichef.
5. The data referred to in paragraph 4 of the Agreement are:
a. Biological Data
(1) Tag returns: tag number and/or tag; date and location of capture (latitude and
longitude); sex, length, width, and weight of crab; condition of shell.
(2) Life history data: length, width, weight, and age of crab by sex; moult data;
breeding habits, feeding habits, migration habits.
(3) Publications dealing with king crabs and tanner crabs in the Bering Sea and North
Pacific.
b. Catch Statistics
Total annual and monthly catches by 1 of longitude.
c. Effort Statistics
(1) Description of pots; number of pot lifts per month by 1 of longitude.
(2) Number of fleets operated by dates of operations; number of pot boats.
d. Production Statistics
(1) Canned crab; number of cases, number of crabs per case, quantity of meat per case.
(2) Frozen crab: description of units and number of units; number of crabs.
