amendment to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific oceansource: https://iea.uoregon.edu/marinemammals/engine/documents/0-1216-1219.htmfisheries and oceans pacific and freshwater fisheries assistant deputy minister ottawa, canada k1a 0e6 canadamay 8, 1991the honourable james baker secretary of state washington, dc 20520 u.s.a. dear sir:i have the pleasure of transmitting to you the commission's recommendation to amend the annex to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean ('the convention'), as amended by the protocol signed at tokyo, april 25, 1978. this recommendation to amend the annex to the convention was adopted by the international north pacific fisheries commission by correspondence on april 25, 1991, in accordance with the provisions of article iii, paragraph 1, subparagraph (c) of the convention. it is recommended to all the contracting parties to amend the present annex by inserting 'and 1991' immediately after 'in 1990' in paragraph 4. the revised paragraph would read as follows:4. in 1990 and 1991 only, the japanese mothership fishery can be converted to a non-traditional landbased fishery ('the non-traditional landbased fishery').the non-traditional landbased fishery may be conducted in the areas specified in sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) of paragraph 1 above, according to the conditions stipulated in sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) of paragraph 1 above respectively. the provisions of sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 1, paragraph 2 and paragraph 3 above shall not apply to the non-traditional landbased fishery. for the purpose of the non-traditional landbased fishery, a mothership fleet day is defined as one day when fishing vessels engaged in the non-traditional landbased fishery in the area concerned use 14,190 tans (330 tans/15 km) of fishing nets during a portion of any one calendar day.'the commission looks forward to receipt of notification of acceptance of this recommendation by the three contracting parties in accordance with article vii of the convention.sincerely yours, david good secretary international north pacific fisheries commissionc.c. - bernard e. skud executive director inpfc-i, barbara jean mcdougall,secretary of state for external affairs in the government of canada, do hereby certify thatthe government of canada accepts the amendment to the annex to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean, recommended by the international north pacific fisheries commission on april 25, 1991. in witness whereof, i have signed and sealed this instrument of acceptance.done at ottawa, this 9th day of may 1991. barbara jean mcdougall secretary of state for external affairs-ministry of foreign affairs tokyo, japanmay 10, 1991mr. david good secretary international north pacific fisheries commissiondear mr. good,with reference to your letter dated may 8, 1991, concerning the recommendation of the international north pacific fisheries commission to amend the annex to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean, i have the pleasure to notify on behalf of the government of japan, the international north pacific fisheries commission that the government of japan decided, on may 10, 1991 to accept the recommendation mentioned above.sincerely yours, taro nakayama minister for foreign affairs-united states department of state assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs washington, d.c. 20520may 16, 1991mr. david good secretary international north pacific fisheries commission 6640 northwest marine drive vancouver, b.c., canada v6t 1x2dear mr. good:this responds to your letter to secretary baker dated may 8, 1991, which conveyed the recommendation of the international north pacific fisheries commission (inpfc) that, in accordance with article iii, section 1(c) of the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean, as amended by the protocol signed at tokyo on april 25, 1978 (the convention), the three contracting parties amend the present annex of the convention.in accordance with article vii of the convention, the government of the united states of america hereby accepts the commission's recommendation to amend the present annex to the convention as described in your letter.in accepting the recommendation of the commission, the government of the united states of america affirms its support for united nations general assembly resolutions 44/225 and 45/197 on large-scale pelagic driftnet fishing. as such, our acceptance of the amendment to the annex and the related memorandum of understanding does not signify satisfaction with, or approval of, the measures attendant to the amendment, or other inpfc programs, as effective to prevent unacceptable impacts of these driftnet fisheries on the living marine resources of the north pacific, or to ensure the conservation of these resources.sincerely, curtis bohlen-international north pacific fisheries commission 6640 northwest marine drive vancouver, b.c., canada v6t 1x2 cable: northcom phone: (604) 228-1128 fax: (604) 228-113523 may 1991the honourable james baker secretary of state washington, dc 20520 u.s.a. the hon. barbara mcdougall, p.c., m.p. minister for external affairs room 231, west block house of commons ottawa, on k1a 0g2the honourable taro nakayama minister for foreign affairs 2-2-1 kasumigaseki, chiyoda-ku tokyo 100, japandear madam/sir:referring to the inpfc letter dated 1991 may 8 by secretary good, the secretariat of inpfc received a notification on may 23, 1991, that the government of canada formally accepted the amendment to the annex of the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean.as specified in article vii, now that all three contracting parties have notified the commission of their acceptance, the annex is amended as of this date (1991 may 23).a copy of the canadian acceptance is attached.sincerely yours, bernard e. skud executive directorattach.
