amendments to annex iii of the convention on the prior informed consent procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international tradesource: this document includes the text of three separate rotterdam commission decisions rc-5/3, rc-5/4, and rc-5/5, which added alachlor, aldicarb, and endosulfan, respectively to annex iii of the convention.rc-5/3: listing of alachlor in annex iii to the rotterdam conventionthe conference of the parties,noting with appreciation the work of the chemical review committee,having considered the recommendation of the chemical review committee to make alachlor subject to the prior informed consent procedure and accordingly to list it in annex iii to the rotterdam convention on the prior informed consent procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade, satisfied that all the requirements for listing in annex iii to the rotterdam convention have been met,1. decides to amend annex iii to the rotterdam convention to list the following chemical:chemical - relevant cas number(s) - categoryalachlor - 15972-60-8 - pesticide2. also decides that this amendment shall enter into force for all parties on 24 october 2011. 3. approves the decision guidance document for alachlor (unep/fao/rc/cop.5/14, annex v).rc-5/4: listing of aldicarb in annex iii to the rotterdam conventionthe conference of the parties,noting with appreciation the work of the chemical review committee,having considered the recommendation of the chemical review committee to make aldicarb subject to the prior informed consent procedure and accordingly to list it in annex iii to the rotterdam convention on the prior informed consent procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade, satisfied that all the requirements for listing in annex iii to the rotterdam convention have been met,1. decides to amend annex iii to the rotterdam convention to list the following chemical:chemical - relevant cas number(s) - categoryaldicarb - 116-06-3 - pesticide2. also decides that this amendment shall enter into force for all parties on 24 october 2011. 3. approves the decision guidance document for aldicarb (unep/fao/rc/cop.5/15, annex v).rc-5/5: listing of endosulfan in annex iii to the rotterdam conventionthe conference of the parties,noting with appreciation the work of the chemical review committee,having considered the recommendation of the chemical review committee to make endosulfan subject to the prior informed consent procedure and accordingly to list it in annex iii to the rotterdam convention on the prior informed consent procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade, satisfied that all the requirements for listing the chemical in annex iii to the convention have been met,1. decides to amend annex iii to the convention to list the following chemical:chemical - relevant cas number(s) - categoryendosulfan - 115-29-7 - pesticide2. also decides that this amendment shall enter into force for all parties on 24 october 2011.3. approves the decision guidance document for endosulfan (unep/fao/rc/cop.5/15, annex v).
