NOTE I
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship
Buenos Aires, 30 August 2010
Sir,
I have the honour to refer to the mutually expressed desire of the Argentine Republic and the Eastern Republic of Uruguay to establish a Scientific Committee as a subsidiary body within the Administrative Commission of the River Uruguay (CARU) and to set down modalities and criteria for its functioning as follows:
"TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Introduction
2. The Scientific Committee
2.1. Organization
2.2. Tasks
3. Monitoring of the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill
3.1. Inside the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill
3.2. The River Uruguay in the zone potentially affected by the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill
4. Monitoring of the confluence of the River Gualeguaychu with the River Uruguay
5. Monitoring of all industrial and agricultural establishments and urban centres discharging effluent into the River Uruguay and the areas affected by it
6. Monitoring of the quality of the waters of the River Uruguay
7. Common provisions
1. INTRODUCTION
In accordance with the presidential instructions issued on 2 June 2010 in Anchorena, Uruguay, and on 28 July in Olivos, Argentina, and in connection with the judgment of the International Court of Justice of 20 April 2010 in Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay, the delegations of Argentina and Uruguay have agreed on the following directives for the constitution and functioning of the Scientific Committee established within the Administrative Commission of the River Uruguay (CARU) under the aforementioned Olivos Presidential Agreement, for the purpose of monitoring the River Uruguay and all industrial and agricultural establishments and urban centres discharging effluents into the River Uruguay and the areas affected by it.
Monitoring by the CARU Scientific Committee shall begin at the Botnia-UPM Mill and at the confluence of the River Gualeguaychu with the River Uruguay. It shall continue in Argentina at an
establishment or place to be selected by the Uruguayan Party. Thereafter, it shall be carried out al-ternately in the two countries.
2. THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE
2.1. ORGANIZATION
A Scientific Committee shall be established as a subsidiary body of the Administrative Com-mission of the River Uruguay (CARU).
The Committee shall consist of four scientists, two nominated by Uruguay and two by Argen-tina.
CARU shall provide the personnel necessary for the provision of technical assistance to the Scientific Committee. Such personnel shall possess qualifications appropriate to that task. CARU shall also provide administrative support and suitable premises and equipment for the conduct of the Committee's work.
The remuneration and the statutory regulations applicable to the members and technical assis-tants of the Scientific Committee shall be determined by CARU.
The work of the Scientific Committee shall be conducted in parallel with that of CARU con-sultants.
2.2. TASKS
The Scientific Committee shall be responsible for the technical oversight of CARU monitoring in the River Uruguay and all industrial and agricultural establishments and urban centres discharg-ing their effluents into the River Uruguay and the areas affected by it.
CARU shall consult the Scientific Committee before taking decisions in relation to any of its activities for the control and prevention of pollution in the River Uruguay under the monitoring plans described below.
The Scientific Committee shall report to CARU on a monthly basis concerning the activities implemented.
CARU shall establish standards or general guidelines for the monitoring plans, as well as the objectives sought under those plans.
The Scientific Committee shall draw up specific projects to be carried out under the monitor-ing plans and shall submit them to CARU for approval. They shall include the following:
- Details of the activities to be carried out for the achievement of the objectives set by CARU;
- Work plan;
- Necessary basic logistics.
The time limit for the submission of specific projects under the monitoring plans referred to in sections 3 and 4 below shall be sixty (60) calendar days from the date on which the Scientific Committee is constituted, and for projects under the plan referred to in section 6, the time limit shall be one hundred and fifty (150) calendar days. Once the monitoring plans referred to in sections
3, 4 and 6 have been implemented, CARU shall arrange for the implementation of the moni-toring plan referred to in section 5.
For the attainment of its objectives, especially during preparatory activities, the Scientific Committee, after having notified CARU, may approach the competent authorities of the States Par-ties to obtain the technical information necessary for the performance of its tasks.
In all cases, the findings and conclusions obtained by the Scientific Committee shall be re-ferred by it to CARU, which shall, in turn, transmit them to the corresponding State Party for im-plementation of the relevant actions.
On the basis of the follow-up measures to be carried out, the Scientific Commit-tee may propose to CARU or, through it, to the State Party concerned, additional measures to those already planned for the prevention of pollution in the River Uruguay.
3. MONITORING OF THE ORION (UPM, FORMERLY BOTNIA)MILL
In principle, for operational reasons, this plan is divided into two specific activities: one concerns intervention measures inside the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill, and the other concerns the monitoring of the River Uruguay in the zone potentially affected by the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill.
The Scientific Committee may, as a consequence of the results it obtains and the knowledge it acquires of the River Uruguay zone, propose to CARU the inclusion of other specific activities, complementary to those referred to herein, with a view to duly identifying all potential sources of discharges of pollutants into the River Uruguay in the zone potentially affected by the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill, in order to be able to identify with certainty the cause of potential changes in the water quality of the River Uruguay in that zone. In this connection, the provisions under section 3 are linked to those in section 4.
All the monitoring activities and modalities described below shall continue to be carried out without interruption unless CARU decides, at its discretion, to suspend any of them.
The Scientific Committee shall submit an initial monitoring plan to CARU, taking into ac-count the activities listed below, for monitoring inside the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill and on the River Uruguay, in accordance with section 2.2. This plan shall be adjusted as necessary as the work progresses.
The common objective of these monitoring activities is to provide early warning of cases of deviation from the applicable standards concerning either the condition of effluents or the condi-tions resulting therefrom in the River Uruguay, in order to enable the competent authorities to take appropriate action.
3.1. INSIDE THE ORION (UPM, FORMERLY BOTNIA)MILL
The principal aim of this area of activity is to verify that discharges of effluents by the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill comply with CARU regulations and the regulations implemented by Uruguay in its jurisdiction with a view to protecting and preserving the aquatic environment by preventing pollution. This area of activity shall include the analysis of samples of liquid effluents and gaseous emissions that might enter the River Uruguay, and the interpretation of the results.
To this end, activities shall be carried out inside the Orion Mill under the operational respon-sibility of the Uruguayan National Directorate for the Environment (DINAMA), with the participa-tion of CARU through the intermediary of the Scientific Committee.
It is initially foreseen that the scope of activities of the Scientific Committee may include:
(a) Monitoring, inside the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill, of the conditions of its efflu-ents in relation to all the parameters laid down in the applicable CARU and Uruguayan regulations and any regulations which the Scientific Committee may suggest to CARU as appropriate for in-clusion in future Commission regulations;
(b) Monitoring of effluent flows into the River Uruguay;
(c) Monitoring, on the premises of the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill, of air quality conditions which may facilitate understanding of the effects of gaseous emissions on the aquatic environment of the River Uruguay.
For monitoring purposes, the Scientific Committee shall visit the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill, accompanying DINAMA, to effect assessments and take samples of effluents in accordance with the procedure described in the Olivos presidential agreement. Under this procedure, DINAMA shall take duplicate samples, one of which shall be submitted immediately to the CARU Scientific Committee. The latter may make up to 12 inspection visits a year to the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill.
The assessments to be made shall include the use of sensors, and all other scientific and tech-nological innovations which the Parties deem necessary for the monitoring of liquid effluents and gaseous emissions that might enter the River Uruguay.
The information obtained from this monitoring shall be made public, taking into account sci-entific time frames.
In the context of the preparatory activities for this monitoring plan, the Scientific Commit-tee may carry out activities to learn more about the areas on which its activity will subsequently be focused.
3.2. THE RIVER URUGUAY IN THE ZONE POTENTIALLY AFFECTED BY THE ORION (UPM, FORMERLY BOTNIA)MILL
The principal purpose of activities in this area is the ongoing assessment of the environmental conditions in the aquatic environment of the River Uruguay in the zone potentially affected by the discharge of liquid effluents and gaseous emissions that might enter the River Uruguay from the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill, in order to determine whether any changes have occurred in the quality levels of the aquatic environment of the River Uruguay as established by CARU.
For this purpose, actions in the River Uruguay shall be carried out by CARU, which shall have operational responsibility for their implementation, using contractual arrangements in line with its usual practice to date.
It is initially foreseen that the scope of activities of the Scientific Committee may include:
(a) Monitoring of the water quality level of the River Uruguay in relation to all the parame-ters laid down in the CARU Digest on the Uses of the River Uruguay, including monitoring of all the parameters established by the pollution control programme (PROCON);
(b) Monitoring of existing hydrodynamic conditions in the River Uruguay;
(c) Monitoring of other environmental matrices (in addition to water) that are currently not covered by the regulations approved by CARU, and for which it is deemed desirable to adopt pa-rameters with standards concerning the target level of quality of the aquatic environment of the River Uruguay;
(d) Monitoring, outside the premises of the Orion (UPM, formerly Botnia) Mill, of air quality conditions which may facilitate understanding of the effects of gaseous emissions on the aquatic environment of the River Uruguay.
The assessments to be made shall include the use of sensors, and all other scientific and tech-nological innovations which the States Parties deem necessary for the monitoring of liquid efflu-ents and gaseous emissions that might enter the River Uruguay.
The information obtained from this monitoring shall be made public, taking into account sci-entific time frames.
In the context of the preparatory activities for this monitoring plan, the Scientific Commit-tee may carry out activities to learn more about the areas on which its activities will subsequently be focused.
4. MONITORING OF THE CONFLUENCE OF THE RIVER GUALEGUAYCHU WITH THE RIVER URUGUAY
Monitoring in this area shall consist of two sets of activities: on the one hand, those on the River Uruguay (to be conducted by CARU) and, on the other hand, those on the River Gualeguaychu in an area near the confluence between this river and the River Uruguay, at a dis-tance deemed by the Scientific Committee to be sufficiently far from that point to enable it to ade-quately assess the water quality of the River Gualeguaychu. These activities shall be under the op-erational responsibility of the appropriate implementing authority of the Argentine Republic, with CARU, through its Scientific Committee, as a participant.
The objectives of the CARU monitoring plan are:
1. To assess, on an ongoing basis, the environmental conditions in the aquatic environment of the River Uruguay in the zone potentially affected by the confluence of the River Gualeguaychu, in order to determine whether any changes have occurred in the quality levels of the aquatic envi-ronment of the River Uruguay as established by CARU;
2. To ensure that the discharge from the River Gualeguaychu, regarded as effluent at the point of confluence, complies with CARU regulations and the regulations implemented by Argen-tina in its jurisdiction with a view to protecting and preserving the aquatic environment by prevent-ing pollution;
3. To provide early warning of cases of deviation from the applicable standards concerning either the conditions of the River Gualeguaychu or the conditions resulting therefrom in the River Uruguay, in order to enable the competent authorities to take appropriate action.
It is initially foreseen that the scope of activity of the Scientific Committee may include:
(a) Monitoring the water quality level of the River Uruguay in relation to all the parameters laid down in the CARU Digest on the Uses of the "River Uruguay", including the monitoring of all the parameters established by the Pollution Control Programme (PROCON);
(b) Monitoring the quality conditions of the River Gualeguaychu in relation to all the parame-ters laid down in the applicable CARU and Argentine regulations and any regulations which the Scientific Committee may suggest to CARU as appropriate for inclusion in future Commission regulations;
(c) Monitoring the existing hydrodynamic conditions in the River Uruguay and in the dis-charge from the River Gualeguaychu;
(d) Monitoring other environmental matrices (in addition to water) that are currently not cov-ered by the regulations approved by CARU, and for which it is deemed desirable to adopt parame-ters with standards concerning the target quality level of the aquatic environment of the River Uru-guay.
The Scientific Committee shall submit a plan to CARU covering the elements mentioned in section 2.2 (Tasks), with the aim of assessing the discharge from the River Gualeguaychu at the point of confluence with the River Uruguay. This plan shall be adjusted as necessary as the work progresses.
For the purpose of monitoring the confluence of the River Gualeguaychu with the River Uru-guay, the Scientific Committee shall visit the River Gualeguaychu, accompanying the implement-ing authority of the Argentine Republic, to effect assessments and take samples from the river, in accordance with the procedure described in the Olivos Presidential Agreement. Under this proce-dure, the Argentine implementing authority shall take duplicate samples, one of which shall be submitted immediately to the CARU Scientific Committee. The Scientific Committee may make up to twelve (12) inspection visits a year to the River Gualeguaychu for monitoring purposes.
The assessments to be made shall include the use of sensors and all other scientific and tech-nological innovations which the Parties deem necessary for monitoring the discharge into the River Uruguay.
The information obtained from this monitoring shall be made public, taking into account sci-entific time frames.
In the context of the preparatory activities for this monitoring plan, the Scientific Commit-tee may carry out activities to learn more about the areas in which its interventions will subse-quently be focused.
All the monitoring activities and modalities described in detail shall continue to be carried out without interruption unless CARU decides, at its discretion, to suspend any of them.
5. MONITORING OF ALL INDUSTRIAL AND AGRICULTURAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND URBAN CENTRES DISCHARGING EFFLUENT INTO THE RIVER URUGUAY AND THE AREAS AFFECTED BY IT
CARU intends to establish specific plans for sectors of the River Uruguay, including industrial and agricultural establishments and urban centres discharging significant amounts of discharges in-to the River Uruguay, as well as the effluents of the River Uruguay at the points of confluence.
Work will begin at a sector of the River, selected by Uruguay Party, where there is a signifi-cant discharge on the Argentine bank, and will continue alternately at sectors chosen by each of the Parties.
The objectives of each one of these specific monitoring plans shall be:
1. To attend to the ongoing assessment of the existing environmental conditions in the aquat-ic environment of the River Uruguay in the zones potentially affected by the discharge of liquid ef-fluents and gaseous emissions that might enter the River Uruguay from all establishments discharg-ing effluents into the River Uruguay and the areas potentially affected by it, in order to determine whether any changes have occurred in the quality levels of the aquatic environment as established by CARU;
2. To verify that the discharges of the aforementioned effluents comply with CARU regula-tions and the regulations implemented by the Parties in their respective jurisdiction with a view to protecting and preserving the aquatic environment by preventing its pollution. This activity shall include the analysis of samples of liquid effluents and gaseous emissions that might enter the River Uruguay and interpretation of the results;
3. To provide early warning in cases of deviations from the applicable standards concerning either the conditions of the effluents or those resulting therefrom in the River Uruguay, in order to enable the competent authorities to take appropriate action.
For this purpose, it is initially foreseen that, in each of the cases or sectors of the river, the scope of actions by the Scientific Committee may include:
(a) Monitoring the water quality of the River Uruguay in relation to all the parameters laid down in the CARU Digest;
(b) Monitoring the water quality of the River Uruguay, including as a minimum the monitor-ing of all the parameters established by the Pollution Control Programme (PROCON);
(c) Monitoring the condition of the above-mentioned effluents in relation to all the parame-ters laid down in the applicable CARU and Party regulations and any regulations which the Scien-tific Committee may suggest to CARU as appropriate for inclusion in future Commission regula-tions;
(d) Continuously monitoring the hydrodynamic conditions in the River Uruguay and the flows of effluents and those that might enter the River Uruguay;
(e) Monitoring air quality conditions which may facilitate the understanding of the effects of gaseous emissions from establishments on the River Uruguay;
(f) Monitoring other environmental matrices (in addition to water) that are currently not covered by the regulations approved by CARU, and for which it is deemed desirable to adopt parameters
with their standards concerning the quality target level of the aquatic environment of the River Uruguay to be achieved.
6. MONITORING THE WATER QUALITY OF THE RIVER URUGUAY
This activity includes a Plan for Pollution Control and Prevention in the segment of the River Uruguay which is shared between the Argentine Republic and the Eastern Republic of Uruguay.
The Scientific Committee shall be requested to submit to CARU a draft plan that provides for:
1. The provision to CARU of ongoing assessments of the current situation of the aquatic en-vironment of the River Uruguay, identifying existing and potential pollution problems;
2. The implementation of environmental targets for the River Uruguay and actions for the achievement and periodic adjustment of those targets;
3. The collection of relevant information and results for the prevention and mitigation of en-vironmental problems in the River Uruguay and in the areas affected by it;
4. The linkage with other monitoring activities conducted by CARU, the interpretation of the results they yield and the provision of guidance on the selection of zones, establishments or efflu-ents to be included in CARU's monitoring activities;
5. The compilation of an inventory of pollutants in the River Uruguay, to provide CARU with the information needed to determine precisely the flows of pollutants entering the River Uru-guay in the section defined as the "River" in the Statute of the River Uruguay and leaving it at the Punta Gorda parallel.
In the preparation and implementation of the Monitoring Plan, the Scientific Committee should bear in mind that this Plan should:
1. Adopt a systemic approach;
2. Include biogeochemical assessments encompassing various environmental matrices, the carrying out of punctual sampling at variable intervals depending on the type of sample, and the in-stallation of instruments for measurements in situ;
3. Include implementation of a system for informing the public and users of the environmen-tal targets adopted by CARU, and of the desirability and necessity of preventing pollution and pre-serving and protecting the aquatic environment and its ecological balance;
4. Provide information on changes in the aquatic system and in the remedial and preserva-tion measures being taken;
5. Establish a basis for the implementation of ongoing research programmes on the River Uruguay and the areas affected by it.
Monitoring activities on the River Uruguay shall be carried out by CARU, in compliance with its rules. This body shall have operational responsibility for the implementation of the activities, using contractual arrangements in line with its usual practice to date.
7. COMMON PROVISIONS
All monitoring-related activities shall continue to be carried out without interruption, unless CARU decides to suspend any of them.
In parallel with the monitoring activities and based on the conclusions of the Scientific Com-mittee, CARU shall update "Section E3 Pollution" of the Digest on the Uses of the "River Uru-guay".
To best achieve the agreed targets, the Parties shall provide CARU, for use by the Scientific Committee, with the information available to them or which they can obtain through their compe-tent agencies, and which may prove necessary for the effective conduct of studies and research."
Should the foregoing provisions be acceptable to the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, this Note, together with your Note in reply, conveying your acceptance, shall constitute an agreement be-tween the two Governments, which shall enter into force on the date of your Note in reply.
Accept, Sir, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
HECTOR TIMERMAN
Mr. Luis Almagro Lemes
Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay
Montevideo
NOTE II
Eastern Republic of Uruguay
Montevideo, 30 August 2010
Sir,
I have the honour to refer to your Note of today's date, the text of which reads as follows:
[See note I]
In this connection, I have the pleasure to confirm, on behalf of my Government, that the above-mentioned Note is acceptable to the Government of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay and that your Note and this reply shall constitute an Agreement in this regard, which shall enter into force on today's date.
Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest consideration.
LUIS ALMAGRO LEMES
Minister of Foreign Affairs
H. E. Mr. Hector Marcos Timerman
Minister of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship
of the Argentine Republic
