1
TRADE AGREEMENT
Between the Government of the Republic of Armenia and the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Iran
Preamble
The Government of the Republic of Armenia and the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Considering their mutual interest in strengthening and developing of trade
ties and expanding and diversifying of cooperation based on equality, nondiscrimination and maintenance of mutual interests,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Scope of the Agreement
Commercial exchanges between the Parties and contracts concluded
between natural and juridical persons of the two countries shall be carried out
within the framework of the present Agreement and in conformity with the
governing laws and regulations of each Party.
Article 2
Re-exportation to a third party
Commodities/Goods exchanged under the present Agreement between the
two Parties might be, with the consent of the exporting Party, re-exported to third
countries.
Article 3
The issuance of the certificate of origin
Each Party shall in accordance with its laws and regulations, take proper
measures to issue certificates of origin for commodities/goods exported to the other
Party. For this purpose, the commodities entirely produced and manufactured in
Armenia shall be regarded as Armenian product.
Article 4
Customs duties and charges
Within the framework of this Agreement and subject to the existing law and
regulations in each of the two countries, both Parties agreed to make their utmost
efforts for the facilitation and promotion of mutual trade relations.
2
Custom duties and taxes levied by either Party on the products of the other
Party shall not be in excess of the amounts applied to similar products of other
countries.
Article 5
Privileges
The facilities granted on the basis of this Agreement will not include the
following:
a) The privileges which one of the parties has granted or will grant to a
neighboring country in order to facilitate the creation of the border trade.
b) The privileges which are granted or will be granted to a country in the
free trade zone, customs unions or in the regional agreements.
Article 6
Taxes
The Parties agreed not to enact new or stricter regulations on taxes, customs
duties, and other, owning dues on imports & exports, unless the following
conditions ate met;
- promulgation and exchange of the regulations by authorized bodies;
- expiration of three months from the date of the official information;
- prior arrangements for hearing of the complaints on taxes and customs.
Article 7
Non-tariff measures
The Parties in order to develop mutual commercial relations have agreed to
reduce or eliminate the non-tariff obstacles or to the appendix which will be
negotiated between the two Parties.
Article 8
System of currency, receipt and payment
All receipt and payment in foreign currency arisen from the application of
the present Agreement and settlement of accounts shall be in the currency agreed
upon between the Parties according to subsidiary agreements concluded by the
central banks of the Parties.
Article 9
Participation in fairs
3
Each Party shall encourage its commercial companies and institutions to
participate in international or specific fairs held in the territory of the other Party
and shall as far as possible provide the commercial companies and institutions of
the other Party with the necessary facilities.
Any enactment and collection or exemption of customs duties, taxes and
other owning dues regarding the exports of either Party entered into the territory of
the other Party for exhibition or fair-related purposes shall be in accordance with
Facilities for the Importation of Goods for Display or use at Exhibition Fairs,
Meetings or similar Events, Done at Brussels on 8 June 1961.
Article 10
Establishment of trade representation
In order to facilitate and develop the exchange of commodities/goods,
services and trade information between the Parties each Party shall permit the other
Party to establish a trade representation in its territory, The number of employees
and the equipment and branches of the said office or center shall be determined
through the future agreement of the Parties.
Article 11
Expansion and diversification of commercial relations
The Parties in order to develop commercial relations shall encourage their
natural and juridical persons to implement international trade regulations,
encourage their Chambers of Commerce to maintain close and effective
cooperation, exchange of commercial delegations, and convenience of specialized
seminars and conferences.
Article 12
Joint commission
The Parties agreed to establish a joint commission consisting of their
representatives, which shall hold session annually, and alternately in the territory of
each Party.
The functions/duties of the commission shall be as follows:
a) supervision of the good performance of this agreement;
b) presentation of solutions for elimination of difficulties which might arise
from the performance of this agreement;
c) review and study of ways to increase and diversify mutual trade and
presentation of executive recommendations in this connection to the Parties.
Article 13
Settlement of disputes
4
In framework of this Agreement the disputes arisen between the Parties
could be solved by friendly negotiations and consultations. In case of disagreement
it should be solved by an arbitration tribunal which shall be formed by the
representatives of both Parties, according to the legislation of Parties and
regulations accepted in the international practice.
Article 14
Protection of public health and national interests
The provisions of the present Agreement shall not confine the rights of each
party as for the imposition of any banning or restriction with regard to the
protection of national interests, public health and/or prevention of diseases and
animal or plant pests.
Article 15
Duration of the validity of the Agreement
The present Agreement shall come into force from the date of the last
notification by one of the Parties to the other, indicating that it has complied with
its constitutional requirements for entry into force of the present Agreement, and
shall remain in force for a period of 5 years. After the expiration of this period the
present Agreement shall be extended for one year periods unless either Party
notifies the other in writing six months prior to termination of this period that it
does not intend to extend the Agreement.
Upon termination of the validity of this Agreement, its provisions with
regard to the contracts accordingly signed and are being executed shall be valid for
one year after the termination of this Agreement at the latest, unless the Parties
agree otherwise.
Done in one preamble and 15 Articles on 74.2.16 day of 6 May 1995 in two
copies and three languages in Armenian, Persian and English all three texts being
equally authentic.
In case of divergent interpretation the English text shall prevail.

