EXCHANGE OF NOTES ACCEPTING THE PROTOCOL SIGNED AT KIGOMA,
ON 5 AUGUST 1924, RELATIVE TO THE TANGANYIKA-RUANDA-URUNDI
FRONTIER. BRUSSELS, 17 MAY 1926



No. 1 - The British Ambassador at Brussels to the Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs


Brussels, 17 May 1926


Monsieur le Ministre,

I have the honour, under instructions from His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, to convey to Your Excellency by the present note the formal acceptance by His Majesty's Government of the Protocol signed at Kigoma on 5 August 1924, with its accompanying maps, as defining the boundary between Tanganyika territory and the Belgian mandated territory of Ruanda-Urundi.

I am at the same time instructed to draw the attention of the Belgian Government to paragraph 51 of the Protocol in question and to invite them to agree that, notwithstanding the new boundary in Lake Tanganyika which is defined by the said paragraph, all customary rights of fishing and passage exercised by natives living on either side of it should be preserved, but that, at the same time, even with regard to the rights of fishing and passage, the respective Governments should preserve their common law rights and should not, for instance, be debarred from levying a fishing tax on all persons alike who use their territorial waters.

I should be grateful if Your Excellency would be good enough to confirm to me that the Belgian Government is in agreement with His Majesty's Government with regard to the arrangements indicated in the preceding paragraph.

I avail myself of this opportunity, etc.



No. 2 - The Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador at Brussels

Brussels, 17 May 1926

Your Excellency,

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of today's date, in which you are good enough to inform the Royal Government that His Britannic Majesty's Government accepts the Protocol signed at Kigoma on August 5, 1924, with its accompanying maps, as defining the boundary between Tanganyika Territory and the Belgian mandated territory of Ruanda-Urundi.

The Belgian Government also approves these documents.

At the same time you draw the attention of the Belgian Government to paragraph 51 of the Protocol in question and invite them to agree that, notwithstanding the new boundary in Lake Tanganyika which is defined by the said paragraph, all customary rights of fishing and passage exercised by natives living on either side of it should be preserved, but that at the same time, even with regard to the rights of fishing and passage, the respective Governments should preserve their common law rights and should not, for instance, be debarred from levying a fishing tax on all persons alike who use their territorial waters.

The Belgian Government has the honour to confirm to Your Excellency that they are in agreement with His Britannic Majesty's Government with regard to these arrangements.

I have the honour to be, etc.

