Dt. 22/03/2006 Page 1 of 3
TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH
The Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh,
Being conscious of the urge of their two peoples to enlarge areas of
mutual co-operation;
 Desirous of expanding trade and strengthening economic relations
between the two countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit;
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
 The two Governments recognizing the need and requirement of each
other in the context of their developing economies undertake to explore all
possibilities, including economic and technical cooperation, for promotion,
facilitation, expansion and diversification of trade between the two countries on
the basis of equality and mutual benefit.
Article II
 The two Governments agree to take appropriate measures in
accordance with the evolving international trading system for mutual benefit of
developing countries and least developed countries in so far as such
measures are consistent with their individual, present and future development,
financial and trade facilitation.
Article III
 The two Governments agree that expansion of their mutual trade
exchanges would make an important contribution towards their development.
To this end, they agree to take appropriate and special measures during
periodic reviews taking into account the asymmetries between the two
countries with a view to augmenting and diversifying their mutual trade
specially in respect of specific products as may be agreed upon.
Article IV
 All payments and charges in connection with trade between the two
countries shall continue to be effected in freely convertible currencies in
accordance with the foreign exchange regulations in force in each country
from time to time.
Article V
 Imports and exports of commodities and goods produced or
manufactured in India or Bangladesh, as the case may be, shall be permitted
in accordance with the import, export and foreign exchange laws, regulations 
Dt. 22/03/2006 Page 2 of 3
and procedures in force in either country from time to time taking into account
asymmetries between the two countries.
Article VI
 Each Government shall accord to the commerce of the country of the
other Government, treatment no less than that accorded to the commerce of
any third country.
Article VII
 The provisions of Article VI shall not prevent the grant or continuance
of:-
a) Privileges which are or may be granted by either of the two
Governments in order to facilitate frontier trade by separate agreement(s);
b) Advantages and privileges which are or may be granted by either
of the respective neighbouring countries;
c) Advantages resulting from any customs union, a free trade area
or similar arrangements which either of the two Governments has concluded
or may conclude in the future.
d) Advantages or preferences accorded under any scheme for
expansion of trade and economic cooperation among developing countries,
which is open for participation by all developing countries, and to which either
of the two Governments is or may become a party.
Article VIII
 The two Governments agree to make mutually beneficial arrangements
for the use of their waterways, roadways and railways for commerce between
the two countries for passage of goods between two places in one country
through the territory of the other.
Article IX
 Each Government will grant merchant vessels of the other country while
entering, putting off and lying at its ports the most-favoured-nation treatment
accorded by their respective laws, rules and regulations to the vessels under
the flag of any third country.
 Both the Governments agree on the basis of shipper’s preference, to
utilize to the maximum extent possible, the vessels owned/chartered by
shipping organizations of the two countries concerned for shipping cargoes
imported or exported under this Agreement at competitive freight rates.
Article X
The two Governments agree to cooperate effectively with each other to
prevent infringement and circumvention of the laws, rules and regulations of
either country in regard to matters relating to foreign exchange and foreign
trade. 
Dt. 22/03/2006 Page 3 of 3
Article XI
 The two Governments agree to accord, subject to their respective laws
and regulations, reasonable facilities for the holding of trade fairs and
exhibitions and visits of business and trade delegations sponsored by the
Government concerned.
Article XII
 In order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement, the two
Governments shall consult each other at least once in a year or earlier as and
when necessary, and shall review the working of the Agreement with special
attention to the asymmetries between the two countries.

Article XIII
 This amended Agreement shall come into force on the 1st April, 2006.
It shall remain in force for a period of three years. It may be extended by a
further period of three years by mutual consent subject to such modifications
as may be agreed upon.

Done in New Delhi, on the 21st March, 2006, in two original copies, each in
Hindi, Bangla and English, all the texts being equally authentic. In case of
difference, the English text shall prevail.
 (Kamal Nath) (M. Saifur Rahman)
Minister of Commerce and Industry Minister for Finance & Planning
Government of the Republic of India Government of People’s
 Republic of Bangladesh 