FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA AND THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

PREAMBLE

The Republic of Latvia and the Republic of Bulgaria (hereinafter called the Contracting Parties),

Reaffirming their commitment to the principles of market economy, which constitutes the basis for their relations,

Considering their common desire to participate actively in the process of international economic integration,

Expressing their readiness to co-operate in finding the means and ways for strengthening of this process;

Considering the rights and obligations arising out of the Europe Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Latvia, of the other part, and the Europe Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Bulgaria, of the other part,

Resolved to this end to eliminate progressively the obstacles to substantially all their mutual trade, in accordance with the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1994) and the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO),

Convinced that this Agreement will create a new climate for their economic relations and, in particular, for the development of trade, investments and economic and technical co-operation,

Firmly decided that this Agreement will promote the intensification of mutually beneficial trade between them and will contribute to the process of integration in Europe;

Considering that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting the Parties from their obligations under other international agreements, especially the Agreement establishing the WTO,

Recalling their firm commitment to the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, the Paris Charter, and, in particular, the principles contained in the final document of the Bonn Conference on Economic Co-operation in Europe,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

Objectives

1. The Contracting Parties shall establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of the present Agreement and in conformity with those of the GATT 1994, in particular Article XXIV of the GATT 1994, and the Agreement establishing the WTO.

2. The objectives of the present Agreement are:

(a) to promote through the expansion of mutual trade the harmonious development of economic relations between the Contracting Parties and thus to foster the advance of economic activity in the Contracting Parties, the improvement of living and employment conditions and increased productivity and financial stability.

(b) to ensure fair conditions of competition in the trade between the Contracting Parties,

(c) to contribute in this way, by removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious development and expansion of the world trade,

(d) to enhance the co-operation between the Contracting Parties.

 

Chapter I

Industrial Products

Article 2

Scope

1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the industrial products originating in one of the Contracting Parties.

2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "industrial products" means products falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, with the exception of the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.

Article 3

Customs duties on imports

1. Customs duties on imports applied in the Republic of Bulgaria to products originating in the Republic of Latvia shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. Customs duties on imports applied in the Republic of Latvia to products originating in the Republic of Bulgaria shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

3. No new customs duties on imports shall be introduced in the trade between the Contracting Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 4

Charges having equivalent effect to import duties

1. No new charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on imports shall be introduced in the trade between the Contracting Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. All charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on imports shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 5

Fiscal duties

The provisions of Article 3 shall also be applied to customs duties of a fiscal nature.

Article 6

Customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect

1. No new customs duties on exports or charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on exports shall be introduced in the trade between the Contracting Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. All customs duties on exports and charges having an effect equivalent to customs duties on exports shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 7

Quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect

1. No new quantitative restrictions on exports or measures having equivalent effect shall be introduced in the trade between the Contracting Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. All quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect on exports of products originating in the Contracting Parties shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 8

Quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect

1. No new quantitative restrictions on imports or measures having equivalent effect shall be introduced in the trade between the Contracting Parties from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

2. All quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect on imports of products originating in the Contracting Parties shall be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 9

Technical barriers to trade

1. The rights and obligations of the Contracting Parties related to standards or technical regulations and the respective measures shall be stipulated as governed by the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade of the WTO.

2. The Contracting Parties shall cooperate and exchange information in the field of standardization, metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation, with the aim of reducing technical barriers to trade.

 

Chapter II

Agricultural products

Article 10

Scope

1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products originating in one of the Contracting Parties.

2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "agricultural products" means products falling within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, including the products listed in Annex I to this Agreement.

Article 11

Exchange of concessions

1. The Contracting Parties grant each other the concessions, specified in Protocol 1 in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and those laid down in this Protocol.

2. The Contracting Parties declare their readiness to foster, in so far as their agricultural policies allow, the harmonious development of trade in agricultural products and to discuss this issue periodically within the Joint Committee.

Taking account of:

- the role of agriculture in their economies,

- the development of trade in agricultural products between the Contracting Parties,

- the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products,

- the rules of their agricultural policies,

- the results of the multilateral trade negotiations under the GATT and of the WTO,

the Contracting Parties shall examine within the framework of the Joint Committee the possibilities of granting each other further concessions.

Article 12

Concessions and agricultural policies

1. Without prejudice to the concessions granted under Protocol 1 to this Agreement, the provisions of this Chapter shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective agricultural policies of the Contracting Parties or taking of any measures under such policies, including the implementation of the respective provisions of the Agreement on Agriculture within the framework of the WTO and the Agreement establishing the WTO.

2. The Contracting Parties shall notify each other through the Joint Committee of changes in their respective agricultural policies pursued or measures applied which may affect the conditions of agricultural trade among them as provided for in this Agreement. Prompt consultations shall be held, upon request of any Contracting Party, to examine the situation.

Article 13

Specific safeguards

Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement and, in particular, Article 26 (General safeguards), if, given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, imports of products originating in a Contracting Party, which are subject to concessions granted under this Agreement, cause serious disturbance to the markets of the other Contracting Party, the Contracting Party concerned shall immediately enter into consultations to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Contracting Party concerned may take the measures it deems necessary.

Article 14

Veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary measures

1. The Contracting Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, sanitary and phytosanitary matters in a non-discriminatory fashion and shall not introduce any new measures that have the effect of unduly obstructing trade.

2. The veterinary and sanitary measures and the work of the veterinary services will be in accordance with international conventions in this field.

3. The phytosanitary measures and the work of the plant protection service will be in accordance with international conventions in this field.

 

Chapter III

General Provisions

Article 15

Rules of origin and co-operation in customs administration

1. Protocol 2 to this Agreement lays down the rules of origin and related methods of administrative co-operation.

2. The Contracting Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews in the Joint Committee and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the provisions of Protocol 2 and Articles 3 (Customs duties on imports) to 8 (Quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect), 12 (Concessions and agricultural policies), 16 (Internal taxation) and 27 (Structural adjustment) of the Agreement are effectively and harmoniously applied, and to reduce, as far as possible, the formalities imposed on trade, as well as to achieve mutually satisfactory for both Contracting Parties solutions to any difficulties arising from the operation of those provisions.

3. The mutual assistance between administrative authorities in customs matters shall take place in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 3 to this Agreement.

Article 16

Internal taxation

1. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products originating in the Contracting Parties.

2. Products exported to the territory of one of the Contracting Parties may not benefit from repayment of internal taxation in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxation imposed on them.

Article 17

General exceptions

This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on the imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public order or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals and plants; the protection of environment; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; the protection of the intellectual property or the rules relating to gold or silver or the conservation of exhaustible natural resources, if such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on the trade between the Contracting Parties.

Article 18

Security exceptions

Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking any measure which it considers necessary:

1. to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;

2. for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of international obligations or national policies:

(a) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or

(b) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or

(c) taken in time of war or other serious international tension, constituting threat of war.

Article 19

State monopolies

1. The Contracting Parties shall adjust progressively any State monopoly of a commercial character so as to ensure that by the end of the year following the entry into force of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals of the Contracting Parties. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to implement this objective.

2. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any body through which the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly supervise, determine or appreciably influence imports or exports between the Contracting Parties. These provisions shall likewise apply to monopolies delegated by a Contracting Party to other bodies.

Article 20

Payments

1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to trade in goods between the Contracting Parties and the transfer of such payments to the territory of the Contracting Party to this Agreement, where the creditor resides, shall be free from any restrictions.

2. The Contracting Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the grant, repayment or acceptance of short and medium term credits related to trade in goods in which a resident of a Contracting Party participates.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, any measures concerning current payments connected with the movement of goods shall be in conformity with the conditions laid down under Article VIII of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund.

Article 21

Rules of competition concerning undertakings

1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement in so far as they may affect trade between the Contracting Parties:

(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;

(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the Contracting Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to the activities of all undertakings including public undertakings and undertakings to which the Contracting Parties grant special or exclusive rights. Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest or having the character of a revenue-producing monopoly, shall be subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 insofar as the application of these provisions does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular public tasks assigned to them.

3. With regard to products referred to in Chapter II the provisions stipulated in paragraph 1 (a) shall not apply to such agreements, decisions and practices which form an integral part of a national market organization.

4. If a Contracting Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Contracting Party or material injury to its domestic industry, the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 30 (Procedure for the application of safeguard measures).

Article 22

State Aid

1. Any aid granted by a State being a Contracting Party to this Agreement or through State resources in any form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods shall, in so far as it may affect trade between the Contracting Parties, be incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to products referred to in Chapter II.

3. ?he criteria on the basis of which the practices contrary to paragraph 1 shall be assessed, as well as the rules for their implementation, have to be compatible with the respective criteria applied within the European Union and the implementing rules agreed between each of the Contracting Parties and the European Union.

4. The Contracting Parties shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid measures, inter alia by reporting annually to the Joint Committee on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given and by providing to the other Contracting Party, upon request, information on aid schemes and on particular individual cases of state aid.

5. If a Contracting Party considers that a particular practice:

- is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1, or

- causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of that Contracting Party or material injury to its domestic industry,

it may take appropriate measures under the conditions of and in accordance with the provisions laid down in Article 30 (Procedure for the application of safeguard measures). Such appropriate measures may only be taken in conformity with the procedures and under the conditions laid down by the GATT 1994 and by the Agreement establishing the WTO and any other relevant instruments negotiated under the auspices of the WTO which are applicable between the Contracting Parties.

Article 23

Public procurement

1. The Contracting Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement markets as an objective of this Agreement. The Contracting Parties aim at opening up of the award of public contracts on the basis of non-discrimination and reciprocity.

2. The Contracting Parties will progressively develop their respective rules, conditions and practices on public procurement and shall grant suppliers of the other Contracting Party access to contract award procedures on their respective public procurement markets not less favourable than that accorded to companies of any third country.

3. The Contracting Parties to this Agreement shall endeavour to acceed to the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement.

Article 24

Protection of intellectual property

1. The Contracting Parties confirm their will to respect the obligations arising from the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, constituting Annex Ic to the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the WTO, as well as other conventions on intellectual property protection, which are signed by both Contracting Parties, and listed in Annex II to this Agreement.

2. For the purpose of this Agreement the term "intellectual property" refers to all categories of intellectual property such as: copyright and related rights, trademarks, geographical indications including appellations of origin, industrial designs and models, patents, lay-out designs of integrated circuits and undisclosed information including trade secrets.

3. In fulfilment of their commitments under international agreements and legislation in the field of intellectual property rights, the Contracting Parties to this Agreement shall not grant to nationals of the state of the other Contracting Party treatment less favourable than that accorded to nationals of any third state.

4. The Contracting Parties shall co-operate in matters of intellectual property. Upon request of a Contracting Party, they shall hold consultations of experts on these matters, in particular with respect to activities, relating to the existing or to future international conventions on the harmonization, administration and vindication of intellectual property rights, and on activities in international organizations, such as the WTO, World Intellectual Property Organization, as well as concerning the relations of the Contracting Parties with third countries with respect to the intellectual property matters.

5. The implementation of this article shall be regularly assessed by the Contracting Parties. Upon difficulties in trade in relation to the rights of intellectual property, any of the Contracting Parties may request urgent consultations for finding mutually acceptable solution.

Article 25

Dumping

If a Contracting Party to this Agreement finds that dumping within the meaning of Article VI of the GATT 1994 is taking place in the trade relations governed by this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures against that practice in accordance with Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994, and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 30 (Procedure for the application of safeguard measures).

Article 26

General safeguards

Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause:

(a) serious injury to the domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the territory of the importing Contracting Party, or

(b) serious disturbances in any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could cause serious deterioration in the economic situation of a region,

the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 30 (Procedure for the application of safeguard measures).

Article 27

Structural adjustment

1. Exceptional measures of a limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article 4 may be taken by any of the Contracting Parties in the form of increased customs duties.

2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important social problems.

3. Customs duties on imports applicable in the Contracting Party concerned to products originating in the other Party introduced by these measures may not exceed 25 % ad valorem and shall contain an element of preference for products originating in the other Contracting Party. The total value of imports of the products subject to these measures may not exceed 15% of the total imports of industrial products from the other Contracting Party as defined in Article 2 during the last year for which statistics are available.

4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding three consecutive years.

5. No such measures shall be introduced in respect of a product if more than three years have elapsed since the entry into force of this Agreement.

6. The Contracting Party concerned shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures it intends to take and, at the request of the other Contracting Party, consultations shall be held within the Joint Committee on such measures and the sectors to which they apply before their introduction. When taking such measures the Contracting Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the customs duties introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a phasing out of these duties starting at the latest one year after their introduction, at equal annual rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a different schedule.

Article 28

Re-export and serious shortage

1. Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 6 (Customs duties on exports and charges having equivalent effect) and 7 (Quantitative restrictions on exports and measures having equivalent effect) leads to:

(a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Contracting Party maintains for the product concerned quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or charges having equivalent effect; or

(b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Contracting Party;

and where the situations above referred give rise or are likely to give rise, to major difficulties for the exporting Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 30 (Procedure for the application of safeguard measures) .

2. Measures taken as a result of the situation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be eliminated when the conditions no longer justify their maintenance and in the case of the situation referred to in paragraph 1(b) shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner.

Article 29

Fulfilment of obligations

1. The Contracting Parties shall take all necessary measures required to fulfil their obligations under the Agreement. They shall ensure to it that the objectives set out in the Agreement are achieved.

2. If a Contracting Party considers that the other Contracting Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 30 (Procedure for the application of safeguard measures) .

Article 30

Procedure for the application of safeguard measures

1. Before initiating the procedure for application of safeguard measures set out in the following paragraphs of the present Article, the Contracting Parties shall endeavour to solve any differences between them through direct consultations.

2. If a Contracting Party subjects the imports of products liable to give rise to the situation referred to in Article 26 (General safeguards) to an administrative procedure, the purpose of which is the rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other Party.

3. Without prejudice to paragraph 7 of the present Article, a Contracting Party which considers resorting to safeguard measures shall promptly notify the other Contracting Party thereof and supply all relevant information. Consultations between the Contracting Parties shall take place without delay but not later than 30 days after requesting such consultations in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a mutually acceptable solution.

4. (a) As regards Articles 25 (Dumping), 26 (General safeguards) and 28 (Re-export and serious shortage) the Joint Committee shall examine the case or the situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to the difficulties notified by the Party concerned. In the case of the absence of such decision within thirty days of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the Contracting Party concerned may adopt the measures necessary in order to remedy the situation,

(b) As regards Article 29 (Fulfilment of obligations), the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures after the consultations have been concluded or after a period of three months has elapsed from the date of the first notification to the other Contracting Party,

(c) As regards Article 21 (Rules of competition concerning undertakings) and 22 (State aid), the Contracting Party concerned shall give the Joint Committee all the assistance required in order to examine the case and, where appropriate, eliminate the practice objected to. If the other Contracting Party fails to put an end to the practice objected to within the period fixed by the Joint Committee or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an agreement within thirty working days, of the matter being referred to it, the Contracting Party concerned may adopt the appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from the practice in question.

5. The safeguard measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee. They shall be limited with regard to their extent and to their duration to what is strictly necessary in order to rectify the situation giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury caused by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures that will least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.

6. The safeguard measures taken shall be the object of periodic consultations in the Joint Committee with a view to their relaxation as soon as possible or abolition when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.

7. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination impossible, the Contracting Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 25 (Dumping), 26 (General safeguards) and 28 (Re-export and serious shortage), apply forthwith the provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified without delay and consultations between the Contracting Parties shall take place as soon as possible in the Joint Committee.

Article 31

Balance of payments difficulties

1. The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures including measures relating to imports for balance of payments purposes.

2. Where one of the Contracting Parties is in serious balance of payments difficulties, or under imminent threat thereof, the Party concerned may, in accordance with the conditions established under the GATT 1994 and Article VIII of the IMF Agreement, adopt restrictive measures, including measures related to imports, which shall be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. The measures shall be progressively relaxed as balance of payments conditions improve and they shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The Contracting Party concerned shall inform the other Contracting Party forthwith of their introduction and, whenever practicable, of a time schedule for their removal.

Article 32

Customs unions, free trade areas and frontier trade

1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade to such an extent that these do not negatively affect the trade regime of the Contracting Parties and in particular the provisions concerning the rules of origin provided for in this Agreement.

2. Upon request, consultations between the Contracting Parties shall take place within the Joint Committee, in order the Contracting Parties to inform each other about any agreement establishing such customs union or free trade area.

 

Chapter IV

Institutional and final provisions

Article 33

The Joint Committee

1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Contracting Party shall be represented.

2. The Joint Committee shall be responsible for the administration of this Agreement and shall ensure its proper implementation.

3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall exchange information and, at the request of any Contracting Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the Contracting Parties.

4. The Joint Committee may, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 34 (Procedures of the Joint Committee), take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement. On other matters the Committee may make recommendations.

Article 34

Procedures of the Joint Committee

1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall meet whenever necessary but at least once a year. Each Contracting Party may request a meeting to be held.

2. The Joint Committee shall act by common agreement.

3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Contracting Party to this Agreement has accepted a decision subject to the fulfilment of internal legal requirements, the decision shall enter into force, if no later date is contained therein, on the first day of the second month following the receipt of a written notification as to the fulfilment by that Contracting Party of such requirements.

4. For the purpose of this Agreement the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure which shall, inter alia, contain provisions for convening meetings and for the designation of the Chairman and his term of office.

5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such subcommittees and working groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.

Article 35

Evolutionary clause

Where a Contracting Party considers that it would be useful in the interests of the economies of the Contracting Parties to develop and deepen the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Contracting Party. The Contracting Parties may instruct the Joint Committee to examine such a request and, where appropriate, to make recommendations, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.

Article 36

Amendments, Annexes and Protocols

1. Amendments to this Agreement other than those decided upon in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 34 and which are approved by the Joint Committee shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the receipt of the latter diplomatic note confirming that the internal legal requirements of each Contracing Party for their entry into force have been fulfilled.

2. Annexes and Protocols to this Agreement are an integral part of it.

3. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Annexes and Protocols, taking into account the procedure mentioned in paragraph 3 of Artcile 34.

Article 37

Validity and denunciation

1. This Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period of time.

2. Each Contracting Party to this Agreement may denounce this Agreement by means of a written notification to the other Contracting Party. The termination shall take effect on the first day of the sixth month following the date on which the notification was received by the other Contracting Party.

3. Both Contracting Parties agree that in the event of a Contracting Party to this Agreement becoming a member of the European Union, that Contracting Party will withdraw from this Agreement at the latest the day before membership takes effect, and without any compensation to the other Contracting Party.

Article 38

Entry into force

1. This Agreement is subject to ratification.

2. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date on which the Contracting Parties have notified each other through diplomatic channels that their internal legal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized thereto, have signed the present Agreement.

DONE at Riga this 16th day of October, 2002 in duplicate copies in the Latvian, Bulgarian and English languages, each of these texts being equally authentic. In case of divergences the English text shall prevail.

 

FOR THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA: FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA:

 

Kaspars Gerhards Lachezar Petkov

State Secretary Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary

Ministry of Economics Ambassador of the Republic

of Bulgaria in Poland

ANNEX TEXT:

Annex II

PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

(referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 24)

The multilateral Agreements mentioned in paragraph 1 of Article 24 are the following:

1. Paris Convention of 20 March 1883 for the Protection of Industrial Property (Stockholm Act, 1967 as amended in 1979);

2. Bern Convention of 9 September 1886 for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Paris Act, 1971);

3. International Convention of 26 October 1961 for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations (Rome Convention);

4. Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks (Stockholm Act, 1967 as amended 1979);

5. Budapest Treaty of the International Recognition of the Deposit of Micro-organisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure (1977, as amended in 1980);

6. Patent Co-operation Treaty (Washington 1970, amended in 1979 and modified in 1984);

7. Convention establishing the World Intellectual Property Organisation (Stockholm Act, 1967 as amended 1979);

8. Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against Unauthorized Duplication of Their Phonograms (Geneva 1971).

 

PROTOCOL 1

(referred to in Article 11)

EXCHANGE OF AGRICULTURAL CONCESSIONS BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA AND THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

Article 1

This Protocol shall apply to the products specified in Chapter II of the Agreement.

Article 2

The Republic of Latvia shall grant concessions for the agricultural products originating in the Republic of Bulgaria listed in Annex I to the level set out in this Annex and in compliance with the provisions of Protocol 2 on Rules of Origin of this Agreement. Customs duties on imports, applicable in the Republic of Latvia to products originating in the Republic of Bulgaria, listed in Annex I to this Protocol shall be abolished or reduced within the limits of tariff quotas, specified in this Annex, to the level set out in this Annex from the date of application of this Agreement.

Article 3

The Republic of Bulgaria shall grant concessions for the agricultural products originating in the Republic of Latvia listed in Annex II to the level set out in this Annex and in compliance with the provisions of Protocol 2 on Rules of Origin of this Agreement. Customs duties on imports, applicable in the Republic of Bulgaria to products originating in the Republic of Latvia, listed in Annex II to this Protocol shall be abolished or reduced within the limits of tariff quotas, specified in this Annex, to the level set out in this Annex from the date of application of this Agreement.

Article 4

1. Basic duties, agreed under this Protocol and the Annexes to it are the Most Favoured Nation duty rates applied at the time of actual importation. Customs duties referred to in this Protocol include ad valorem and specific customs duties.

2. If, after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reductions are applied on an erga omnes basis, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 1 as from the date when such reductions are applied.

Article 5

For products specified in the Annexes to this Protocol the Contracting Parties shall inform each other about any intention to increase the Most Favoured Nation duty rates in due time.

TITLE I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Protocol:

a) "manufacture" means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;

b) "material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the manufacture of the product;

c) "product" means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;

d) "goods" means both materials and products;

e) "customs value" means the value as determined in accordance with the 1994 Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);

f) "ex-works price" means the price paid for the product ex works to the manufacturer in the Contracting Party in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;

g) "value of materials" means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the Contracting Party;

h) "value of originating materials" means the value of such materials as defined in (g) applied mutatis mutandis;

i) "value added" shall be taken to be the ex works price minus the customs value of each of the materials incorporated which originate in the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 or, where the customs value is not known or can not be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the Contracting Party;

j) "chapters" and "headings" mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes) used in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as "the Harmonized System" or "HS";

k) "classified" refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular heading;

l) "consignment" means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;

m) "territories" includes territorial waters.

 

TITLE II

DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"

Article 2

General requirements

For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in a Contracting Party:

a) products wholly obtained in that Contracting Party within the meaning of Article 5;

b) products obtained in that Contracting Party incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in that Contracting Party within the meaning of Article 6.

Article 3

Cumulation in Bulgaria

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2, products shall be considered as originating in Bulgaria if such products are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in Bulgaria, the European Communities, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, Romania, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Slovenia, Iceland, Norway, Switzerland (incl. Liechtenstein)1 or Turkey in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on rules of origin annexed to the Agreements between Bulgaria and each of these countries, provided that the working or processing carried out in Bulgaria goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing.

2. Where the working or processing carried out in Bulgaria does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in Bulgaria only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used originating in any one of the other countries referred to in paragraph 1. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country which accounts for the highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in Bulgaria.

3. Products, originating in one of the countries referred to in paragraph 1, which do not undergo any working or processing in Bulgaria, retain their origin if exported into one of these countries.

4. The cumulation provided for in this Article may only be applied to materials and products which have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those given in this Protocol.

Article 4

Cumulation in Latvia

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2, products shall be considered as originating in Latvia if such products are obtained there, incorporating materials originating in Bulgaria, the European Communities, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, Romania, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Slovenia, Iceland, Norway, Switzerland (including Liechtenstein)1 or Turkey in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on rules of origin annexed to the Agreements between Latvia and each of these countries, provided that the working or processing carried out in Latvia goes beyond the operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing.

2. Where the working or processing carried out in Latvia does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in Latvia only where the value added there is greater than the value of the materials used originating in any one of the other countries referred to in paragraph 1. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in the country which accounts for the highest value of originating materials used in the manufacture in Latvia.

3. Products, originating in one of the countries referred to in paragraph 1, which do not undergo any working or processing in Latvia, retain their origin if exported into one of these countries.

4. The cumulation provided for in this Article may only be applied to materials and products which have acquired originating status by the application of rules of origin identical to those given in this Protocol.

Article 5

Wholly obtained products

1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in a Contracting Party:

a) mineral products extracted from its soil or from its seabed;

b) vegetable products harvested there;

c) live animals born and raised there;

d) products from live animals raised there;

e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;

f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the territorial waters of a Contracting Party by its vessels;

g) products made aboard its factory ships exclusively from products referred to in (f);

h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including used tyres fit only for retreading or for use as waste;

i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;

j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside its territorial waters provided that it has sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;

k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in (a) to (j).

2. The terms "its vessels" and "its factory ships" in paragraph 1(f) and (g) shall apply only to vessels and factory ships:

a) which are registered or recorded in a Contracting Party;

b) which sail under the flag of that Contracting Party;

c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50 per cent by nationals of that Contracting Party, or by a company with its head office in one of the Contracting Parties, of which the manager or managers, Chairman of the Board of Directors or the Supervisory Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are nationals of that Contracting Party and of which, in addition, in the case of partnerships or limited companies, at least half the capital belongs to that Contracting Party or to public bodies or nationals of that Contracting Party;

d) of which the master and officers are nationals of that Contracting Party; and

e) of which at least 75 per cent of the crew are nationals of that Contracting Party.

Article 6

Sufficiently worked or processed products

1. For the purposes of Article 2, products which are not wholly obtained are considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list in Annex II are fulfilled.

The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by the Agreement, the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. It follows that if a product, which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in the list, should not be used in the manufacture of a product may nevertheless be used, provided that:

a) their total value does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the product;

b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating materials are not exceeded through the application of this paragraph.

This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System.

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply subject to the provisions of Article 7.

Article 7

Insufficient working or processing

1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 6 are satisfied:

(a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during transport and storage;

(b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;

(c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;

(d) ironing or pressing of textiles;

(e) simple painting and polishing operations;

(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;

(g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;

(h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;

(i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;

(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching; (including the making-up of sets of articles);

(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards and all other simple packaging operations;

(l) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;

(m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds,

(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of products into parts;

(o) a combination of two or more operations specified in (a) to (n);

(p) slaughter of animals.

2. All operations carried out in the Contracting Parties on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.

Article 8

Unit of qualification

1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonized System.

It follows that:

a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonized System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification;

b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonized System, each product must be taken individually when applying the provisions of this Protocol.

2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonized System, packaging is included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.

Article 9

Accessories, spare parts and tools

Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.

Article 10

Sets

Sets, as defined in general rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded as originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15 per cent of the ex-works price of the set.

Article 11

Neutral elements

In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:

a) energy and fuel;

b) plant and equipment;

c) machines and tools;

d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product.

TITLE III

TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS

Article 12

Principle of territoriality

1. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4 and paragraph 3 of this Article, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Title II must be fulfilled without interruption in one of the Contracting Parties.

2. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4, where originating goods exported from one of the Contracting Parties to another country return, they must be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:

a) the returning goods are the same as those exported; and

b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.

3. The acquisition of originating status in accordance with the conditions set out in Title II shall not be affected by working or processing done outside the Contracting Parties on materials exported from one of the Contracting Parties and subsequently reimported there, provided:

a) the said materials are wholly obtained in one of the Contracting Parties or have undergone working or processing beyond the operations referred to in Article 7 prior to being exported; and

b) it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:

i) the reimported goods have been obtained by working or processing the exported materials; and

ii) the total added value acquired outside the Contracting Parties by applying the provisions of this Article does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the end product for which originating status is claimed.

4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Title II shall not apply to working or processing done outside the Contracting Parties. But where, in the list in Annex II, a rule setting a maximum value for all the non-originating materials incorporated is applied in determining the originating status of the end product, the total value of the non-originating materials incorporated in the territory of the Contracting Party concerned, taken together with the total added value acquired outside the Contracting Parties by applying the provisions of this Article, shall not exceed the stated percentage.

5. For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4, "total added value" shall be taken to mean all costs arising outside the Contracting Parties, including the value of the materials incorporated there.

6. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which do not fulfil the conditions set out in the list in Annex II or which can be considered sufficiently worked or processed only if the general tolerance fixed in Article 6(2) is applied.

7. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products of Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System.

8. Any working or processing of the kind covered by the provisions of this Article and done outside the Contracting Parties shall be done under the outward processing arrangements, or similar arrangements.

Article 13

Direct transport

1. The preferential treatment provided for under the Agreement applies only to products, satisfying the requirements of this Protocol, which are transported directly between the Contracting Parties or through the territories of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4. However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion arise, trans-shipment or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition.

Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of the Contracting Parties.

2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the customs authorities of the importing country by the production of:

a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting country through the country of transit; or

b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:

(i) giving an exact description of the products;

(ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable, the names of the ships, or the other means of transport used; and

(iii) certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or

c) failing these, any substantiating documents.

Article 14

Exhibitions

1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in a country other than those referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and sold after the exhibition for importation in a Contracting Party shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that :

a) an exporter has consigned these products from a Contracting Party to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;

b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in a Contracting Party;

c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and

d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.

2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.

3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organized for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs control.

 

TITLE IV

DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION

Article 15

Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties

1. Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in a Contracting Party or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 for which a proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V shall not be subject in that Contracting Party to drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.

2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund, remission or non-payment, partial or complete, of customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect, applicable in a Contracting Party to materials used in the manufacture, where such refund, remission or non-payment applies, expressly or in effect, when products obtained from the said materials are exported and not when they are retained for home use there.

3. The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit at any time, upon request from the customs authorities, all appropriate documents proving that no drawback has been obtained in respect of the non-originating materials used in the manufacture of the products concerned and that all customs duties or charges having equivalent effect applicable to such materials have actually been paid.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging within the meaning of Article 8 (2), accessories, spare parts and tools within the meaning of Article 9 and products in a set within the meaning of Article 10 when such items are non-originating.

5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials which are of the kind to which the Agreement applies. Furthermore, they shall not preclude the application of an export refund system for agricultural products, applicable upon export in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement.

 

TITLE V

PROOF OF ORIGIN

Article 16

General requirements

1.Products originating in a Contracting Party shall, on importation into the other Contracting Party benefit from the Agreement upon submission of either:

a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III; or

b) in the cases specified in Article 21(1), a declaration, subsequently referred to as the "invoice declaration", given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified. The text of the invoice declaration appears in Annex IV.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 26, benefit from the Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above.

Article 17

Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1

1. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting country on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorized representative.

2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorized representative shall fill out both the movement certificate EUR.1 and the application form, specimens of which appear in Annex III. These forms shall be completed in English, Bulgarian or Latvian languages and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.

3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country where the movement certificate EUR.1 is issued, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.

4. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of a Contracting Party if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in a Contracting Party or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol.

5. The customs authorities issuing movement certificate EUR.1 shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate. They shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.

6. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in Box 11 of the certificate.

7. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.

Article 18

Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively

1. Notwithstanding Article 17(7), a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:

a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or

b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate EUR.1 was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.

2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and state the reasons for his request.

3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the corresponding file.

4. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively must be endorsed with one of the following phrases:

"ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY"

"BPLFLTY D GJCKTLCNDBT"

"IZDOTS PC PREU EKSPORTA "

5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the movement certificate EUR.1.

Article 19

Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1

1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.

2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with one of the following words:

"DUPLICATE"

"LE<KBRFN"

" DUBLIKTS"

3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.

4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as from that date.

Article 20

Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin issued or made out previously

When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in a Contracting Party, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere within one of the Contracting Parties. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.

Article 20a

Accounting segregation

1. Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks of originating and non-originating materials which are identical and interchangeable, the customs authorities may, at the written request of those concerned, authorise the so-called "accounting segregation" method to be used for managing such stocks.

2. This method must be able to ensure that, for a specific reference-period, the number of products obtained which could be considered as "originating" is the same as that which would have been obtained if there had been physical segregation of the stocks.

3. The customs authorities may grant such authorisation, subject to any conditions deemed appropriate.

4. This method is recorded and applied on the basis of the general accounting principles applicable in the country where the product was manufactured.

5. The beneficiary of this facilitation may issue or apply for proofs of origin, as the case may be, for the quantity of products which may be considered as originating. At the request of the customs authorities, the beneficiary shall provide a statement of how the quantities have been managed.

6. The customs authorities shall monitor the use made of the authorisation and may withdraw it at any time whenever the beneficiary makes improper use of the authorisation in any manner whatsoever or fails to fulfil any of the other conditions laid down in this Protocol.

Article 21

Conditions for making out an invoice declaration

1. An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 16(1)(b) may be made out:

a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 22, or

b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products whose total value does not exceed EUR 6 000.

2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in a Contracting Party or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol.

3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.

4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV, using one of the linguistic versions set out in that Annex and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed characters.

5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 22 shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of the exporting country a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.

6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing country no longer than two years after the importation of the products to which it relates.

Article 22

Approved exporter

1. The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorize any exporter, hereinafter referred to as "approved exporter", who makes frequent shipments of products under this Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation must offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.

2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.

3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorization number which shall appear on the invoice declaration.

4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorization by the approved exporter.

5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorization at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, no longer fulfills the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorization.

Article 23

Validity of proof of origin

1. A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the exporting country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing country.

2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.

3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing country may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the said final date.

Article 24

Submission of proof of origin

Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement.

Article 25

Importation by instalments

Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of the importing country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or headings 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonized System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.

Article 26

Exemptions from proof of origin

1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, this declaration can be made on the customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.

2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.

3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the case of small packages or EUR 1 200 in the case of products forming part of travellers' personal luggage.

Article 27

Supporting documents

The documents referred to in Articles 17(3) and 21(3) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice declaration can be considered as products originating in a Contracting Party or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol may consist inter alia of the following:

a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal book-keeping;

b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in a Contracting Party where these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;

c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in a Contracting Party, issued or made out in a Contracting Party, where these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;

d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in a Contracting Party in accordance with this Protocol, or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 or 4, in accordance with rules of origin which are identical to the rules in this Protocol.

Article 28

Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents

1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the documents referred to in Article 17(3).

2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least three years a copy of this invoice declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 21(3).

3. The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the application form referred to in Article 17(2).

4. The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep for at least three years the movement certificates EUR.1 and the invoice declarations submitted to them.

Article 29

Discrepancies and formal errors

1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products submitted.

2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.

Article 30

Amounts expressed in euro

1. For the application of the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) and Article 26(3) in cases where products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the national currencies of the countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro shall be fixed annually by each of the countries concerned.

2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) or Article 26(3) by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the country concerned.

3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that currency of the amounts expressed in euro as at the first working day of October and shall apply from 1 January the following year. The Contracting Parties shall be notified of the relevant amounts.

4. A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its national currency of an amount expressed in euro. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5 per cent. A country may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, prior to any rounding-off, results in an increase of less than 15 per cent in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a decrease in that equivalent value.

5. The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee at the request of any of the Contracting Parties. When carrying out this review, the Joint Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in euro.

 

TITLE VI

ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION

Article 31

Mutual assistance

1. The customs authorities of the Contracting Parties shall provide each other with specimen impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of movement certificates EUR.1 and with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for verifying those certificates and invoice declarations.

2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the Contracting Parties shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.1 or the invoice declarations and the correctness of the information given in these documents.

Article 32

Verification of proofs of origin

1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.

2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs authorities of the importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of these documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.

3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting country. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.

4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.

5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in a Contracting Party or in one of the other countries referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfill the other requirements of this Protocol.

6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.

Article 33

Dispute settlement

Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 32 which cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification or where they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Joint Committee.

In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the importing country shall be under the legislation of the said Contracting Party.

Article 34

Penalties

Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for products.

Article 35

Free zones

1. The Contracting Parties shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products traded under cover of a proof of origin which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory, are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.

2. By means of an exemption to the provisions contained in paragraph 1, when products originating in a Contracting Party are imported into a free zone under cover of a proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned shall issue a new movement certificate EUR.1 at the exporter's request, if the treatment or processing undergone is in conformity with the provisions of this Protocol.

 

TITLE VII

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 36

Customs Sub-Committee

1. A Sub-Committee on customs and origin matters shall be set up under the Joint Committee to assist it in carrying out its duties and to ensure a continuous information and consultation processed between experts.

2. It shall be composed of experts from both Contracting Parties responsible for questions related to customs and origin matters.

Article 37

Amendments to the Protocol

The Joint Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this Protocol.

Article 38

Goods in transit or storage

The provisions of this Agreement may be applied to goods which comply with the provisions of this Protocol and which on the date of entry into force of this Agreement are either in transit or are in one of the Contracting Parties in temporary storage in bonded warehouses or in free zones, subject to the submission to the customs authorities of the importing Contracting Party, within four months of that date, of the certificate EUR.1 issued retrospectively by the competent authorities of the exporting Contracting Party together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly.

1 The Principality of Liechtenstein has a customs union with Switzerland, and is a Contracting Party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area

 

Annex I TO PROTOCOL 2

INTRODUCTORY NOTES TO THE LIST IN ANNEX II TO PROTOCOL 2

Note 1:

The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or processed within the meaning of Article 6 of the Protocol.

 

Note 2:

2.1. The first two columns in the list describe the product obtained. The first column gives the heading number or chapter number used in the Harmonized System and the second column gives the description of goods used in that system for that heading or chapter. For each entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in column 3 or 4. Where, in some cases, the entry in the first column is preceded by an "ex", this signifies that the rules in column 3 or 4 apply only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.

2.2. Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 1 or a chapter number is given and the description of products in column 2 is therefore given in general terms, the adjacent rules in column 3 or 4 apply to all products which, under the Harmonized System, are classified in headings of the chapter or in any of the headings grouped together in column 1.

2.3. Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within a heading, each indent contains the description of that part of the heading covered by the adjacent rules in column 3 or 4.

2.4. Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both columns 3 and 4, the exporter may opt, as an alternative, to apply either the rule set out in column 3 or that set out in column 4. If no origin rule is given in column 4, the rule set out in column 3 is to be applied.

 

Note 3:

3.1. The provisions of Article 6 of the Protocol, concerning products having acquired originating status which are used in the manufacture of other products, shall apply, regardless of whether this status has been acquired inside the factory where these products are used or in another factory in the Contracting Party.

 

Example:

An engine of heading 8407, for which the rule states that the value of the non-originating materials which may be incorporated may not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price, is made from "other alloy steel roughly shaped by forging" of heading ex 7224.

If this forging has been forged in the Contracting Party from a non-originating ingot, it has already acquired originating status by virtue of the rule for heading ex 7224 in the list. The forging can then count as originating in the value-calculation for the engine, regardless of whether it was produced in the same factory or in another factory in the Contracting Party. The value of the non-originating ingot is thus not taken into account when adding up the value of the non-originating materials used.

3.2. The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or processing required, and the carrying-out of more working or processing also confers originating status; conversely, the carrying-out of less working or processing cannot confer originating status. Thus, if a rule provides that non-originating material, at a certain level of manufacture, may be used, the use of such material at an earlier stage of manufacture is allowed, and the use of such material at a later stage is not.

3.3. Without prejudice to Note 3.2, where a rule uses the expression "Manufacture from materials of any heading", then materials of any heading(s) (even materials of the same description and heading as the product) may be used, subject, however, to any specific limitations which may also be contained in the rule.

However, the expression "Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading ..." or "Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of the same heading as the product" means that materials of any heading(s) may be used, except those of the same description as the product as given in column 2 of the list.

3.4. When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufactured from more than one material, this means that one or more materials may be used. It does not require that all be used.

 

Example:

The rule for fabrics of headings 5208 to 5212 provides that natural fibres may be used and that chemical materials, among other materials, may also be used. This does not mean that both have to be used; it is possible to use one or the other, or both.

3.5. Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a particular material, the condition obviously does not prevent the use of other materials which, because of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See also Note 6.2 below in relation to textiles).

 

Example:

The rule for prepared foods of heading 1904, which specifically excludes the use of cereals and their derivatives, does not prevent the use of mineral salts, chemicals and other additives which are not products from cereals.

However, this does not apply to products which, although they cannot be manufactured from the particular materials specified in the list, can be produced from a material of the same nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.

 

Example:

In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made from non-woven materials, if the use of only non-originating yarn is allowed for this class of article, it is not possible to start from non-woven cloth - even if non-woven cloths cannot normally be made from yarn. In such cases, the starting material would normally be at the stage before yarn - that is, the fibre stage.

3.6. Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the maximum value of non-originating materials that can be used, then these percentages may not be added together. In other words, the maximum value of all the non-originating materials used may never exceed the higher of the percentages given. Furthermore, the individual percentages must not be exceeded, in relation to the particular materials to which they apply.

 

Note 4:

4.1. The term "natural fibres" is used in the list to refer to fibres other than artificial or synthetic fibres. It is restricted to the stages before spinning takes place, including waste, and, unless otherwise specified, includes fibres which have been carded, combed or otherwise processed, but not spun.

4.2. The term "natural fibres" includes horsehair of heading 0503, silk of headings 5002 and 5003, as well as wool-fibres and fine or coarse animal hair of headings 5101 to 5105, cotton fibres of headings 5201 to 5203, and other vegetable fibres of headings 5301 to 5305.

4.3. The terms "textile pulp", "chemical materials" and "paper-making materials" are used in the list to describe the materials, not classified in Chapters 50 to 63, which can be used to manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or yarns.

4.4. The term "man-made staple fibres" is used in the list to refer to synthetic or artificial filament tow, staple fibres or waste, of headings 5501 to 5507.

 

Note 5:

5.1. Where, for a given product in the list, reference is made to this Note, the conditions set out in column 3 shall not be applied to any basic textile materials used in the manufacture of this product and which, taken together, represent 10 % or less of the total weight of all the basic textile materials used. (See also Notes 5.3 and 5.4 below.)

5.2. However, the tolerance mentioned in Note 5.1 may be applied only to mixed products which have been made from two or more basic textile materials.

The following are the basic textile materials:

- silk,

- wool,

- coarse animal hair,

- fine animal hair,

- horsehair,

- cotton,

- paper-making materials and paper,

- flax,

- true hemp,

- jute and other textile bast fibres,

- sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave,

- coconut, abaca , ramie and other vegetable textile fibres,

- synthetic man-made filaments,

- artificial man-made filaments,

- current-conducting filaments,

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polypropylene,

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester,

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyamide,

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyacrylonitrile,

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyimide,

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polytetrafluoroethylene,

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of poly(phenylene sulphide),

- synthetic man-made staple fibres of poly(vinyl chloride),

- other synthetic man-made staple fibres,

- artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose,

- other artificial man-made staple fibres,

- yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether, whether or not gimped,

- yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyester, whether or not gimped,

- products of heading 5605 (metallised yarn) incorporating strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film,

- other products of heading 5605.

 

Example:

A yarn, of heading 5205, made from cotton fibres of heading 5203 and synthetic staple fibres of heading 5506, is a mixed yarn. Therefore, non-originating synthetic staple fibres which do not satisfy the origin-rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) may be used, provided that their total weight does not exceed 10 % of the weight of the yarn.

 

Example:

A woollen fabric, of heading 5112, made from woollen yarn of heading 5107 and synthetic yarn of staple fibres of heading 5509, is a mixed fabric. Therefore, synthetic yarn which does not satisfy the origin-rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp), or woollen yarn which does not satisfy the origin-rules (which require manufacture from natural fibres, not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning), or a combination of the two, may be used, provided that their total weight does not exceed 10 % of the weight of the fabric.

 

Example:

Tufted textile fabric, of heading 5802, made from cotton yarn of heading 5205 and cotton fabric of heading 5210, is a only mixed product if the cotton fabric is itself a mixed fabric made from yarns classified in two separate headings, or if the cotton yarns used are themselves mixtures.

 

Example:

If the tufted textile fabric concerned had been made from cotton yarn of heading 5205 and synthetic fabric of heading 5407, then, obviously, the yarns used are two separate basic textile materials and the tufted textile fabric is, accordingly, a mixed product.

5.3. In the case of products incorporating "yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether, whether or not gimped", this tolerance is 20 % in respect of this yarn.

5.4. In the case of products incorporating "strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film", this tolerance is 30 % in respect of this strip.

 

Note 6:

6.1. Where, in the list, reference is made to this Note, textile materials (with the exception of linings and interlinings), which do not satisfy the rule set out in the list in column 3 for the made-up product concerned, may be used, provided that they are classified in a heading other than that of the product and that their value does not exceed 8 % of the ex-works price of the product.

6.2. Without prejudice to Note 6.3, materials, which are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63, may be used freely in the manufacture of textile products, whether or not they contain textiles.

 

Example:

If a rule in the list provides that, for a particular textile item (such as trousers), yarn must be used, this does not prevent the use of metal items, such as buttons, because buttons are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63. For the same reason, it does not prevent the use of slide-fasteners, even though slide-fasteners normally contain textiles.

6.3. Where a percentage-rule applies, the value of materials which are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63 must be taken into account when calculating the value of the non-originating materials incorporated.

 

Note 7:

7.1. For the purposes of headings ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, the "specific processes" are the following:

(a) vacuum-distillation;

(b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation-process;

(c) cracking;

(d) reforming;

(e) extraction by means of selective solvents;

(f) the process comprising all of the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally-active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;

(g) polymerisation;

(h) alkylation;

(i) isomerisation.

7.2. For the purposes of headings 2710, 2711 and 2712, the "specific processes" are the following:

(a) vacuum-distillation;

(b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation-process;

(c) cracking;

(d) reforming;

(e) extraction by means of selective solvents;

(f) the process comprising all of the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally-active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;

(g) polymerisation;

(h) alkylation;

(ij) isomerisation;

(k) in respect of heavy oils of heading ex 2710 only, desulphurisation with hydrogen, resulting in a reduction of at least 85 % of the sulphur-content of the products processed (ASTM D 1266-59 T method);

(l) in respect of products of heading 2710 only, deparaffining by a process other than filtering;

(m) in respect of heavy oils of heading ex 2710 only, treatment with hydrogen, at a pressure of more than 20 bar and a temperature of more than 250 C, with the use of a catalyst, other than to effect desulphurisation, when the hydrogen constitutes an active element in a chemical reaction. The further treatment, with hydrogen, of lubricating oils of heading ex 2710 (e.g. hydrofinishing or decolourisation), in order, more especially, to improve colour or stability shall not, however, be deemed to be a specific process;

(n) in respect of fuel oils of heading ex 2710 only, atmospheric distillation, on condition that less than 30 % of these products distils, by volume, including losses, at 300 0C, by the ASTM D 86 method;

(o) in respect of heavy oils other than gas oils and fuel oils of heading ex 2710 only, treatment by means of a high-frequency electrical brush-discharge;

(p) in respect of crude products (other than petroleum jelly, ozokerite, lignite wax or peat wax, paraffin wax containing by weight less than 0.75 % of oil) of heading ex 2712 only, de-oiling by fractional crystallisation.

7.3. For the purposes of headings ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, simple operations, such as cleaning, decanting, desalting, water-separation, filtering, colouring, marking, obtaining a sulphur-content as a result of mixing products with different sulphur-contents, or any combination of these operations or like operations, do not confer origin.

 

Annex II TO PROTOCOL 2

LIST OF WORKING OR PROCESSING REQUIRED TO BE CARRIED OUT ON NON-ORIGINATING MATERIALS IN ORDER THAT THE PRODUCT MANUFACTURED CAN OBTAIN ORIGINATING STATUS

The products mentioned in the list may not be all covered by the Agreement. It is, therefore, necessary to consult the other parts of the Agreement.

PROTOCOL 3

REGARDING MUTUAL ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS

Article 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Protocol:

(a) "customs legislation" shall mean any legal or regulatory provision adopted by the Contracting Parties governing the import, export and transit of goods and their placing under any customs procedure, including measures of prohibition, restriction and control;

(b) "applicant authority" shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been appointed by a Contracting Party for this purpose and which makes a request for assistance in customs matters;

(c) "requested authority" shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been appointed by a Contracting Party for this purpose and which receives a request for assistance in customs matters;

(d) "personal data" shall mean all information relating to an identified or identifiable individual;

(e) "customs authority" shall mean in the Republic of Latvia - National Customs Board of State Revenue Service, and in the Republic of Bulgaria - the National Customs Agency to the Ministry of Finance, Central Customs Directorate.

Article 2

Scope

1. The Contracting Parties shall assist each other, in the areas within their jurisdiction in the manner and under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, in ensuring that the customs legislation is correctly applied, in particular by the prevention, detection and investigation of operations in breach of that legislation.

2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall apply to any administrative authority of the Contracting Parties which is competent for the application of this Protocol. It shall not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in criminal matters nor shall cover information obtained under powers exercised at the request of the judicial authorities, except where communication of such information has the prior authorization of the said authorities.

Article 3

Assistance on Request

1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall furnish it with all relevant information which may enable it to ensure compliance with customs legislation, including information regarding operations noted or planned which are or might be in breach of such legislation.

2. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall inform it whether goods exported from the territory of one of the Contracting Party have been properly imported into the territory of other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the goods.

3. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall within the framework of its laws take the necessary steps to ensure special surveillance of:

(a) natural or legal persons of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are or have been in breach of customs legislation;

(b) places where goods are stored in a way that gives grounds for suspecting that they are intended to supply operations in breach of customs legislation;

(c) movements of goods notified as possibly giving rise to breaches of customs legislation;

(d) means of transport for which there are reasonable grounds for believing that they have been, are or may be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.

Article 4

Spontaneous Assistance

The Contracting Parties shall provide each other at their own initiative and in accordance with their laws, rules and other legal instruments, with assistance, if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs legislation, particularly when they obtain information pertaining to:

(a) operations which are or appear to be in breach of such legislation and which may be of interest to the other Contracting Party;

(b) new means or methods employed in carrying out such operations;

(c) goods known to be subject to breaches of customs legislation.

Article 5

Delivery/Notification

At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, in accordance with its legislation take all necessary measures in order:

- to deliver all documents;

- to notify all decisions falling within the scope of this Protocol to an addressee, residing or established in its territory. In such a case Article 6 (3) shall apply.

Article 6

Form and Substance of Requests for Assistance

1. Requests pursuant to this Protocol shall be made in writing. They shall be accompanied by the documents necessary to enable compliance with the request. When required because of the urgency of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in writing immediately.

2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include the following information:

(a) the applicant authority making the request;

(b) the measure requested;

(c) the object of and the reason for the request;

(d) the laws, rules and other legal elements involved;

(e) indications as exact and comprehensive as possible on the natural or legal persons who are the target of the investigations;

(f) a summary of the relevant facts and of the inquiries already carried out, except in cases provided for in Article 5.

3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to such authority.

4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements, its correction or completion may be requested; precautionary measures may however be ordered.

Article 7

Execution of Requests

1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority, or, when the latter cannot act on its own, the administrative department to which the request has been addressed by this authority, shall proceed, within the limits of its competence and available resources, as though it were acting on its own account or at the request of other authorities of that same Contracting Party, by supplying information already possessed, by carrying out appropriate inquiries or by arranging for them to be carried out.

2. Requests for assistance will be executed in accordance with the laws, rules and other legal instruments of the requested Contracting Party.

3. Duly authorized officials of a Contracting Parties may, with the agreement of the other Contracting Party involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, obtain from the offices of the requested authority or other authority for which the requested authority is responsible, information relating to operations which are or may be in breach of customs legislation which the applicant authority needs for the purposes of this Protocol.

4. Officials of a Contracting Parties may, with the agreement of the other Contracting Party involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present at inquiries carried out in the latter's territory.

Article 8

Form in which information is to be communicated

1. The requested authority shall communicate results of inquiries to the applicant authority in the form of documents, certified copies of documents, reports and the like.

2. The documents provided for in paragraph 1 may be replaced by computerized information produced in any form for the same purpose. Original files and documents shall be requested only in cases where certified copies would be insufficient. Originals which have been transmitted shall be returned at the earliest opportunity.

Article 9

Exceptions to the Obligation to Provide Assistance

1. The Contracting Parties may refuse to give assistance as provided for in this Protocol, where to do so would:

(a) be likely to prejudice the sovereignty of the Republic of Latvia or that of the Republic of Bulgaria which has been asked to provide assistance under this Protocol

(b) be likely to prejudice the public order, security or other essential interests in particular in the cases referred to under Article 10 (2);

(c) or involve currency or tax regulations other than customs legislation;

(d) or violate an industrial, commercial or professional secret.

2. Where the applicant authority requests assistance which it would itself be unable to provide if so asked, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. It shall than be for the requested authority to decide how to respond to such a request.

3. If assistance is refused the decision and the reasons therefore must be notified to the applicant authority without delay.

Article 10

Information Exchange and Confidentiality

1. Any information communicated in whatsoever form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of a confidential or restricted nature depending on the rules applicable in each of the Contracting Parties. It shall be covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shall enjoy the protection extended to similar information under the relevant laws of the Contracting Party which received it.

2. Personal data may be exchanged only where the receiving Contracting Party undertakes to protect such data in at least an equivalent way to the one applicable to that particular case in the supplying Contracting Party.

3. The furnishing Contracting Party shall verify the accuracy of the information to be transferred. Whenever it appears that the information supplied was inaccurate or to be deleted the receiving Contracting Party shall be notified without delay. The latter shall be obliged to carry out the correction or deletion.

4. Information obtained shall be used solely for the purposes of this Protocol. Where one of the Contracting Parties requests the use of such information for other purposes, it shall ask for the prior written consent of the authority which furnished the information. Such use shall than be subject to any restrictions laid down by that authority. These provisions shall not apply to information concerning operations in breach of customs legislation relating to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Such information may be communicated to other authorities in the requesting Contracting Party directly involved in the combating of illicit drug traffic within the limits of Article 2.

5. Paragraph 3 shall not impede the use of information in any judicial or administrative proceedings subsequently instituted for failure to comply with customs legislation. The competent authority which supplied that information shall be notified of such use.

6. The Contracting Parties may in there records of evidence, reports and testimonies and in proceedings and charges brought before the courts, use as evidence information obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.

Article 11

Experts and Witnesses

An official of a requested authority may be authorized to appear within the limitations of the authorization granted, as an expert or witness in judicial or administrative proceedings regarding the matters covered by the present Protocol in the jurisdiction of the other Contracting Party and produce such objects, documents or authenticated copies thereof as may be needed for the proceedings. The request for an appearance must indicate specifically on what matters and by virtue of what title or qualification the official will be questioned.

Article 12

Assistance Expenses

The Contracting Parties shall waive all claims on each other for the reimbursement of expenses incurred pursuant to this Protocol, except as appropriate, for expenses to experts and witnesses and interpreters and translators who are not public service employees.

Article 13

Application

1. The application of this Protocol shall be entrusted to the competent services of the Republic of Latvia on the one hand and the central customs authorities of the Republic of Bulgaria on the other. They shall decide on all practical measures and arrangements necessary for its application, taking into consideration rules in force in the field of data protection.

2. The Contracting Parties shall consult each other and subsequently keep each other informed of the detailed rules of implementation which are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.

3. The customs authorities of the Contracting Parties may arrange for their investigation services to be in direct communication with each other.