AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS AND THE GOVERN
MENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA CON
CERNING FISHING FOR ANCHOVIES AND SPRATS IN EACH
OTHER'S TERRITORIAL WATERS IN THE BLACK SEA
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
Government of the People's Republic of Bulgaria,
Proceeding from the friendly relations existing between the two countries,
Bearing in mind the interest of the two countries in the optimum utilization of
the living resources of the Black Sea,
Guided by a desire for the further development of mutually beneficial
co-operation between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the People's
Republic of Bulgaria in the field of fisheries,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1. The Government of the USSR shall permit fishing vessels of the
People's Republic of Bulgaria to fish for anchovies in the territorial waters of the
USSR in the Black Sea, subject to the conditions prescribed in this Agreement.
On the basis of reciprocity, the Government of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria shall permit fishing vessels of the USSR to fish for sprats in the
territorial waters of the People's Republic of Bulgaria in the Black Sea.
Article 2. Fishing vessels of one Contracting Party shall, on entering the
territorial waters of the other Contracting Party, notify the fact to the latter
Party's competent authorities in the manner and in accordance with the procedure
established by each Contracting Party.
Article 3. Fishing vessels of one Contracting Party shall, when fishing in
the territorial waters of the other Contracting Party, be governed by the rules
applicable to fishing and also by those laws and decisions of the Contracting Party
in whose territorial waters fishing is carried on which concern the presence of
foreign vessels and foreign juridical and physical persons in its territorial waters,
subject to the provisions of this Agreement.
The Contracting Parties shall inform each other in good time of the
above-mentioned laws, decisions and rules and also of any amendments or
additions thereto.
Article 4. Neither Contracting Party shall engage in fishing in particular
areas of the territorial waters of the other Contracting Party when navigation is
prohibited in such areas.
Article 5. Each Contracting Party shall provide the other in good time with
lists of fishing vessels sent to fish in the territorial waters of the latter Contracting
Party.
The number of fishing vessels, the size of the catch and other conditions
pertaining to fishing in the territorial waters of each Contracting Party shall be
agreed upon each year by the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties.
Article 6. This Agreement is concluded for a period of five years and shall
enter into force on the date of notification of its approval by the competent
authorities of each country. It shall remain in force for successive five-year
periods unless one of the Contracting Parties gives notice of termination in writing
at least six months before the expiry of the current five-year term.
DONE at Moscow on 3 October 1978, in duplicate in the Russian and
Bulgarian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:
Y. BYSTROV
Deputy Minister of Fisheries
of the USSR
For the Government of the People's Republic of Bulgaria:
E. Marinova
Chairman of the Committee on the Food Industry, Ministry of
Agriculture and the Food Industry
