BAMAKO CONVENTION ON THE BAN OF THE IMPORT TO
AFRICA AND THE CONTROL OF TRANSBOUNDARY
MOVEMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF
HAZARDOUS WASTES WITHIN AFRICA
PREAMBLE
The Parties to this Convention,
1. Mindful of the growing threat to human health and the environment
posed by the increased generation and the complexity of hazardous wastes,
2. Further mindful that the most effective way of protecting human health
and the environment from the dangers posed by such wastes is the reduction of their
generation to a minimum in terms of quantity and/or hazard potential,
3. A ware of the risk of damage to human health and the environment
caused by transboundary movements of hazardous wastes,
4. Reiterating that States should ensure that the generator should carry out
his responsibilities with regard to the transport and disposal of hazardous wastes in
a manner that is consistent with the protection of human health and environment,
whatever the place of disposal,
5. Recalling relevant Chapter of the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity (OA U} on Environmental Protection, the African Charter for Human and Peoples'
Rights, Chapter IX of the Lagos Plan of Action and other Recommendations adopted
by the Organization of African Unity on the environment,
6. Further recognizing the sovereignty of States to ban the importation into,
and the transit through, their territory, of hazardous wastes and substances for human
health and environmental reasons,
7. Recognizing also the increasing mobilization in Africa for the prohibition
of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal in African
countries,
8. Convinced that hazardous wastes should, as far as is compatible with
environmentally sound and efficient management, be disposed in the State where they
were generated,
9. Convinced that the effective control and minimization of transboundary
movements of hazardous wastes will act as an incentive, in Africa and elsewhere, for
the reduction of the volume of the generation of such wastes,
10. Noting that a number of international and regional agreements deal with
the problem of the protection and preservation of the environment with regard to the
transit of dangerous goods,
11. Taking into account the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on
the Human Environment (Stockholm, 1972), the Cairo Guidelines and Principles for
the Environmentally Sound Management of Hazardous Wastes adopted by the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) by Decision
14/30 of 17 June, 198 7, the Recommendations of the United Nations Committee of
Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (formulated in 1957 and updated
biennially), the Charter of Human Rights, relevant recommendations, declarations,
instruments and regulations adopted within the United Nations System, the relevant
Articles of the 1989 Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements
of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, allows for the establishment of regional
agreements which may be equal to or stronger than its own provisions, Article 39 of
the Lome IV Convention relating to the international movement of hazardous wastes
and radioactive wastes, African inter-governmental organizations and the work and
studies done within other international and regional organizations,
12. Mindful of the spirit, principles, aims and functions of the African
Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources adopted by the
African Heads of State and Government in Algiers (1968) and the World Charter for
Nature adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations at its Thirty-seventh
Session ( 1982) as the rule of ethics in respect of the protection of human
environment and the conservation of natural resources,
13. Concerned by the problems of the transboundary traffic in hazardous wastes,
14. Recognizing the need to promote the development of clean production
methods, including clean technologies, for the sound management of hazardous
wastes produced in Africa, in particular, to avoid, minimize and eliminate the
generation of such wastes,
15. Recognizing also that when necessary hazardous wastes should be
transported in accordance with relevant international conventions and
recommendations,
16. Determined to protect, by strict control, the human health of the African
population and the environment against the adverse effects which may result from the
generation of hazardous wastes,
17. Affirming a commitment also to responsibly address the problem of
hazardous wastes originating within the Continent of Africa,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Convention:
1. "Wastes" are substances or materials which are disposed of, or are
intended to be disposed of, or are required to be disposed of by the provisions of
national law;
2. "Hazardous wastes" shall mean wastes as specified in Article 2 of this Convention
3. "Management" means the prevention and reduction of hazardous wastes
and the collection, transport, storage, treatment either for re-use or disposal of
hazardous wastes including after-care of disposal sites;
4. "Transboundary Movement" means any movement of hazardous wastes
from an area under the national jurisdiction of any state to or through an area under
the national jurisdiction of another State, or to or through an area not under the
national jurisdiction of another State, provided at least two States are involved in the
movement;
5. "Clean production methods" means production or industrial systems
which avoid or eliminate the generation of hazardous wastes and hazardous products
in conformity with Article 4, Section 3 (f) and (g) of this Convention;
6. "Disposal" means any operation specified in Annex Ill to this Convention;
7. "Approved site or facility" means a site or facility for the disposal of
hazardous wastes which is authorized or permitted to operate for this purpose by a
relevant authority of the State where the site or facility is located;
8. "Competent authority" means one governmental authority designated by
a Party to be responsible, within such geographical areas as the Party may think fit,
for receiving the notification of a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes and
any information related to it, and for responding to such a notification, as provided in
Article 6
9. "Focal point" means the entity of a Party referred to in Article 5
responsible for receiving and submitting information as provided for in Articles 13 and
16;
10. "Environmentally sound management of hazardous wastes" means taking
all practicable steps to ensure that hazardous wastes are managed in a manner which
will protect human health and environment against the adverse effects which may
result from such wastes;
11. "Area under the national jurisdiction of a State" means any land, marine
  area or airspace within . which a State exercises administrative and regulatory
  responsibility in accordance with international law in regard to the protection of
  human health or the environment;
  12. "State of export" means a State from which a transboundary movement
  of hazardous wastes is planned to be initiated or is initiated;
  13. "State of import" means a State to which a transboundary movement is
  planned or takes place for the purpose of disposal therein or for the purpose of loading
  prior to disposal in an area not under the national jurisdiction of any State;
  14. "State of transit" means any State, other than the State of export or
  import, through which a movement of hazardous wastes is planned or takes place;
  15. "States concerned" means Parties which are States of export or import,
  or transit States whether or not Parties;
  16. "Person" means any natural or legal person;
  17. "Exporter" means any person under the jurisdiction of the State export
  who arranges for hazardous wastes to be exported;
  18. "Importer" means any person under the jurisdiction of the State of import
  who arranges for hazardous wastes to be imported;
  19. "Carrier" means any person who carries out the transport of hazardous
  wastes;
  20. "Generator" means any person whose activity produces hazardous
  wastes, or, if that person is not known, the person who is in possession and/or
  control of those wastes;
  21. "Disposer" means any person to whom hazardous wastes are shipped
  and who carries out the disposal of such wastes;
  22. "Illegal traffic" means any transboundary movement of hazardous wastes
  as specified in Article 9;
  23. "Dumping at sea" means the deliberate disposal of hazardous wastes at
  sea from vessels, aircraft, platforms or other man-made structures at sea, and
  includes ocean incineration and disposal into the seabed and sub-seabed.
  ARTICLE 2
  SCOPE OF THE CONVENTION
  1. The following substances shall be "hazardous wastes" for the purposes
  of this convention:
    fa) Wastes that belong to any category contained in Annex I of this
Convention;
(b) Wastes that are not covered under paragraph (a) above but are
defined as, or are considered to be, hazardous wastes by the
domestic legislation of the State of export, import or transit;
le) Wastes which possess any of the characteristics contained in
Annex II of this Convention;
(d) Hazardous substances which have been banned, cancelled or
refused registration by government regulatory action, or
voluntarily withdrawn from registration, in the country of
manufacture, for human health and environmental reasons.
2. Wastes which, as a result of being radioactive, are subject to any
international control systems, including international instruments, applying specifically
to radioactive materials, are included in the scope of this Convention.
3. Wastes which derive from the normal operations of a ship, the discharge
of which is covered by another international instrument, shall not fall within the scope
of this Convention.
ARTICLE 3
NATIONAL DEFINITIONS OF HAZARDOUS WASTES
1. Each State shall, within six months of becoming a Party to this
Convention, inform the Secretariat of the Convention of the wastes, other than those
listed in Annex 1 of this Convention, considered or defined as hazardous under its
national legislation and of any requirements concerning transboundary movement
procedures applicable to such wastes.
2. Each Party shall subsequently inform the Secretariat of any significant
changes to the information it has provided pursuant to Paragraph 1 of this
Convention.
3. The Secretariat shall forthwith inform all Parties of the information it has
received pursuant to Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
4. Parties shall be responsible for making the information transmitted to
them by the Secretariat under Paragraph 3 of this Article, available to their exporters
and other appropriate bodies.
ARTICLE 4
GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
1. Hazardous Waste Import Ban.
All Parties shall take appropriate legal, administrative and other measures
within the area under their jurisdiction to prohibit the import of all hazardous wastes,
for any reason, into Africa from non-Contracting Parties. Such import shall be deemed
illegal and a criminal act. All Parties shall:
  2. Waterways.
(a) Forward as soon as possible, all information relating to such illegal
hazardous waste import activity to the Secretariat who shall
distribute the information to all Contracting Parties;
(b) Co-operate to ensure that no imports of hazardous wastes from
a non-Party enter a Party to this Convention. To this end, the
Parties shall, at the Conference of the Contracting Parties consider
other enforcement mechanisms.
Ban on Dumping of Hazardous Wastes at Sea, Internal Waters and
(a) Parties in conformity with related international conventions and
instruments shall, in the exercise of their jurisdiction within their
internal waters, territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and
continental shelf, adopt legal, administrative and other appropriate
measures to control all carriers from non-Parties, and prohibit the
dumping at sea of hazardous wastes, including their incineration
at sea and their disposal in the seabed and sub-seabed; any
dumping of hazardous wastes at sea, including incineration at sea
as well as seabed and sub-seabed disposal, by Contracting
Parties, whether in internal waters, territorial seas, exclusive
economic zones or high seas shall be deemed to be illegal;
(b) Parties shall forward, as soon as possible, all information relating
to dumping of hazardous wastes to the Secretariat which shall
distribute the information to all Contracting Parties.
3. Waste Generation in Africa,
Each Party shall:
  (a) Ensure that hazardous waste generators submit to the Secretariat
reports regarding the wastes that they generate in order to enable
the Secretariat of the Convention to produce a complete
hazardous waste audit;
(b) Impose unlimited liability as well as joint and several liability on
hazardous waste generators;
(c) Ensure that the generation of hazardous wastes within the area
under its jurisdiction is reduced to a minimum taking into account
social, technological and economic aspects,
(d) Ensure the availability of adequate treatment and/or disposal
facilities, for the environmentally sound management of hazardous
wastes which shall be located, to the extent possible, within its
jurisdiction;
(e) Ensure that persons involved in the management of hazardous
wastes within its jurisdiction take such steps as are necessary to
prevent pollution arising from such wastes and, if such pollution
occurs, to minimize the consequence thereof for human health
and environment;
The Adoption of Precautionary Measures:
  (f) Each Party shall strive to adopt and implement the preventive,
precautionary approach to pollution problems which entails interalia,
preventing the release into the environment of substances
which may cause harm to humans or the environment without
waiting for scientific proof regarding such harm. The Parties shall
co-operate with each other in taking the appropriate measures to
implement the precautionary principle to pollution prevention
through the application of clean production methods, rather than
the pursuit of a permissible emissions approach based on
assimilative capacity assumptions;
(g) In this respect Parties shall promote clean production methods
applicable to entire product life cycles including:
  - raw material selection, extraction and processing;
- product conceptualization, design, manufacture and assemblage;
- materials transport during all phases;
- industrial and household usage;
- reintroduction of the product into industrial systems or
nature when it no longer serves a useful function,
Clean production shall not include "end-of-pipe" pollution controls
such as filters and scrubbers, or chemical, physical or biological
treatment. Measures which reduce the volume of waste by
incineration or concentration, mask the hazard by dilution, or
transfer pollutants from one environmental medium to another, are
also excluded,
(h) The issue of the transfer to Africa of polluting technologies shall
be kept under systematic review by the Secretariat of the
Conference and periodic reports made to the Conference of the
Parties;
Obligations in the Transport and Transboundary Movement of Hazardous
Wastes from Contracting Parties;
(i) Each Party shall prevent the export of hazardous wastes to States
which have prohibited by their legislation or international
agreements all such imports, or if it has reason to believe that the
wastes in question will not be managed in an environmentally
sound manner, according to criteria to be decided on by the
Parties at their first meeting;
(j) A Party shall not permit hazardous wastes to be exported to a
State which does not have the facilities for disposing of them in
an environmentally sound manner;
(k) Each Party shall ensure that hazardous wastes to be exported are
managed in an environmentally sound manner in the State of
import and of transit. Technical guidelines for the environmentally
sound management of wastes subject to this convention shall be
decided by the Parties at their first meeting;
(l) The Parties agree not to allow the export of hazardous wastes for
disposal within the area South of 60 degrees South Latitude,
whether or not such wastes are subject to transboundary
movement;
(m) Furthermore, each Party shall:
  (i) prohibit all persons under its national jurisdiction
from transporting or disposing of hazardous wastes
unless such persons are authorized or a/lo wed to
perform such operations;
(ii) ensure that hazardous wastes that are to be the
subject of a transboundary movement are packaged,
labelled, and transported in conformity with generally
accepted and recognized international rules and
standards in the field of pack3ging, labelling and
transport, and that due account is taken of relevant
internationally recognized practices;
(iii) ensure that hazardous wastes be accompanied by a
movement document, containing information
specified in Annex IV B, from the point at which a
transboundary movement commences to the point of
disposal;
(n) Parties shall take the appropriate measures to ensure that the
transboundary movements of hazardous wastes only are allowed
if:
  (i) the State of export does not have the technical
capacity and the necessary facilities, capacity or
suitable disposal sites in order to dispose of the
wastes in question in an environmentally sound and
efficient manner; or
(ii) the transboundary movement in question is in
accordance with other criteria to be decided by the
Parties, provided those criteria do not differ from the
objectives of this Convention;
(o) Under this Convention, the obligation of States in which
hazardous wastes are generated, requiring that those wastes are
managed in an environmentally sound manner, may not under any
circumstances be transferred to the States of import or transit;
(p) Parties shall undertake to review periodically the possibilities for
the reduction of the amount and/or the pollution potential of
hazardous wastes which are exported to other States;
(q) Parties exercising their right to prohibit the import of hazardous
wastes for disposal shall inform the other Parties of their decision
pursuant to Article 13;
(r) Parties shall prohibit or shall not permit the export of hazardous
wastes to States which have prohibited the import of such wastes
when notified by the Secretariat or any competent authority
pursuant to sub-paragraph (q) above;
(s) Parties shall prohibit or shall not permit the export of hazardous
wastes if the State of import does not consent in writing to the
specific import, in the case where that State of import has not
prohibited the import of such wastes;
(t) Parties shall ensure that the transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes is reduced to the minimum consistent with the
environmentally sound and efficient management of such wastes,
and is conducted in a manner which will protect human health and
the environment against the adverse effects which may result
from such movements;
(u) Parties shall require that information about a proposed
transboundary movement of hazardous wastes be provided to the
States concerned, according to Annex IV A, and clearly state
the potential effects of the proposed movement on human
health and the environment.
4. Furthermore:
  (a) Parties shall undertake to enforce the obligation of this Convention
against offenders and infringements according to relevant national
laws and/or order to better protect human health and the
environment;
(b) Nothing in this Convention shall prevent a Party from imposing
additional requirements that are consistent with the provisions of
this Convention, and are in accordance with the rules of
international law, in order to better protect human health and the
environment;
(c) This Convention recognizes the sovereignty of States over their
territorial sea, waterways and air space established in accordance
with international law, and jurisdiction which States have in their
exclusive economic zone and their continental shelves in
accordance with international law, and the exercise by ships and
aircraft of all States of navigation rights and freedoms as provided
for in international law and as reflected in relevant international
instruments.
ARTICLE 5
DESIGNATION OF COMPETENT AUTHORITIES
FOCAL POINT AND DUMPWATCH
To facilitate the implementation of this Convention, the Parties shall:
  1. Designate or establish one or more competent authorities and one focal
point. One competent authority shall be designated to receive the notification in case
of a State of transit.
2. Inform the Secretariat, within three months of the date of the entry into
force of this Convention for them, which agencies they have designated as their focal
point and their competent authorities.
3. Inform the Secretariat, within one month of the date of decision, of any
changes regarding the designations made by them under paragraph 2 above.
4. Appoint a national body to act as a Dumpwatch. In such capacity as a
dump watch, the designated national body only will be required to co-ordinate with the
concerned governmental and non-governmental bodies.
ARTICLE 6
TRANSBOUNDARY MOVEMENT AND NOT/FICA TION
PROCEDURES
1. The State of export shall notify, or shall require the generator or exporter
to notify, in writing, through the channel of the competent authority of the State of
export, the competent authority of the State concerned of any proposed
transboundary movement of hazardous wastes. Such notification shall contain the
declaration and information specified in Annex IV A of this Convention, written in a
language acceptable to the State of import. Only one notification needs to be sent
to each State concerned.
2. The State of import shall respond to the notifier in writing consenting to
the movement with or without conditions, denying permission for the movement, or
requesting additional information. A copy of the final response of the State of import
shall be sent to the competent authorities of the States concerned that are Parties to
this Convention.
3. The State of export shall not allow the transboundary movement until it
has received:
  (a) written consent of the State of import, and
(b) from the State of import written confirmation of the existence of
a contract between the exporter and the disposer specifying
environmentally sound management of the wastes in question.
4. Each State of transit which is a Party to this Convention shall promptly
acknowledge to the notifier receipt of the notification. It may subsequently respond
to the notifier in writing within 60 days consenting to the movement with or without
conditions, denying permission for the movement, or requesting additional in formation.
The State of export shall not allow the transboundary movement to commence until
it has received the written consent of the State of transit.
5. In the case of a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes where the
wastes are legally defined as or considered to be hazardous wastes only:
  fa) by the State of export, the requirements of paragraph 8 of this
Article that apply to the importer or disposer and the State of
import shall apply mutatis mutandis to the exporter and State of
export, respectively;
(b) by the State of import or by the States of import and transit
which are Parties to this Convention, the requirements of
paragraph 1,3,4 and 6 of this Article that apply to the exporter
and State of export shall apply mutatis mutandis to the importer
or disposer and State of import, respectively; or
(c) by any State of transit which is Party to this Convention, the
provisions of paragraph 4 shall apply to such State.
6. The State shall use a shipment specific notification even where hazardous
wastes having the same physical and chemical characteristics are shipped regularly
to the same disposer via the same customs office of entry of the State of import, and
in the case of transit via the same customs office of entry and exit of the State or
States of transit; specific notification of each and every shipment shall be required and
contain the information in Annex IV A of this Convention.
7. Each Party to this Convention shall limit their points or ports of entry and
notify the Secretariat to this effect for distribution to all Contracting Parties. Such
points and ports shall be the only ones permitted for the transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes.
8. The Parties to this Convention shall require that each person who takes
charge of a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes sign the movement
document either upon delivery or receipt of the wastes in question. They shall also
require that the disposer inform both the exporter and the competent authority of the
State of export of receipt by the disposer of the wastes in question and, in due
course, of the completion of disposal as specified in the notification. If no such
information is received within the State of export, the competent authority of the
State of export or the exporter shall so notify the State of import.
9. The notification and response by this Article shall be transmitted to the
competent authority of the States concerned.
10. . Any transboundary movement of hazardous wastes shall be covered by
insurance, bond or other guarantee as may be required by the State of import or any
State of transit which is a Party to this Convention.
ARTICLE 7
TRANSBOUNDARY MOVEMENT FROM A PARTY
THROUGH STATES WHICH ARE NOT PARTIES
Paragraph 2 of Article 6 of the Convention shall apply mutatis mutandis
to transboundary movements of hazardous wastes from a Party through a State or
States which are not Parties.
ARTICLE 8
DUTY OF RE-IMPORT
When a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes to which the
consent of the States concerned has been given, subject to the provisions of this
Convention, cannot be completed in accordance with the terms of the contract, the
State of export shall ensure that the wastes in question are taken back into the State
of export, by the exporter, if alternative arrangements cannot be made for their
disposal in an environmentally sound manner within a maximum of 90 days from the
time that the importing State informed the State of export and the Secretariat. To
this end, the State of export and any State of transit shall not oppose, hinder or
prevent the return of those wastes to the State of export.
ARTICLE 9
ILLEGAL TRAFFIC
1. For the purpose of this Convention, any transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes under the following situations shall be deemed to be illegal traffic:
  (a) if carried out without notification, pursuant to the provisions of
this Convention, to all States concerned; or
(b) if carried out without the consent, pursuant to the provisions of
this Convention, of a State concerned; or
(c) if consent is obtained from States concerned through falsification,
misrepresentation or fraud; or
(d) if it does not conform in a material way with the documents; or
(e) if it results in deliberate disposal of hazardous wastes in
contravention of this Convention and of general principles of
international law.
2. Each State shall introduce appropriate national legislation for imposing
criminal penalties on all persons who have planned, carried out, or assisted in such
illegal imports. Such penalties shall be sufficiently high to both punish and deter such
conduct.
3. In case of a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes deemed to
be illegal traffic as the result of conduct on the part of the exporter or generator, the
State of export shall ensure that the wastes in question are taken back by the
exporter or generator or if necessary by itself into the State of export, within 30 days
from the time the State of export has been informed about the illegal traffic. To this
end the States concerned shall not oppose, hinder or prevent the return of those
wastes to the State of export and appropriate legal action shall be taken against the
contravenor(s).
4. In the case of a transboundary movement of hazardous wastes deemed
to be illegal traffic as the result of conduct on the part of the importer or disposer, the
State of import shall ensure that the wastes in question are returned to the exporter
by the importer and that legal proceedings according to the provisions of this
Convention are taken against the contravenor(s).
ARTICLE 10
INTRA-AFRICAN COOPERATION
1. The Parties to this Convention shall cooperate with one another and with
relevant African organizations, to improve and achieve the environmentally sound
management of hazardous wastes.
2. To this end, the Parties shall:
  (a) make available information, whether on a bilateral or multilateral
basis, with a view to promoting clean production methods and the
environmentally sound management of hazardous wastes,
including harmonization of technical standards and practices for
the adequate management of hazardous wastes, 
(b) cooperate in monitoring the effects of the management of
hazardous wastes on human health and the environment;
(c) co-operate, subject to their national laws, regulations and policies,
in the development and implementation of new environmentally
sound clean production technologies and the improvement of
existing technologies with a view to eliminating, as far as
practicable, the generation of hazardous wastes and achieving
more effective and efficient methods of ensuring their
management in an environmentally sound manner, including the
study of the economic, social and environmental effects of the
adoption of such new and improved technologies;
(d) co-operate actively to their national laws, regulations and policies,
in the transfer of technology and management systems related to
the environmentally sound management of hazardous wastes.
They shall also cooperate in developing the technical capacity
among Parties, especially those which may need and request
technical assistance in this field;
(e) co-operate in developing appropriate technical guidelines and/or
codes of practice;
(f) co-operate in the exchange and dissemination of information on
the movement of hazardous wastes in conformity with Article 1 3
of this Convention.
ARTICLE 11
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
BILATERAL, MULTILATERAL AND REGIONAL AGREEMENTS
1. Parties to this Convention may enter into bilateral, multilateral, or regional
agreements or arrangements regarding the transboundary movement and management
of hazardous wastes generated in Africa with Parties or non-Parties provided that such
agreements or arrangements do not derogate from the environmentally sound
management of hazardous wastes as required by this Convention. These agreements
or arrangements shall stipulate provisions which are no less environmentally sound
than those provided for by this Convention.
2. Parties shall notify the Secretariat of any bilateral, multilateral or regional
agreements or arrangements referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and those which
they have entered into prior to the entry into force of this Convention for them, for
the purpose of controlling transboundary movements of hazardous wastes which take
place entirely among the Parties to such agreements. The provisions of this
Convention shall not affect transboundary movements of hazardous wastes generated
in Africa which take place pursuant to such agreements provided that such
agreements are compatible with the environmentally sound management of hazardous
wastes as required by this Convention.
3. Each Contracting Party shall prohibit vessels flying its flag or aircraft
registered in its territory from carrying out activities in contravention to this
Convention.
4. Parties shall use appropriate measures to promote South-South
cooperation in the implementation of this Convention.
5. Taking into account the needs of developing countries, co-operation
between international organizations is encouraged in order to promote, among other
things, public awareness, the development of the rational management of hazardous
wastes and the adoption of new and less polluting technologies.
ARTICLE 12
LIABILITIES AND COMPENSATION
The Conference of Parties shall set up an Ad Hoc Expert Organ to prepare
a Draft Protocol setting out appropriate rules and procedures in the field of liabilities
and compensation for damage resulting from the transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes.
ARTICLE 13
TRANSMISSION OF INFORMATION
1. The Parties shall ensure that in the case of an accident occurring during
the transboundary movement of hazardous wastes or their disposal which is likely to
present risks to human health and the environment in other States, those States are
immediately informed.
2. The States shall inform each other, through the Secretariat, of:
  (a) Changes regarding the designation of competent authorities and/or
focal points, pursuant to Article 5 of the present Convention;
(b) Changes in their national definition of hazardous wastes, pursuant
to Article 3 of the present Convention;
(c) Decisions made by them to limit or ban the import of hazardous
wastes;
(d) Any other information required pursuant to paragraph
4 of this Article.
3. The Parties, consistent with national laws and regulations, shall set up
information collection and dissemination mechanisms on hazardous wastes. They
shall transmit such information through the Secretariat, to the Conference of the
Parties established under Article 15 of the present Convention, before the end of each
calendar year, in a report on the previous calendar year, containing the following
information:
  (a) Competent authorities, Dumpwatch, and focal points that have
been designated by them pursuant to Article 5 of the present
Convention.
(b) Information regarding transboundary movements of hazardous
wastes in which they have been involved including:
  (i) the quantity of hazardous wastes exported, their
category, characteristics, destination, any transit
country and disposal methods as stated in the
notification;
(ii) the amount of hazardous wastes imported, their
category, characteristics, origin and disposal
methods;
(iii) disposal which did not proceed as intended;
(iv) Efforts to achieve a reduction of the amount of
hazardous wastes subject to transboundary
movements.
(c) Information on the measures adopted by them in the
implementation of this Convention;
(d) Information on available qualified statistics - which have been
compiled by them on the effects on human health and the
environment of the generation, transportation, and disposal of
hazardous wastes - as part of the information required in
conformity with Article 4 Section 3 (a) of this Convention;
(e) Information concerning bilateral, multilateral and regional
agreements and arrangements entered into pursuant to Article 11
of this Convention.
(f) Information on accidents occurring during the transboundary
movements and disposal of hazardous wastes and on the
measures undertaken to deal with them;
(g) Information on disposal options operated within the area under
their national jurisdiction, 
(h) Information on measures undertaken for the development of clean
production methods, including clean production technologies, for
the reduction and/or elimination of the production of hazardous
wastes; and
(i) Such other matters as the Conference of the Parties shall deem
relevant.
4. The Parties, consistent with national laws and regulations, shall ensure
that copies of each notification concerning any given transboundary movement of
hazardous wastes, and the response to it, are sent to the Secretariat.
ARTICLE 14
FINANCIAL ASPECTS
1. The regular budget of the Conference of the Parties, as required in
Articles 15 and 16 of this Convention, shall be prepared by the Secretariat and
approved by the Conference.
2. Parties shall, at the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties, agree
on a scale of contributions to the recurrent budget of the Secretariat.
3. The Parties shall also consider the establishment of a revolving fund to
assist on, an interim basis, in case of emergency situations to minimize damage from
disasters or accidents arising from transboundary movements of hazardous wastes or
during the disposal of such wastes.
4. The Parties agree that, according to the specific needs of different
regions and sub-regions, regional or sub-regional centres for training and technology
transfers regarding the management of hazardous wastes and the minimization of their
generation should be established as well as appropriate funding mechanisms of a
voluntary nature.
ARTICLE 15
CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES
1. A Conference of the Parties made up of Ministers having the environment
as their mandate is hereby established. The first meeting of the Conference of the
Parties shall be convened by the Secretary-General of the OA U not later than one year
after the entry into force of this Convention. Thereafter, ordinary meetings of the
Conference of the Parties shall be held at regular intervals to be determined by the
Conference at its first meeting.
2. The Conference of the Parties to this Convention shall adopt Rules of
Procedure for itself and for any subsidiary body it may establish, as well as financial
rules to determine in particular the financial participation of the Parties under this
Convention.
3. The Parties to this Convention at their first meeting shall consider any
additional measures needed to assist them in fulfilling their responsibilities with
respect to the protection and the preservation of the marine and inland waters
environments in the context of this Convention.
4. The Conference of the Parties shall keep under continued review and
evaluation the effective implementation of this Convention, and in addition, shall:
  (a) promote the harmonization of appropriate policies, strategies and
measures for minimizing harm to human health and the
environment by hazardous wastes;
(b) consider and adopt amendments to this Convention and its
annexes, taking into consideration, inter-alia, available scientific,
technical, economic and environmental information;
(c) consider and undertake any additional action that may be required
for the achievement of the purpose of this Convention in the light
of experience gained in its operation and in the operation of the
agreements and arrangements envisaged in Article 11 of the
present Convention;
(d) consider and adopt protocols as required;
(e) establish such subsidiary bodies as are deemed necessary for the
implementation of this Convention,  and
(f) make decisions for the peaceful settlement of disputes arising
from the transboundary movement of hazardous wastes, if need
be, according to international law.
5. Organizations may be represented as observers at meetings of the
Conference of the Parties to this Convention. Any body or agency, whether national
or international, governmental or non-governmental, qualified in fields relating to
hazardous wastes which has informed the Secretariat, may be represented as an
observer at a meeting of the Conference of the Parties to this Convention. The
admission and participation of observers shall be subject to the rules of procedures
adopted by the Conference of the Parties.
ARTICLE 16
SECRETARIAT
1. The functions of the Secretariat shall be:
  (a) to arrange for, and service, meetings provided for in Articles 15
and 17 of the present Convention;
(b) to prepare and transmit reports based upon information received
in accordance with Articles 3,4, 6, 11, and 13 of the present
Convention as well as upon information derived from meetings of
subsidiary bodies established under Article 15 of the present
Convention as well as upon, as appropriate, information provided
by relevant inter-governmental and non-governmental entities;
(c) to prepare reports on its activities carried out in the
implementation of its functions under this Convention and present
them to the Conference of the Parties;
(d) to ensure the necessary co-ordination with relevant international
bodies, and in particular to enter into such administrative and
contractual arrangements as may be required for the effective
discharge of its functions;
(e) to communicate with focal points, competent authorities and
Dumpwatch established by the Parties in accordance with Article
5 of this Convention as well as appropriate inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations which may provide assistance in
the implementation of this Convention.
(f) to compile information concerning approved national sites and
facilities of Parties to this Convention available for the disposal on
treatment of their hazardous wastes and to circulate this
information;
(g) to receive and convey information from and to Parties to this
Convention on:
  - sources of technical assistance and training;
- available technical and scientific know-how;
- sources of advice and expertise; and
- availability of resources.
This information will assist them in:
  - the management of the notification system of this
Convention;
- environmentally sound clean production methods relating to
- hazardous wastes, such as clean production technologies;
- the assessment of disposal capabilities and sites;
- the monitoring of hazardous wastes; and
emergency responses.
(h) to provide the Parties to this Convention with information on
consultants or consulting firms having the necessary technical
competence in the field, which can assist them with examining a
notification for a transboundary movement, the concurrence of a
shipment of hazardous wastes with the relevant notification,
and/or whether the proposed disposal facilities for hazardous
wastes are environmentally sound, when they have reason to
believe that the wastes in question will not be managed in an
environmentally sound manner. Any such examinations would not
be at the expense of the Secretariat;
(i) to assist Parties to this Convention in their identification of cases
of illegal traffic and to circulate immediately to the Parties
concerned any information it has received regarding illegal traffic;
(j) to co-operate with Parties to this Convention and with relevant
and competent international organizations and agencies in the
provision of experts and equipment for the purpose of rapid
assistance to States in the event of an emergency situation; and
(k) to perform such other functions relevant to the purposes of this
Convention as may be determined by the Conference of the
Parties to this Convention.
2. The Secretariat's functions shall be carried out on an interim basis by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) jointly with the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa (ECA) until the completion of the first meeting of the
Conference of the Parties held pursuant to Article 15 of the present Convention. At
this meeting, the Conference of the Parties shall also evaluate the implementation by
the interim Secretariat of the functions assigned to it, in particular under paragraph
1 above, and decide upon the structures appropriate for those functions.
ARTICLE 17
AMENDMENT OF THE CONVENTION AND
OF PROTOCOLS
1. Any Party may propose amendments to this Convention and any Party
to a Protocol may propose amendments to that Protocol. Such amendments shall take
due account, inter alia of relevant scientific, technical, environmental and social
considerations.
2. Amendments to this Convention shall be adopted at a meeting of the
Conference of the Parties. Amendments to any Protocol shall be adopted at a meeting
of the Parties to the Protocol in question. The text of any proposed amendment to
this Convention or to any Protocol, except as may otherwise be provided in such
Protocol, shall be communicated to the Parties by the Secretariat at least six months
before the meeting at which it is proposed for adoption. The Secretariat shall also
communicate proposed amendments to the Signatories to this Convention for their
information.
3. The Parties shall make every effort to reach agreement on any proposed
amendment to this Convention by consensus. If all efforts at consensus have been
exhausted, and no agreement reached, the amendment shall, as a last resort, be
adopted by a two-thirds majority vote of the Parties present and voting at the
meeting. It shall then be submitted by the Depository to all Parties for ratification,
approval, formal confirmation or acceptance.
Amendment of Protocols to this Convention.
4. The procedure specified in paragraph 3 above shall apply to amendments
to any protocol, except that a two-thirds majority of the Parties to that Protocol
present and voting at the meeting shall suffice for their adoption.
GENERAL PRO VISIONS
5. Instruments of ratification, approval, formal confirmation or acceptance
of amendments shall be deposited with the Depository. Amendments adopted in
accordance with paragraph 3 or 4 above shall enter into force between Parties having
accepted them, on the ninetieth day after the receipt by the Depository of the
instrument of ratification, approval, formal confirmation or acceptance by at least two thirds
of the Parties who accepted the amendments to the Protocol concerned, except
as may otherwise be provided in such Protocol. The amendments shall enter into
force for any other Party on the ninetieth day after that Party deposits its instrument
of ratification, approval, formal confirmation or acceptance of the amendments.
6. For the purpose of this Article, "Parties present and voting" means
Parties present and casting an affirmative or negative vote.
ARTICLE 18
ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF ANNEXES
1. The annexes to this Convention or to any Protocol shall form an integral
part of this Convention or of such Protocol, as the case may be and, unless expressly
provided otherwise, a reference to this Convention or its Protocols constitutes at the
same time a reference to any annexes thereto. Such annexes shall be restricted to
scientific, technical and administrative matters.
2. Except as may be otherwise provided in any Protocol with respect to its
annexes, the following procedures shall apply to the proposal, adoption and entry in to
force of additional annexes to this Convention or of annexes to a protocol:
(a) Annexes to this Convention and its Protocols shall be proposed
and adopted according to the procedures laid down in Article 17,
paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the present Convention;
(b) Any Party that is unable to accept an additional annex to this
Convention or an annex to any Protocol to which it is Party shall
so notify the Depository, in writing, within six months from the
date of the communication of the adoption by the Depository.
The Depository shall with out dela y notify all Parties of any such
notification received. A Party may at any time substitute an
acceptance for a previous declaration of objection and the
annexes shall thereupon enter in to force for that Party;
(c) Up on the expiration of six months from the date of the circulation
of the communication by the Depository, the annex shall become
effective for all Parties to this Convention or to any Protocol
concerned, which have not submitted a notification in accordance
with the provision of sub-paragraph (b) above.
3. The proposal, adoption and entry into force of amendments to annexes
to this Convention or to any Protocol shall be subject to the same procedure as for the
proposal, adoption and entry into force of annexes to the Convention or annexes to
a Protocol. Annexes and amendments thereto shall take due account, inter alia of
relevant scientific and technical considerations.
4. If an additional annex or an amendment to an annex involves an
amendment to this Convention or to any Protocol, the additional annex or amended
annex shall not enter into force until such time as the amendment to this Convention
or to the Protocol enters into force.
ARTICLE 19
VERIFICATION
Any Party which has reason to believe that another Party is acting or has
acted in breach of its obligations under this Convention must inform the Secretariat
thereof, and in such an event, shall simultaneously and immediately inform, directly
or through the Secretariat, the Party against whom the allegations are made. The
Secretariat shall carry out a verification of the substance of the allegation and submit
a report thereof to all the Parties to this convention.
ARTICLE 20
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
1. In case of dispute between Parties as to the interpretation or application
of, or compliance with, this Convention or any Protocol thereto, the Parties shall seek
a settlement of the dispute through negotiations or any other peaceful means of their
own choice.
2. If the Parties concerned cannot settle their dispute as provided in
paragraph 1 of this Article, the dispute shall be submitted either to an Ad Hoc organ
set up by the Conference for this purpose or to the International Court of Justice.
3. The conduct of arbitration of disputes between Parties by the Ad Hoc
organ provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article shall be as provided in Annex V of
this Convention.
ARTICLE 21
SIGNATURE
This Convention shall be open for signature by Member States of the
OAU in Bamako and Addis Ababa for a period of six months from 30 January, 1991
to 31 July, 1991.
ARTICLE 22
RATIFICATION. ACCEPTANCE, FORMAL CONFIRMATION OR APPROVAL
1. This Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance, formal
confirmation or approval by Member States of the OAU. Instruments of
ratification, acceptance, formal confirmation, or approval shall be deposited with the
Depository.
2. Parties shall be bound by all obligations of this Convention.
ARTICLE 23
ACCESSION
This Convention shall be open for accession by Member States of the
OAU from the date after the day on which the Convention is closed for signature.
The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Depository.
ARTICLE 24
RIGHT TO VOTE
Each Contracting Party to this Convention shall have one vote.
ARTICLE 25
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. This Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date
of deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification from Parties signatory to this
Convention.
2. For each State which ratifies this Convention or accedes thereto after the
date of the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, it shall enter into force on
the ninetieth day after the date of deposit by such State of its instrument of accession
or ratification.
ARTICLE 26
RESERVATIONS AND DECLARATIONS
1. No reservations or exception may be made to this Convention.
2. Paragraph 1 of this Article does not preclude a State when signing,
ratifying, or acceding to this Convention, from making declarations or statements,
however phrased or named, with a view, inter alia, to the harmonization of its laws
and regulations with the provisions of this Convention, provided that such declarations
or statements do not purport to exclude or to modify the legal effects of the
provisions of the Convention in their application to that State.
ARTICLE 27
WITHDRAWAL
1. At any time after three years from the date on which this Convention has
entered into force for a Party, that Party may withdraw from the Convention by giving
written notification to the Depository.
2. Withdrawal shall be effective one year after receipt of notification by the
Depository, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification.
3. Withdrawal shall not exempt the withdrawing Party from fulfilling any
obligations it might have incurred under this Convention.
ARTICLE 28
DEPOSITORY
The Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity shall be the
Depository for this Convention and of any Protocol thereto.
ARTICLE 29
REGISTRA TIQN
This Convention, as soon as it enters into force, shall be registered with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Organization in conformity with Article
102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
ARTICLE 30
AUTHENTIC TEXTS
The Arabic, English, French and Portuguese texts of this Convention are
equally au then tic.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed this Convention.
ADOPTED IN BAMAKO, MALI, ON 30 JANUARY, 1991

ANNEX I
CA TEGORIES OF WASTES WHICH ARE HAZARDOUS WASTES
Waste Streams
YO All wastes containing or contaminated by radionuclides, the concentration or
properties of which result from human activity.
Y1 Clinical wastes from medical care in hospitals, medical centres and clinics.
Y2 Wastes from the production and preparation of pharmaceutical products.
Y3 Waste pharmaceuticals, drugs and medicines.
Y4 Wastes from the production, formulation and use of biocides and
phytopharmaceuticals.
Y5 Wastes from the manufacture, formulation and use of wood preserving
chemicals.
Y6 Wastes from the production, formulation and use of organic solvents.
Y7 Wastes from heat treatment and tempering operations containing cyanides.
YB Waste mineral oils unfit for their originally intended use.
Y9 Waste oils/water, hydrocarbons/water mixtures, emulsions.
Y10 Waste substances and articles containing or contaminated with
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCTs) and/or polychlorinated terphenyls (PCYs)
and/or polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs).
Y11 Waste tarry residues arising from refining, distillation and any pyrolytic
treatment.
Y12 Wastes from production, formulation and use of inks, dyes, pigments, paints,
lacquers, varnish.
Y13 Wastes from production, formulation and use of resins, latex, plasticizers,
glues/adhesives.
Y14 Waste chemical substances arising from research and development or teaching
activities which are not identified and/or are new and whose effects on human
and/or environment are not known.
Y15 Wastes of an explosive nature not subject to other legislation.
Y16 Wastes from production, formulation and use of photographic chemicals and
processing materials.
Y17 Wastes resulting from surface treatment of metals and plastics.
Y18 Residues arising from industrial waste disposal operations.
Y46 Wastes collected from households, including sewage and sewage sludges.
Y46 Residues arising from the incineration of household wastes.
WASTES HAVING AS CONSTITUENTS:
Y19 Metal Carbonyls.
Y20 Beryllium,  beryllium compounds.
Y21 Hexavalent chromium compounds.
Y22 Copper compounds.
Y23 Zinc Compounds
Y24 Arsenic; arsenic compounds.
Y25 Selenium,  selenium compounds.
Y26 Cadmium; cadmium compounds
Y27 Antimony; antimony compounds.
Y28 Tellurium; tellurium compounds.
Y29 Mercury; mercury compounds.
Y30 Thallium; thallium compounds.
Y31 Lead; lead compounds.
Y32 Inorganic fluorine compounds excluding calcium fluoride.
Y33 Inorganic cyanides.
Y34 Acidic solutions or acids in solid form.
Y35 Basic solutions or bases in solid form.
Y36 Asbestos (dust and fibers).
Y37 Organic phosphorus compounds.
Y38 Organic cyanides.
Y39 Phenols; phenol compounds including chlorophenols.
Y40 Ethers
Y41 Halogenated organic solvents.
Y42 Organic solvents excluding halogenated solvents.
Y43 Any congenor of polychlorinated dibenzo-furan.
Y44 Any con9enor of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin.
Y45 Organohalogen compounds other than substances referred to in this Annex (e.g.
Y39, Y41, Y42, Y43, Y44).
ANNEX II
LIST OF HAZARDOUS CHARACTERISTICS
UN Class 
Code Characteristics
1. HI Explosive 
An explosive substance or waste is a solid or liquid substance or waste
(or mixture of substances or wastes) which is in itself capable by
chemical reaction or producing gas at such a temperature and pressure
and at such a speed as to cause damage to the surroundings.
3. H3 Flammable liquids
The word "flammable" has the same meaning as "inflammable".
Flammable liquids are liquids, or mixtures of liquids, or liquids containing
solids in solution or suspension (for example paints, varnishes, lacquers,
etc., but not including substances or wastes otherwise classified on
account of their dangerous characteristics) which give off a flammable
vapour at temperatures of not more than 60. 5 degrees C, closed up test,
or not more than 65. 6 degrees C, open-cup test (Since the results of
open-cup tests and of closed-up tests are not strictly comparable and
even individual results by the same test are often variable, regulations
varying from the above figures to make allowance for such difference
would be within the spirit of this definition).
4.1. H4.1 Flammable solids
Solids, or waste solids, other than those classed as explosives, which
under conditions encountered in transport are readily combustible, or
may cause or contribute to fire through friction.
4.2. H4.2 Substances or wastes liable to spontaneous combustion
Substances or wastes which are liable to spontaneous heating under
normal conditions encountered in transport, or to heating up on contact
with air, and being then liable to catch fire.
4.3. H4.3 Substances or wastes which, in contact with water emit flammable gases.
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with water, are liable to
become spontaneously flammable or to give off flammable gases in
dangerous quantities.
5.1. H5.1 Oxidizing
Substances or wastes which, while in themselves not
necessarily combustible, may, generally by yielding oxygen, cause or
contribute to the combustion of other materials.
5.2. H5.2 Organic peroxides
Organic substances or wastes which contain the bivalent -0-0-structure
are thermally unstable substances which may undergo exothermic selfaccelerating
decomposition.
6.1. H6.1 Poisonous (Acute)
Substances or wastes liable either to cause death or serious injury or to
harm human health if swallowed or inhaled or by skin contact.
6.2. H6.2 Infectious Substances
Substances or wastes containing viable micro organisms or their toxins
which are known or suspected to cause disease in animals or humans.
8. H8 Corrosives
Substances or wastes which, by chemical action, will cause severe
damage when in contact with living tissue, or in the case of leakage, will
materially damage, or even destroy, other goods or the means of
transport; they may also cause other hazards.
9. 10 Liberation of toxic gases in contact with air or water
Substances or wastes which, by interaction with air or water, are liable
to give off toxic gases in dangerous quantities.
9. H11 Toxic (Delayed or Chronic)
Substances or wastes which, if they are inhaled or ingested, or if they
penetrate the skin, may involve delayed or chronic effects, including
carcinogenicity.
9. H12 Ecotoxic
Substances or wastes which if released, present or may present
immediate or delayed adverse impacts to the environment by means of
bioaccumulation and/or toxic effect upon biotic systems.
9. H13
Capable, by any means, after disposal, of yielding another material, e.g.,
leachate, which possesses any of the characteristics listed above.
ANNEX Ill
DISPOSAL OPERA TIONS
D 1 Deposit into or onto land, (e.g., landfill, etc.).
D2 Land treatment (e. g., biodegradation of liquid or sludgy discards in soils,
etc.).
D3 Deep injection (e.g. injection of pumpable discards into wells, salt domes
or naturally occurring repositories, etc.).
D4 Surface impoundment (e.g. placement of liquid into lined discrete cells
which are capped and isolated from one another and the environment,
etc.).
D6 Release into a water body except seas/oceans.
D7 Release into seas/oceans including sea-bed insertion.
DB Biological treatment not specified elsewhere in this Annex which results
in final compounds or mixtures which are discarded by means of any of
the operations in Annex Ill.
D9 Physico-chemical treatment not specified elsewhere in the Annex which
results in final compounds or mixtures which are discarded by means of
any of the operations in Annex Ill (e.g. evaporation, drying, calcination,
neutralization, precipitation, etc.).
D10 Incineration on land.
D11 Incineration at sea.
D12 Permanent storage (e.g. emplacement of containers in a mine, etc.).
D13 Blending or mixing prior to submission to any of the
operations in Annex Ill.
D14 Repackaging prior to submission to any of the operations in Annex Ill.
D15 Storage pending any of the operations in Annex Ill.
D16 Use of fuel (other than in direct incineration) or other means to generate
energy.
D17 Solvent reclamation/regeneration.
D18 Recycling/reclamation of organic substances which are not used as
solvents.
D19 Recycling/reclamation of metals and metal compounds.
D20 Recycling/reclamation of other inorganic materials.
D21 Regeneration of acids and bases.
D22 Recovery of components used for pollution abatement.
D23 Recovery of components from catalysts.
D24 Used oil re-refining or other reuses of previously used oil.
D25 Land treatment resulting in benefit to agriculture or ecological
improvement.
D26 Uses of residual materials obtained from any of the operations numbered
D 1 - 25.
D27 Exchange of wastes for submission to any of the operations numbered
D 1 - 26.
D28 Accumulation of material in tended for any operation in Annex III.
ANNEX /VA
INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED ON NOTIFICATION
1. Reason for waste export.
2. Exporter of the waste 1/
3. Generator(s) of the waste and site of generation 1/
4. Importer and Disposer of the waste and actual site of
disposal 1/
5. Intended carrier(s) of the waste or their agents, if known 1/
6. Country of export of the waste.
Competent authority 2/
7. Countries of transit
Competent authority 2/
8. Projected date of shipment and period of time over which waste is to be
exported and proposed itinerary (including point of entry and exit).
9. Means of transport envisaged (road, rail, sea, air, inland waters).
10. Information relating to insurance.
11. Designation and physical description of the waste including Y number and UN
number and its composition 4/ and information on any special handling
requirements including emergency provisions in case of accidents.
12. Type of packaging envisaged (e.g. bulk, drummer, tanker).
13. Estimated quantity of weight/volume.
14. Process by which the waste is generated 51
15. Waste classification from Annex II: Hazardous characteristics, H number, and
UN Class.
16. Method of disposal as per Annex III.
17. Declaration by the generator and exporter that the information is correct.
18. Information transmitted (including technical description of the plant) to the
exporter or generator from the disposer of the waste upon which the latter has
based his assessment that there was no reason to believe that the wastes will
not be managed in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the country of import.
19. Information concerning the contact between the exporter and disposer.
NOTES
1/ Full name and address, telephone, telex or telefax number and the name,
address, telephone, telex, or telefax number of the person to be contacted.
2/ Full name and address, telephone, telex or telefax number.
3/ Information to be provided on relevant insurance requirements and how they
are met by exporter, carrier, and disposer.
4/ The nature and concentration of the most hazardous components, in terms of
toxicity and other dangers presented by the waste both in handling and in
relation to the proposed disposal method.
5/ Insofar as this is necessary to assess the hazard and determine the
appropriateness of the proposed disposal operation.
ANNEX X IV B
INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED ON THE MOVEMENT DOCUMENT
1. Exporter of the waste 1/
2. Generator(s) of the waste and site of generation 1/
3. Importer and disposer of the waste and actual site of disposal 1 I
4. Carrier(s) of the waste 1/ or his agent(s).
5. The date the transboundary movement started and date(s) and signature on
receipt by each person who takes charge of the waste.
6. Means of transport (road, rail, inland waterway, sea, air) including countries of
export, transit and import, also point of entry and exit where these have been
designated.
7. General description of the waste (physical state, proper UN shipping name and
class, UN number, Y number and H number as applicable).
8. Information on special handling requirements including emergency provisions
in case of accidents.
9. Type and number of packages.
10. Quantity in weight/volume.
11. Declaration by the generator or exporter that the information is correct.
12. Declaration by disposer or exporter indicating no objection from the competent
authorities of all States concerned.
13. Certification by disposer of receipt at designated disposal facility and indication
of method of disposal and of the appropriate date of disposal.
NOTES
The information required on the movement document shall, where
possible, be integrated into one document with that required under transport rules.
Where this is not possible, the information should complement rather than duplicate
that required under the transport rules. The movement document shall carry
instruction as to who is to provide information and fill out any form.
1/ Full name and address, telephone, telex or telefax number and the name,
address, telephone, telex or telefax number of the person to be contacted in
case of emergency.
ANNEX V
ARBITRATION
Article 1
Unless the agreement referred to in Article 20 of the Convention provides
otherwise, the arbitration procedure shall be conducted in accordance with Articles
2 to 10 below.
Article 2
The claimant Party shall notify the Secretariat that the parties have
agreed to submit the dispute to arbitration pursuant to paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 of
Article 20 of the Convention and include, in particular, the Articles of the Convention,
and the interpretation or application of which are at issue. The Secretariat shall
forward the information thus received to all Parties to the Convention.
Article 3
The Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of three members. Each of the Parties
to the dispute shall appoint an arbitrator, and the two arbitrators so appointed shall
designate by common agreement, the third arbitrator, who shall be the Chairman of
the Tribunal. The latter shall not be a national of one of the Parties to the dispute, nor
have his usual place of residence in one of the Parties, nor be employed by any of
them, nor have dealt with the case in any other capacity.
Article 4
1. If the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal has not been designated within
two months of the appointment of the second arbitrator, the Secretary-General of the
0AU shall, at the request of either Party, designate him within a further two months'
period.
2. If one of the Parties to the dispute does not appoint an arbitrator within
two months of the receipt of the request, the other Party may inform the Secretary General
of the OAU who shall designate the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal within
a further two months period. Upon designation, the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal
shall request the Party which has not appointed an arbitrator to do so within two
months. After such period, he shall inform the Secretary-General of the OAU who
shall make this appointment within a further two months' period.
Article 5
1. The Arbitral Tribunal shall render its decision in accordance with
international law and in accordance with the provisions of this Convention.
2. Any Arbitral Tribunal constituted under the provisions of this Annex shall
draw up its own rules of procedure.
Article 6
1. The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal both on procedure and on substance,
shall be taken by majority vote of its members.
2. The Tribunal may take all appropriate measures in order to establish the
facts. It may, at the request of one of the Parties, recommend essential interim
measures of protection.
3. The Parties to the dispute shall provide all facilities necessary for the
effective conduct of the proceedings.
4. The absence or default of a Party in the dispute shall not constitute an
impediment to the proceedings.
Article 7
The Tribunal may hear and determine counter-claims arising directly out
of the subject-matter of the dispute.
Article B
Unless the Arbitral Tribunal determines otherwise because of the
particular circumstances of the case, the expenses of the Tribunal, including the
remuneration of its members, shall -be borne by the Parties to the dispute in equal
shares. The Tribunal shall keep a record of all its expenses, and shall furnish a fin al
statement thereof to the Parties.
Article 9
Any Party that has an interest of a legal nature in the subject-matter of
the dispute which may be affected by the decision in the case, may intervene in the
proceedings with the consent of the Tribunal.
Article 10
1. The Tribunal shall render its award within five months of the date on
which it is established unless it finds it necessary to extend the time-limit for a period
which should not exceed five months.
2. Th e award of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be accompanied by a statement
of reasons. It shall be final and binding upon the Parties to the dispute.
3. Any dispute which may arise between the Parties concerning the
interpretation or execution of the award may be submitted by either Party to the
Arbitral Tribunal which made the award or, if the latter cannot be seized thereof, to
another tribunal constituted for this purpose in the same manner as the first.
ADOPTED IN BAMAKO, MALI, ON 30 JANUARY, 1991

