FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN MOLDOVA AND BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
_______________
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
MOLDOVA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
PREAMBLE
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Government of the Republic of Moldova (hereinafter referred to
as “the Parties”),
Reaffirming their desire to actively participate in the process of economic integration in
Europe;
Admitting that Parties are willing to consolidate these relations and to establish strong and
durable relationships of cooperation and economic integration;
Reaffirming their commitment to pluralist democracy based on observance of the rules, rights and
basic human liberties of the state governed by the rule of law;
Firmly convinced that this Agreement will promote intensification of commercial mutually
advantageous exchange leading to creation of a wide zone of free trade, and contributing to the
process of European integration;
Resolved for this purpose to progressively eliminate the barriers in mutual trade in general, in
conformity with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994) and the
Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO), Bosnia and Herzegovina having
objective to become WTO member;
Considering that no provision of this Agreement may be interpreted as exempting the Parties
from their obligations under other international agreements,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Objectives
1. The Parties shall gradually establish a free trade area on substantially all their bilateral trade in
a transitional period ending on 31 December 2005, in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement and in conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the WTO.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(a) to promote, through the expansion of mutual trade, of harmonious development of
economic relations between the Parties, improvement of living standards and conditions of work,
raising productivity and enhancing financial stability;
(b) to provide fair conditions for carrying out loyal competition for trade between the
Parties;
(c) to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods, including also
the agricultural products;
(d) to create conditions for further encouragement of investments, particularly for the
development of joint investments in both countries;
(e) to contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade. 
CHAPTER I: INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
Article 2
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to industrial products originating in the Parties.
2. The term “industrial products” means for the purpose of this Agreement the products falling
within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System with the
exception of the products listed in Annex 1 to this Agreement.
Article 3
Basic Duties
1. For commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Customs Tariffs of the Parties shall
be applied to the classification of goods for imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions set out in this Agreement
are to be applied shall be the MFN duty in force on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. If after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga
omnes basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff agreement concluded as a result of
the GATT Uruguay Round, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in
paragraph 2 of this Article as from that date when such reductions are applied.
4. The reduced duties, calculated in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, shall be
rounded off to the first decimal place.
5. The Parties shall mutually exchange their basic duties.
Article 4

Customs Duties On Import And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties on imports or
charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased
in trade between the Parties.
2. Customs duties on imports and charges having equivalent effect shall be progressively
reduced in accordance with the following timetable:
 - From July 1, 2003 to 60% of the basic duty;
 - From January 1, 2004 to 50% of the basic duty;
 - From January 1, 2005 to 40% of the basic duty;
 - From January 1, 2006 the remaining duties shall be abolished.
Article 5 
Customs Duties On Export, Charges Having Equivalent Effect
And Other Export Duties Of A Fiscal Nature
1. No new customs duties on exports, charges having equivalent effect to customs duties, and
other export duties of a fiscal nature shall be introduced in trade between the Parties, as from the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall abolish all customs duties on exports, charges having equivalent effect to
custom duties, and other export duties of a fiscal nature on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
Article 6
Quantitative Restrictions On Imports And Exports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new quantitative restrictions on imports and exports or measures having equivalent effect
shall be introduced in trade between the Parties as from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and measures having equivalent effect shall
be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 7
Elimination Of Technical Barriers To Trade
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to standards or technical regulations and
related measures shall be governed in accordance with the WTO Agreement on Technical
Barriers to Trade.

2. The Parties shall co-operate and exchange information in the field of standardization,
metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation with the aim of eliminating technical barriers
to trade.

3. Each Party, upon a request of the other Party, shall provide information on particular
individual cases of standards, technical norms or related measures.
4. The Parties shall aim to reduce and/or eliminate technical barriers to trade. To this end the
Parties will enter, where appropriate, into negotiations for the conclusion of the Agreements for
the mutual recognition in the field of conformity assessment, for the products subject to mutual
trade between the Parties.
CHAPTER II: AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
 Article 8
 Scope
 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to agricultural products originating in the Parties.

2. The term "agricultural products" means for the purpose of this Agreement the products falling
within Chapters 1 to 24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System and the
products listed in Annex 1 to this Agreement. 
Article 9
Basic Duties
1. For commercial exchanges covered by this Agreement, the Customs Tariffs of the Parties shall
be applied to the classification of goods for imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions set out in this Agreement
are to be applied shall be the MFN duty in force on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
3. If after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga
omnes basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff agreement concluded as a result of
the GATT Uruguay Round, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in
paragraph 2 of this Article as from that date when such reductions are applied.
4. The reduced duties, calculated in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, shall be
rounded off to the first decimal place.
5. The Parties shall mutually exchange their basic duties.
Article 10
Customs Duties On Import And Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties on imports or
charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced, nor shall those already applied be increased
in trade between the Parties.
2. Customs duties on imports and charges having equivalent effect shall be progressively
reduced in accordance with the following timetable:
 - From July 1, 2003 to 60% of the basic duty;
 - From January 1, 2004 to 50% of the basic duty;
 - From January 1, 2005 to 40% of the basic duty;
- From January 1, 2006 the remaining duties shall be abolished.
Article 11
Customs Duties On Export, Charges Having Equivalent Effect
And Other Export Duties Of A Fiscal Nature
1. No new customs duties on exports, charges having equivalent effect to customs duties, and
other export duties of a fiscal nature shall be introduced in trade between the Parties, as from the
date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall abolish all customs duties on exports, charges having equivalent effect to
custom duties, and other export duties of a fiscal nature on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
Article 12
Quantitative Restrictions On Imports And Exports And Measures Having Equivalent Effect 
1. No new quantitative restrictions on imports and exports or measures having equivalent effect
shall be introduced in trade between the Parties as from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.
2. All quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and measures having equivalent effect shall
be abolished on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 13
Agricultural Policy
1. Without prejudice to the provisions under Article 9 of this Agreement, the provisions of the
Chapter II of this Agreement shall not restrict in any way the pursuance of the respective
agricultural policies of the Parties or the taking of any measures under such policies, including the
implementation of the provisions of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.
2. The Parties shall notify to the Joint Committee changes in their respective agricultural
policies pursued or measures which may affect the conditions of trade in agricultural products
between them. On the request of either Party, prompt consultations shall be held within the Joint
Committee, to examine the situation.
Article 14
Specific Safeguards
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, in particular Article 29 of this
Agreement, given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, if imports of products
originating in one Party, which are subject of concessions, granted under this Agreement, cause
serious disturbances to the market of the other Party, the Party concerned shall enter into prompt
consultations to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution, the Party concerned may
take appropriate measures it deems necessary.
Article 15
Sanitary And Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Parties shall apply their national regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and sanitary
matters, in particular in the exchange of information on infectious diseases of domestic animals,
quarantine diseases, plant pests and weed, in a way that complies to the WTO Agreement on the
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
2. The Parties shall apply their regulations in veterinary, phytosanitary and sanitary matters in a
non-discriminatory way and shall not introduce new measures that may have the effect of unduly
obstructing trade.
3. The Parties undertake the obligations to exchange information on the level of the sanitary and
phytosanitary protection of animals, plants and products.
Article 16
Elimination Of Technical Barriers To Trade 
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to standards or technical regulations and
related measures shall be governed in accordance with the WTO Agreement on Technical
Barriers to Trade.

2. The Parties shall co-operate and exchange information in the field of standardization,
metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation with the aim of eliminating technical barriers
to trade.

3. Each Party, upon a request of the other Party, shall provide information on particular
individual cases of standards, technical norms or related measures.
4. The Parties shall aim to reduce and/or eliminate technical barriers to trade. To this end the
Parties will enter, where appropriate, into negotiations for the conclusion of the Agreements for
the mutual recognition in the field of conformity assessment, for the products subject to mutual
trade between the Parties.
CHAPTER III: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 17
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing,
whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products originating in the Parties.
2. Products exported to the territory of one of the Parties may not benefit from repayment of
internal taxation in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxation imposed on them.
Article 18
Rules Of Origin And Co-Operation In Customs Administration
1. The Parties agree to apply the harmonized European preferential rules of origin in the mutual
trade including all existing and further amendments thereto. In case the European rules of origin
are amended, the Joint Committee shall make a decision on amending rules of origin.
2. Protocol A to this Agreement (hereinafter referred to as “Protocol A”) lays down the rules of
origin and related methods of administrative co-operation.
3. The Parties shall take appropriate measures, including regular reviews by the Joint Committee
and arrangements for administrative co-operation, to ensure that the provisions of Protocol A and
Articles 3 to 7, 9 to 13, 17, 29, 30 and 31 of this Agreement are effectively and harmoniously
applied, and to reduce, as far as possible, the formalities imposed on trade, and to achieve
mutually satisfactory solutions to any difficulties arising from the operation of those provisions.
4. The Parties shall conclude separate Agreement for co-operation between their Customs
Administration, as soon as possible.
Article 19
General Exceptions
1. The provisions of this Agreement shall not prevent from applying prohibitions or restrictions on
import, export, or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public
security; the protection health and human life, animals or plants as well as environment
protection; protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historical or archaeological value; 
the protection of intellectual property; regulations relating to gold or silver, or the conservation of
exhaustible natural resources, if such measures are effectively applied in relation with domestic
consumption or production restrictions.
2. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
discrimination or disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 20
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any appropriate measures which it
considers necessary:
(a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation of
international obligations or national policies:
(i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war, provided
that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of
products not intended for specifically military purposes, and to such traffic in
other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
(ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
(iii) in time of war or other serious international tension constituting the threat of
war.
Article 21
State Monopoly
1. The Parties shall adjust progressively any State monopoly of a commercial character so as to
ensure that by the end of the transitional period laid down in Article 1 of this Agreement, no
discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed, exists
between natural and legal persons of the Parties. The Parties shall inform each other about the
measures adopted to implement this objective.
2. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any body through which the competent
authorities of the Parties, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly supervise, determine or
appreciably influence imports or exports between the Parties. These provisions shall likewise
apply to monopolies delegated by the State to other bodies.
Article 22
Payments
1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to trade in goods between the Parties and
the transfer of such payments to the territory of the Party where the creditor resides shall be free
from any restrictions.

2. The Parties shall refrain from any exchange or administrative restrictions on the grant,
repayment or acceptance of short and medium term credits to trade in goods in which person
residing in one of the Parties participates.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article, all measures concerning current
payments connected with the movement of goods shall be in conformity with the conditions 
stipulated in Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of International Monetary Fund and shall be
applied on a non-discriminatory basis.
Article 23
Rules Of Competition Between Undertakings
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement insofar as they
can affect trade between the Parties:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and
concerted practices between undertakings which have as their objective or effect the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the
Parties, as a whole or in substantial part thereof.
2. If one Party considers that a certain practice is incompatible with the provisions of paragraph 1
of this Article, and if such a practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the
interests of that Party or material injury to its domestic industry, it may take appropriate
measures, upon consultations within the Joint Committee or after 30 days after a request for such
consultations is made, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid down in
Article 26 of this Agreement.
Article 24
State Aid
1. Any aid granted by one Party or through State resources in any form whatsoever, distorting or
threatening to distort competition by favoring certain undertakings or the production of certain
goods shall be incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement, insofar as it may affect
trade between the Parties.
2. The Joint Committee, within two years since the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement, shall set out the basic criteria to verify any practices contrary to this Article, as well as
rules for their implementation.

3. The Parties shall ensure transparency of state aid measures, inter alia also through annual
reporting to the Joint Committee on the total amount of the state aid and its distribution and will
provide, on the other Party’s request, information on the schemes in specific cases.
4. If one Party considers that a given practice is incompatible with the provisions of this Article, it
may take appropriate measures against this practice, which shall not be in excess of the injury
caused, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 26 of this
Agreement. Such measures may be taken only in accordance with the procedures and conditions
set up by the GATT 1994 and WTO and any other negotiated instrument applicable between
Parties.
Article 25
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement markets as an
objective of this Agreement. 
2. The Parties shall progressively develop regulations on public procurement for the purpose of
ensuring mutual access to bidding based contracting on their public procurement markets, at the
latest to the end of transitional period from Article 1 of this Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee will examine the evolution of regulations in this area, aiming to meet the
objectives of this Article, and shall recommend concrete ways to implement its provisions.

4. During the time of examination indicted in paragraph 3 of this Article, the Joint Committee may
take into consideration, in particular, within the framework of international relations development,
the possibility of extending the coverage or/and degree of openness of the market mentioned in
paragraph 2 of this Article.
Article 26
Procedure For The Application Of Safeguard Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of safeguard measures set out in the
following paragraphs of this Article, the Parties shall endeavor to solve any differences between
them through direct consultations.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 6 of this Article, each Party, which considers resorting to
safeguard measures, shall promptly notify the other Party in writing and shall supply all relevant
information. Consultations between the Parties shall take place without delay with a view to
finding a solution.

3. (a) As regards Articles 23 and 24, the Parties shall give the Joint Committee all required
assistance required in order to examine the case. If the Party fails to stop the practice objected to,
within the period fixed by the Joint Committee, or if the Joint Committee fails to reach an
agreement after consultations, or after 30 days following the referral for such consultations, the
Party concerned may adopt the appropriate measures to deal with the difficulties resulting from
the disputed practice.
(b) As regards Articles 28, 29 and 31, the Joint Committee shall examine the case or
situation and may take any decision needed to put an end to the difficulties notified
by the Party concerned. In absence of such a decision during 30 days of the matter
being referred to the Joint Committee, the Party concerned may adopt the necessary
measures in order to remedy the situation.
(c) As regards Article 33 the Party concerned shall supply to the Joint Committee with
all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation with a
view to seeking a mutually acceptable solution. If the Joint Committee fails to reach
an agreement or if a period of three months has elapsed from the date of notification
to the Joint Committee, the Party concerned may take appropriate measures.
4. The safeguard measures taken shall be immediately notified to the other Party. They will be
restricted with regard to their extent and to their duration to what is strictly necessary in order to
rectify the situation-giving rise to their application and shall not be in excess of the injury caused
by the practice or the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures as will least
disturb the functioning of the Agreement.
5. The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of regular consultations within the Joint
Committee with a view of their re-applying, substitution or abolition as soon as possible.
6. When exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior examination
impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 28, 29 and 31, apply forthwith the
precautionary and provisional measures strictly necessary to remedy the respective situation. The
measures shall be notified without delay and consultations between the Parties shall take place
as soon as possible within the Joint Committee. 
Article 27
Intellectual Property Protection
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non-discriminatory protection of
intellectual property rights, including measures for the enforcement of such rights against
infringement, counterfeiting and piracy.

2. For the purposes of this Agreement, the protection of intellectual property rights includes
mainly the protection of copyright, computer programs, databases and related rights, trademarks,
geographic indications, industrial projects, patents, integrated circuits and drawings, as well as
unpublished know-how information.
3. The Parties shall co-operate in intellectual property rights protection matters and, at the
request of any Party, consultations on expert level regarding these problems shall be held, mainly
in areas dealing with the existing and future international treaties on harmonization,
administration and enforcement of intellectual property rights and international specialized
organizations such as the WTO and World Organization on Intellectual Property, as well as the
relationships of the Parties with any other third country on the of intellectual property matter.
Article 28
Dumping
If one of the Parties finds that dumping, in the meaning of Article VI of GATT 1994, is taking place
in the trade relations governed by this Agreement, the concerned Party may take appropriate
measures against this practice under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure laid
down in Article 26 of this Agreement, as well as in conformity with Article VI of GATT 1994 and
WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994.
Article 29
General Safeguards
Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under conditions as to
cause, or threaten to cause:
(a) serious injuries to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in the
territory of the importing Party, or
(b) serious disturbances in any related sector of the economy or difficulties which could
bring serious deterioration in the economic situation of a certain region, the Party concerned may
take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down
in Article 26 of this Agreement.
Article 30
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration, which derogate from the provisions of Article 4 of this
Agreement, may be taken by either Party in the form of increased customs duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing
restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce important
social problems. 
3. Import customs duties applied by one of the Parties for goods originating in other Party
introduced in accordance with paragraph 1 and 2 of this Article shall not exceed 25% ad valorem
and shall contain a preference element in terms of the rate of customs duty for goods originating
in other Party. The total value of imported goods subject to such measures cannot exceed 15% of
the total amount of imports of industrial goods from the other Party during the last year for which
statistic data is available.

4. These measures shall apply for a period that will not exceed three years, otherwise the
authorization of the Joint Committee is needed. They will seize to be applied, at latest, by the end
of the transition period.
5. No measure can be applied to goods if more than two years passed since the removal of all
customs duties and quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect for such goods.

6. The interested Party shall inform the other Party of any exceptional measure it intends to take
and, at the request of the other Party, consultations shall be held within the Joint Committee
regarding such measures and sectors to which they apply, even before they are put into force.
When taking such measures, the Party concerned shall provide the Joint Committee a schedule
for the elimination of customs duties introduced under this Article.
Article 31
Re-Export And Serious Shortage
Where the compliance with the provisions of this Agreement leads to:
(a) re-export towards a third country, against which the exporting Party maintains for that product
quantitative export restrictions, export duties, or measures or charges having equivalent effect; or
(b) a serious shortage, or a threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party, and
where the situation referred to above gives rise or is likely to give rise to major difficulties for the
exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 26 of this Agreement. The measures shall be
non-discriminatory and be eliminated when conditions no longer their maintenance.
Article 32
Balance-Of-Payments Difficulties
1. Where a Party is in serious balance-of-payments difficulties, or under imminent threat
thereof, the Party concerned may adopt, in accordance with the conditions established by GATT
1994 and the provisions of this Agreement, trade restrictive measures, which shall be of limited
duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance-of-payments situation.
The measures shall be progressively attenuated, as the balance-of-payments conditions improve,
and they shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance. The Party in
concerned shall inform the other Party and the Joint Committee forthwith their introduction and,
whenever practicable, of a
time schedule for their removal.
2. The Parties shall endeavor to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures based on balanceof-payments difficulties.
Article 33
Fulfillment Of Obligations 
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the fulfillment of their obligations
under the provisions of this Agreement.
2. If either Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation under this
Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures under the conditions and in
accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 26 of this Agreement.
Article 34
The Joint Committee
1. The Parties agree to establish a Joint Committee composed of their representatives.
2. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised and administrated by the Joint
Committee.
3. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall exchange
information and, at the request of any Party, shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee.
The Joint Committee shall keep under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to
trade between the Parties.

4. The Joint Committee may take decisions in the cases provide for in this Agreement. On other
matters the Joint Committee may take recommendations.
Article 35
Procedures Of The Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall meet whenever
necessary but at least once a year. Either Party may request a meeting to be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall take decisions and recommendations by consensus.
3. If the representative of either Party in the Joint Committee has accepted, under reservation, a
decision subject to the fulfillment of internal legal requirements, that decision shall enter into
force, if no later date is contained therein, on the date of the receipt of a written notification as to
the fulfillment of such requirements.

4. For the purpose of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure.
5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working groups as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
Article 36
Trade Relations Governed By Other Agreements
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, freetrade areas, economic unions or arrangements for frontier trade to the extent that these do not
negatively affect the trade regime between the Parties and in particular the provisions concerning
rules of origin provided for by this Agreement.
2. Upon request, the Parties shall inform each other of any agreement establishing customs
unions or free trade areas concluded with other countries.
Article 37 
Evolutionary Clause
 1. Where either Party considers that it would be useful in the interest of the economies of the
Parties to develop the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not
covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the other Party. The Parties may instruct
the Joint Committee to examine this request and, where appropriate, to make recommendations
to them, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article will be
subject to ratification of approval by the Parties to this Agreement in accordance with their internal
legal procedures.
Article 38
Annexes And Protocols
Annexes and Protocols of this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. The Joint
Committee may decide to amend Annexes and Protocols.
Article 39
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement, including Annexes and Protocol, may be proposed by either
Party and shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the last notification, through diplomatic
channels, confirming that all internal legal procedures required by either Party for their entry into
force have been fulfilled.
Article 40
Entry Into Force, Validity And Denouncement
This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
It shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the date when the Parties have
notified each other through diplomatic channels that their respective internal requirements for the
entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.
Each Party may denounce it through diplomatic channels by a written notification to the other
Party. In such case the Agreement shall be terminated on the first day of the seventh month after
the date on which the other Party received the notification.
The Parties agreed, that in case of accession of one of the Parties to the EU, the Agreement will
be terminated without any compensations for the other Party, on the day before the date of the
accession to the EU. In that case, the Party acceding to the EU shall inform the other Party of
such accession within a reasonable period of time.
After this Agreement becomes ineffective, its provisions will continue to apply to contracts
between enterprises and organizations of both Parties that were signed but not fulfilled during the
period of effectiveness of this Agreement.
DONE in Chisinau, on 23 of December 2002 in two original copies, each in the official
languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian, Moldovian and English
languages, each being equally authentic. In case of different interpretation of provisions of this
Agreement, the text of reference shall be English text. 
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FOR BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA 