PARTIAL SCOPE AGREEMENT OF ECONOMIC COMPLEMENTATION No. 38 SIGNED UNDER ARTICLE 25 OF THE TREATY OF MONTEVIDEO 1980, BETWEEN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL AND THE COOPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF GUYANA
 The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana (hereinafter referred to as "Parties").
WHEREAS Article 25 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, of which the Federative Republic of Brazil is a signatory Party, authorizes the signing of partial scope agreements with other countries and economic integration areas of Latin America;
The Chaguaramas Agreement of 1973, of which the Cooperative Republic of Guyana is a signatory Party;
RECOGNIZING the importance of the Memorandum of Understanding between MERCOSUR and the Cooperative Republic of Guyana in the areas of trade and investment, signed in Rio de Janeiro on June 28, 1999;
HAVING SEEN The rights and obligations of the Parties to the Marrakesh Agreement, which establishes the World Trade Organization;
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the differences in the level of economic development of the Parties,
They agree to the following:  
CHAPTER I Objective
Article 1.- The objective of this Agreement is to promote the increase of bilateral trade flows through the exchange of tariff preferences between the Parties, cooperation on trade issues and increasing participation of the private sector.  
CHAPTER II Treatment of imports
Article 2.- This Agreement is based on the granting of tariff preferences, which consist of percentage reductions in the taxes applied to imports from third countries at the time of customs clearance, of the products negotiated in this Agreement.
Article 3.- Annexes I and II of this Agreement stipulate the tariff preferences and other conditions for the importation of the products listed therein, originating in the territories of the Parties.
Article 4.- Tariff preferences will take effect from the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 5.- The Parties agree to maintain the tariff preferences agreed upon for the importation of the products negotiated in this Agreement, regardless of the level of taxes applied to imports from third countries.
Article 6.- The Parties agree not to maintain or adopt new non-tariff measures or restrictions on trade in the products negotiated in this Agreement, with the exception of the measures referred to in Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty.
Article 7.- For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "taxes" shall be interpreted as customs duties and any other surcharge of an equivalent effect, fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affects imports. This concept does not include similar rates and surcharges that correspond to the approximate cost of the services rendered.
Article 8.- For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "restrictions" shall be interpreted as non-tariff measures of an administrative, financial, exchange rate or of any other nature, through which one of the Parties unilaterally creates obstacles to the importation of The other part. The measures adopted by virtue of the situations provided for in Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty are not included in this concept.  
CHAPTER III Rules of origin
Article 9.- The Parties must apply the rules of origin specified in Annex III, to the goods negotiated in this Agreement.
Article 10.- The certificates of origin issued by government authorities and other public entities or officially authorized private organizations must accompany the aforementioned goods.  
CHAPTER IV Safeguard measures
Article 11.- The safeguard measures adopted within the scope of this Agreement must consist of the suspension or temporary reduction of the tariff preferences established between the Parties.
Article 12.- Once the investigation has been carried out by the competent authority, these measures are applicable to imported products with preferential treatment in the territory of one of the Parties, in quantities and conditions such that they cause or threaten to cause serious damage to the national industry that produces similar or directly competitive goods.
Article 13.- The safeguard measure will be valid for one year, and may be renewed for the same period, consecutively, under the conditions stipulated in this Chapter.
Article 14.- The Party that applies the safeguard measure must notify the other Party within a maximum period of seven (7) business days, counted from its adoption.
Article 15.- The Party shall establish a quota for imports from the other Party of the products negotiated in this Agreement, in order to maintain the quantitative level of imports for a recent period, which shall be interpreted as the average of the last three years for which statistics are available. The granting of preferences and other provisions stipulated in this Agreement must be applied to the aforementioned quotas.
Article 16.- When an importing Party considers it necessary to extend the safeguard measure beyond the initial period of one year indicated in Article 13, it shall begin negotiations with the other Party to define the terms and conditions under which the measure will continue. being applied.
Article 17.- The Parties must initiate the negotiations referred to in Article 16 at least 60 days prior to the end of the safeguard measure. In the absence of an agreement, the party applying the safeguard measure must maintain it for an additional period of one year and must preserve the established quotas, in accordance with article 15.
Article 18.- In the event that at the end of the additional period referred to in Article 17, the importing Party understands that the measure continues to be necessary, the Parties must reassess the tariff preference originally agreed to the product in question.  
CHAPTER V Settlement of disputes
Article 19.- Controversies arising from the implementation of this Agreement must be resolved through direct consultations between the Parties. If there is no agreement within a period of thirty (30) days from the notification of the dispute, the Parties must refer the matter to the Commission established in Article 20, which may establish or gather a group of experts to obtain a technical opinion.  
CHAPTER VI Administration of the Agreement
Article 20.- The Parties agree to establish an Administrative Commission, hereinafter referred to as "the Commission", which must be made up of representatives of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Cooperative Republic of Guyana.
Article 21.- The Commission must be established and hold its first meeting within ninety (90) days from the entry into force of this Agreement. The Commission will adopt its rules of procedure.
Article 22.- The powers of the Commission will be the following:
a) Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement;
b) Formulate recommendations to the Parties in relation to the controversies that arise regarding the interpretation and application of this Agreement;
c) Keep this Agreement under constant evaluation and recommend amendments;
d) Promote the use of this Agreement by the private sector; Y
e) Consider any other matter that the Parties deem necessary.  
CHAPTER VII Membership
Article 23.- This Agreement will be open to adhesion, through negotiation, by the other member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), or the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
Article 24.- The adhesion will be formalized after the negotiation, between the Parties and the adhering country, through the signing of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement, which must enter into force thirty (30) days after its deposit with the Secretary. General of the ALADI.  
CHAPTER VIII Validity and deposit
Article 25.- This Agreement shall enter into force when the Parties exchange communications in which they declare that they have concluded the necessary procedures for the incorporation of this Agreement into their legislation.
Article 26.- The Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil will deposit this Agreement with the Secretary General, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and the Resolutions of the ALADI Council of Ministers.
Article 27.- This Agreement will be valid for a period of two (2) years. This period may be extended by agreement between the Parties.
Article 28.- This Agreement may be replaced by an Economic Complementation Agreement between MERCOSUR and the Cooperative Republic of Guyana, when the latter enters into force.  
CHAPTER IX Complaint
Article 29.- Either Party may denounce this Agreement by communicating its decision to the other Party. The denunciation will take effect one hundred eighty (180) days from the date on which the Party had made the denunciation known to the other Party, in writing.  
CHAPTER X Amendments and modifications
Article 30.- Any of the Parties may submit a proposal to amend or modify the provisions of this Agreement to the Commission referred to in Article 20. The decision to amend must be made by consensus and will take effect with the acceptance of the Parties.
Article 31.- Amendments or modifications to this Agreement will be formalized through Additional Protocols.  
CHAPTER XI General provisions
Article 32.- The importation by the Federative Republic of Brazil of the products of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana included in this Agreement will not be subject to the application of the Additional Freight for the Renewal of the Merchant Navy, established by Decree-Law No. 2,404, of December 23, 1987, in accordance with the provisions of Decree No. 97,945, of July 11, 1989, its amendments and supplements.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Plenipotentiaries, duly authorized, sign this Agreement.
Done in Brasilia, on June 27, two thousand and one, in the Portuguese and English languages, both texts being equally valid. (Signed.:) For the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil; For the Government of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana.
ANNEX TEXT:

ANNEX III
RULES OF ORIGIN
Article 1.- The following shall be considered originating from the Parties:
goods:
a) Goods obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one of the
Parties, namely:
i) materials or products from the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms (including
derived from hunting and fishing), extracted, harvested or
collected, born on its territory or in its territorial waters,
patrimonial and exclusive economic zones;
ii) materials and products extracted from the sea outside their territorial waters,
patrimonial and exclusive economic zones, by ships of its flag
legally registered or leased by companies regularly
established in their territory.
b) Goods produced in the territory of one of the Parties, using
exclusively originating materials in their territories;
c) Goods made in their territories, using materials from countries not
participants of the Agreement, provided that they result from a process of transformation
carried out in one of the Parties, which gives them a new individuality,
characterized by the fact of being classified in the NALADISA in game
different from those materials.
Such goods shall not be considered originating when those
operations or processes in which materials are exclusively used
originating, consist only of simple assemblies or assemblies,
fractioning into batches, pieces or volumes, selection and classification, marking,
composition of assortments of merchandise or other similar operations or processes.
Goods resulting from assembly or assembly operations
made in the territory of one of the Parties, using original materials and
non-originating, will be considered originating when the CIF value port of
destination or CIF maritime port of materials originating from third countries, not
exceeds 50 percent of the FOB export value of said merchandise.
d) In the event that the requirement established in literal c) of this article cannot be
fulfilled, goods made with originating and non-originating materials,
will be considered as originating from the Parties, when the CIF value port of destination
o CIF maritime port of materials originating from third countries, does not exceed
50 percent of the FOB export value of said merchandise.
Article 2.- The Parties may establish, by mutual agreement, requirements
origin specific. These requirements will prevail over the general requirements.
established in the preceding article.
  Article 3.- In the definition of the specific requirements referred to in article
2, or in the review of those that have already been established, the Parties shall take into account
account, individually or jointly, among others, the following elements:
I) Materials used in production:
a) Raw materials:
i) Preponderant raw material or that gives the product its
essential feature; and
ii) Main raw materials.
b) Parts or pieces:
i) Part or piece that gives the product its essential characteristic;
ii) Main parts or pieces; Y
iii) Percentage of parts or pieces in relation to the total weight.
II) Any type of transformation or processing of merchandise.
III) Regional content value.
Any of the Parties may request a review of the established criteria
in Article 1. For these purposes, the Party must justify its request to the other
Party and present the proposal of new requirements for the product or products in
question.
  Article 4.- For the purposes of determining whether a good is originating, its
production in the territory of one or both Parties by one or more producers must be
considered to have been made in the territory of one of the Parties by the exporter or
producer, provided that the merchandise complies with the provisions of this Annex.
  Article 5.- In order for the goods included in this Agreement to benefit
of the tariff preferences, they must be issued directly from the
exporting country to the importing country, and be accompanied by the certificate of origin
correspondent. For such purposes, the following is considered as a direct expedition:
a) Goods transported without passing through the territory of any country are not
participant of this Agreement;
b) Goods transported in transit through one or more non-participating countries,
with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under supervision of the authority
competent customs office in said countries, provided that:
i) the transit is justified for geographical reasons or for considerations
regarding transportation requirements;
ii) They are not intended for trade, use or employment in the country of transit;
iii) They do not undergo, during transport and storage, any operation other than
the loading and unloading; Y
iv) The unloading or handling is carried out only to maintain
goods in good condition or to ensure their preservation.
The intervention of operators from third countries must be authorized when
they comply with the provisions established in items a) and b) of this article, and
provided that such goods are accompanied by the commercial invoice issued by
the intervening party and the corresponding certificate of origin.
  Article 6.- The certificates of origin must be issued only by
government authorities of the Parties. This attribution may be delegated to
other public entities or private organizations, acting with jurisdiction
national or state, hereinafter referred to as “officially authorized entities”.
  A governmental authority in each Party shall be responsible for the
verification and control of the issuance of the certificate of origin.
  Article 7.- The Parties will inform their respective authorities
government agencies and officially authorized entities, empowered to issue
certificates of origin, with the record and facsimile of the signatures authorized for that purpose.
  Article 8.- The certificate of origin is the document that accredits the origin of
the goods. This certificate must meet the following requirements:
a) Be issued by a government authority or by an officially authorized entity;
b) Identify the merchandise to which it refers;
c) Indicate unequivocally that the merchandise in question originates from the Party,
in accordance with the provisions of this Annex.
Article 9.- The application for the certificate of origin must be preceded by a
sworn statement or other legal instrument of equivalent effect, signed by the
final producer, in which the characteristics and components of the
product, the description of the production process and, as a minimum, the following
requirements:
a) Company or trade name;
b) Address or legal and industrial domicile of the facilities;
c) Description of the exported merchandise and classification expressed in NALADISA;
d) FOB Value;
e) Description of the production process;
f) Demonstrative elements of the components of the product, indicating:
i) Material, component and/or national parts and pieces.
ii) Material, component and/or parts and pieces originating from the other Party:
- Classification expressed in NALADISA;
- CIF value in US dollars;
- Percentage of participation in the final item.
iii) Material, component and/or original parts and pieces incorporated into
non-originating goods:
- Classification expressed in NALADISA;
- CIF value in US dollars;
- Percentage of participation in the final item.
The description of the merchandise in the aforementioned declaration or instrument of
equivalent effect must match the description established in the NALADISA,
in addition to the one that appears in the commercial invoice and in the certificate of origin.
The declaration or instrument of equivalent effect must be submitted with
anticipation of the request for certification.
In the case of goods that are regularly exported, provided that the
components, processes and materials are not altered, the same declaration will be
valid for one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of issuance, and
it may be used for the issuance of certificates of origin during said period.
  Article 10.- The certificates of origin must be issued in Portuguese and
English and archived for a period of two (2) years from the date of its
expedition, and contain the corresponding serial number.
  Officially authorized entities of the Parties shall maintain a
permanent record of issued certificates of origin. Said record must
contain, at least, the number of the certificates, the applicant and the date of
expedition.
  The certificates of origin will be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days and will be
issued exclusively on the attached form. This period may be extended
exclusively during the time that the merchandise is subject to any regime
suspensive import, which does not allow any alteration of such merchandise.
  All the fields of the certificates of origin must be properly
filled out, under penalty of being invalidated.
  Article 11.- In case of doubts about the veracity of the information and the
authenticity of the certificate of origin, the governmental authorities of the Party
importer may require the government authority in charge of verification
and control of the certificates of origin of the other Party, additional information for
clarify the issue.
  In no case shall the Parties stop the import procedures for such
goods.
  In the meantime, the Parties may adopt the measures they deem
necessary to guarantee the fiscal interest.
  Article 12.- The government authority responsible for the verification and
control of the certificates of origin, you must provide the information referred to in the
Article 11 within a period of sixty (60) business days from the date of
received the corresponding communication. The information provided will receive treatment
confidential and will be used exclusively ively to clarify such issues.
  Article 13.- Provided that the information provided is considered
unsatisfactory, the authorities of the importing Party may suspend further
operations related to merchandise, companies and operations that involve the
certifying entity in question, including those in the process of dispatch
customs.
  In this case, the authorities of the importing country must submit the
problem to the Administrative Commission, referred to in Article 20 of the Agreement.
Article 14.- To verify if a good is originating, the Parties may,
through the competent authorities of the other Party:
a) Carry out written questionnaires to the exporter or producers;
b) Request that said authority take the necessary measures to facilitate the
verification visits to the exporter's or producer's facilities,
In order to examine production processes, the premises used in the
production, as well as any other activities that may contribute to the
verification of origin of the goods in question; Y
c) Carry out other procedures that the Parties decide.
The Parties agree to facilitate the performance of external audits
reciprocal.
Article 15.- For the purposes of this Annex:
“Materials” means merchandise, raw materials, intermediate products, parts or
parts used in the production of other merchandise;
"Merchandise" designates goods subject to purchase and sale operations;
"NALADISA" designates the Nomenclature of the Latin American Association of
Integration (ALADI);
“Non-originating goods or material” means a good or material that is not
qualifies as originating under this Annex;
"Producer" means a person who plants, extracts, gathers, fishes, captures, hunts,
manufactures, processes or assembles a good:
“Production” means planting, extracting, harvesting, fishing, trapping, hunting,
manufacture, processing or assembly of a good;
"Used" means used or consumed in the manufacture of goods.

