Agreement# I
Terms of Reference
For the Monitoring and Exchange of Groundwater Information
of the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System
Consolidated data throughout the implementation of the "Programme for the
  Development of a Regional Strategy for the Utilisation of the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer
  System" was achieved through a Regional Infonnation System called the Nubian Aquifer
Regional Information System (N'ARlS). This integrated Information System is conceived
to fulfill the following tasks:
-  Storing and documenting the different data, covering all fields relevant to the
Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System.
- Processing, analysis and display of basic data.
- Preparing the input parameters which are needed for the modeling at different
scales, and calibration of the groundwater model and comparison of the results
of modeling with other data for planning and decision making.
- Provide an easy link betvteen the participating countries through a system
ensuring the exchange and flow of infonnation.
Therefore it is herewith agreed that the four countries namely; Chad, Egypt, Libya and
Sudan share the data that was consolidated throughout the implementation of the
Programme mentioned above and included in the Nubian Aquifer Regional Information
System (NAR.lS) in addition to information on developmental aspects including socioeconomic
data, management of harsh environment, drilling experiences, meteorological
data, .. etc. and also agreed to update this system as specified in Agreement #2.
The sharing of this information will be accomplished according to the setup specified
below;
In tern et Environment - Server and access through the Internet.
In this protocol the data will be stored on a server and accessed through internet by the
four countries through web-based Oracle. A level of security is maintained in this
technique, so that access is enabled only to the four countries.
Requirements:
Unix Workstation (Server)
Oracle Engine, Developer Server and Oracle Web Server
Lease Line
Regional Data Exchange
Data is shared and accessed by the four countries only. Any update by one of the four
institutions will be online viewed by the other parties.
Within this mechanism, CEDARE could be hosting the data on its server for one year as
a testing and transition phase, at a certain annual cost which will include all the technical
support for running the System on its workstation, Software and Hardware maintenance,
and Internet leased line. After this first year, the same setup could be founded in the Joint
Authority of the NSAS.

