Agreement Establishing an Association between the European
Community and the Republic of Chile
THE KINGDOM OF BELGIUM,
THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK,
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC,
THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN,
THE FRENCH REPUBLIC,
IRELAND,
THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC,
THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBOURG,
THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS,
THE REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA,
THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC,
THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND,
THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN,
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
Contracting Parties to the Treaty establishing the European Community and the Treaty on
European Union, hereinafter referred to as the “Member States”, and
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY, hereinafter referred to as “the Community”,
of the one part, and
THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE, hereinafter referred to as “Chile”,
of the other part,
Considering the traditional links between the Parties and with particular reference to:
- the common cultural heritage and the close historical, political and economic ties
which unite them;
- their full commitment to the respect for democratic principles and fundamental
human rights as set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
- their attachment to the principles of the rule of law and of good governance;
- the need to promote economic and social progress for their peoples, taking into
account the principle of sustainable development and environmental protection
requirements; 
- the desirability of enlarging the framework of relations between the European Union
and the Latin American regional integration with a view to contributing to a strategic
association between the two regions as foreseen in the Declaration adopted at the
Summit of Heads of State and Government of Latin America and the Caribbean and
the European Union in Rio de Janeiro on 28 June 1999;
- the importance of strengthening the regular political dialogue on bilateral and
international issues of mutual interest, as already established in the Joint Declaration
which is part of the Framework Cooperation Agreement between the Parties of 21
June 1996, hereinafter referred to as the “Framework Cooperation Agreement”;
- the importance that the Parties attach to co-ordinating their positions and
undertaking joint initiatives in the appropriate international fora;
- the importance that the Parties attach to the principles and values set out in the Final
Declaration of the World Summit for Social Development held in Copenhagen in
March 1995;
- the importance attached by the Parties to the principles and rules which govern
international trade, in particular those contained in the Agreement establishing the
World Trade Organisation (the “WTO”) and to the need to apply them in a transparent
and non-discriminatory manner;
- the importance attached by the Parties to the fight against all forms of terrorism and
the commitment to establish effective international instruments to ensure its
eradication;
- the desirability of a cultural dialogue in order to achieve a better mutual
understanding between the Parties, and to foster the existing traditional, cultural and
natural links between the citizens of both Parties;
- the importance of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Community
and Chile of 20 December 1990 and of the Framework Cooperation Agreement in
sustaining and fostering the implementation of these processes and principles,
the Parties have decided to conclude this Agreement:
PART I
GENERAL AND INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
TITLE I
NATURE AND SCOPE OF THE AGREEMENT
Article 1
Principles
1. Respect for democratic principles and fundamental human rights as laid down in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and for the principle of the rule of law underpins the internal and
international policies of the Parties and constitutes an essential element of this Agreement.
2. The promotion of sustainable economic and social development and the equitable distribution of the
benefits of the Association are guiding principles for the implementation of this Agreement.
3. The Parties reaffirm their attachment to the principle of good governance.
Article 2
Objective and Scope
1. This Agreement establishes a Political and Economic Association between the Parties, based on
reciprocity, common interest and on the deepening of the relationship in all areas of 
application.
2. The Association is a process that will lead to a growing relationship and cooperation between the
Parties structured around the bodies created in this Agreement.
3. This Agreement covers in particular the political, commercial, economic and financial, scientific,
technological, social, cultural and cooperation fields. It may be extended to other
areas to be agreed upon by the Parties.
4. In accordance with the objectives defined above, this Agreement provides for the following:
(a) the enhancement of political dialogue on bilateral and international matters of
mutual interest, which will be conducted through meetings at different levels;
(b) the strengthening of cooperation in the political, commercial, economic and
financial, scientific, technological, social, cultural and cooperation fields, as well as
other areas of mutual interest;
(c) the participation of each Party in the framework programmes, specific programmes
and other activities of the other Party shall be upgraded, in so far as permitted by
each Party’s internal procedures governing access to the programmes and activities
concerned, in accordance with Part III of this Agreement; and
(d) the expansion and diversification of the Parties’ bilateral trade relation in
conformity with WTO provisions and with the specific objectives and provisions set out
in Part IV of this Agreement.
TITLE II
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
Article 3
Association Council
1. An Association Council is hereby established, which shall supervise the implementation of this
Agreement. The Association Council shall meet at ministerial level at regular intervals, not exceeding a
period of two years, and extraordinarily whenever circumstances so require, if the Parties so agree.
2. The Association Council shall examine any major issue arising within the framework of this
Agreement, as well as any other bilateral, multilateral or international question of common interest.
3. The Association Council shall also examine proposals and recommendations from the Parties for
the improvement of this Agreement.
Artilcle 4
Composition and rules of procedures
1. The Association Council shall be composed, on the one hand, of the President of the Council of the
European Union, assisted by the Secretary General/High Representative, the incoming Presidency,
other Members of the Council of the European Union or their representatives and Members of the
European Commission, and, on the other hand, of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Chile.
2. The Association Council shall establish its own rules of procedure.
3. Members of the Association Council may arrange to be represented, in accordance with the
conditions laid down in its rules of procedure.
4. The Association Council shall be chaired in turn by a Member of the Council of the European Union
and by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Chile, in accordance with the provisions laid down in its rules
of procedure. 
Article 5
Decision-making powers
1. The Association Council shall, for the purpose of attaining the objectives of this Agreement, have
the power to take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement.
2. The decisions taken shall be binding on the Parties, which shall take all the measures necessary to
implement them in accordance with each Party’s internal rules.
3. The Association Council may also make appropriate recommendations.
4. The Association Council shall adopt decisions and recommendations by mutual agreement between
the Parties.
Article 6
Association Committee
1. The Association Council shall be assisted in the performance of its duties by an Association
Committee composed of representatives of the Members of the Council of the European Union and of
the European Commission, on the one hand, and representatives of the Government of Chile, on the
other, normally at senior officials level.
2. The Association Committee shall be responsible for the general implementation of this Agreement.
3. The Association Council shall establish the rules of procedure of the Association Committee.
4. The Association Committee shall have the power to take decisions in the cases provided for in this
Agreement or where such power has been delegated to it by the Association Council. In this event the
Association Committee shall take its decisions in accordance with the conditions laid down in Article 5.
5. The Association Committee shall generally meet once a year for an overall review of the
implementation of this Agreement, on a date and with an agenda agreed in advance by the Parties, in
Brussels one year and in Chile the next. Special meetings may be convened, by mutual agreement, at
the request of either of the Parties. The Association Committee shall be chaired alternately by a
representative of each of the Parties.
Article 7
Special Committees
1. The Association Council shall be assisted in the performance of its duties by the Special
Committees established in this Agreement.
2. The Association Council may decide to set up any Special Committee.
3. The Association Council shall adopt rules of procedure which determine the composition and duties
of such committees and how they shall function, insofar as not provided for by this Agreement.

Article 8
Political Dialogue
The political dialogue between the Parties shall be conducted within the framework provided for in Part
II of this Agreement.

Article 9
Association Parliamentary Committee
1. An Association Parliamentary Committee is hereby established. It shall be a forum for members of
the Chilean National Congress and the European Parliament to meet and exchange views. Is shall
meet at intervals which it shall itself determine.
2. The Association Parliamentary Committee shall consist of members of the European Parliament, on
the one hand, and of members of the Chilean National Congress, on the other.
3. The Association Parliamentary Committee shall establish its rules of procedure.
4. The Association Parliamentary Committee shall be chaired in turn by a representative of the
European Parliament and a representative of the Chilean National Congress, in accordance with the
provisions to be laid down in its rules of procedure.
5. The Association Parliamentary Committee may request relevant information regarding the
implementation of this Agreement from the Association Council, which shall supply the Committee with
the requested information.
6. The Association Parliamentary Committee shall be informed of the decisions and recommendations
of the Association Council.
7. The Association Parliamentary Committee may make recommendations to the Association Council.
 
Article 10
Joint Consultative Committee
1. A Joint Consultative Committee is hereby established with the task of assisting the Association
Council to promote dialogue and cooperation between the various economic and social organisations
of civil society in the European Union and those in Chile. Such dialogue and cooperation shall
encompass all economic and social aspects of the relations between the Community and Chile, as
they arise in the context of implementation of this Agreement. The Committee may express its view on
questions arising in these areas.
2. It shall be composed of an equal number of members of the European Economic and Social
Committee, on the one hand, and of members of the corresponding institution dealing with economic
and social matters in the Republic of Chile, on the other.
3. The Committee shall carry out its activities on the basis of consultation by the Association Council
or, for the purposes of promoting the dialogue between various economic and social representatives,
on its own initiative.
4. The Joint Consultative Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure.
Article 11
Civil Society
The Parties will also promote regular meetings of representatives of the Chilean and the European
Union’s civil societies, including the academic community, social and economic partners, and nongovernmental organisations in order to keep them informed on the implementation of this Agreement
and gather their suggestions for its improvement.
PART II
POLITICAL DIALOGUE
Article 12
Objectives
1. The Parties agree to reinforce their regular dialogue on bilateral and international matters of mutual
interest. They aim at strengthening and deepening this political dialogue with a view to consolidating
the Association established by this Agreement.
2. The main objective of the political dialogue between the Parties is the promotion, dissemination,
further development and common defence of democratic values, such as the respect for human rights,
the freedom of the individual and the principles of the rule of law as the foundation of a democratic
society.
3. To this end, the Parties shall discuss and exchange information on joint initiatives concerning any
issue of mutual interest and any other international issue with a view to pursuing common goals, in
particular, security, stability, democracy and regional development.
Article 13
Mechanisms
1. The Parties agree that their political dialogue shall take the form of:
(a) regular meetings between Heads of State and Government;
(b) periodic meetings between Foreign Ministers;
(c) meetings between other Ministers to discuss matters of common interest in cases
in which the Parties consider that such meetings will result in closer relations;
(d) annual meetings between senior officials of both Parties.
2. The Parties shall decide on the procedures to be used for the above mentioned meetings.
3. The periodic meetings of Foreign Ministers referred to under paragraph 1(b) shall take place either
within the Association Council established by Article 3 of this Agreement, or on other agreed
occasions of an equivalent level.
4. The Parties will also make maximum use of diplomatic channels. 
Article 14
Cooperation in the field of foreign and security policy
The Parties shall, as far as possible, coordinate their positions and undertake joint initiatives in the
appropriate international fora, and cooperate in the field of foreign and security policy.
Article 15
Cooperation against terrorism
The Parties agree to cooperate in the fight against terrorism in accordance with international
conventions and with their respective laws and regulations. They shall do so in particular:
(a) in the framework of the full implementation of Resolution 1373 of the United
Nations Security Council and other relevant United Nations Resolutions, international
conventions and instruments;
(b) by exchange of information on terrorist groups and their support networks in
accordance with international and domestic law;
(c) by exchange of views on means and methods used to counter terrorism, including
in technical fields and training, and by exchange of experiences in respect of terrorism
prevention.
PART III
COOPERATION
Article 16
General Objectives
1. The Parties shall establish close cooperation aimed inter alia at:
(a) strengthening the institutional capacity to underpin democracy, the rule of law, and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) promoting social development, which should go hand in hand with economic
development and the protection of the environment. The Parties will give particular
priority to respect for basic social rights;
(c) stimulating productive synergies, creating new opportunities for trade and
investment and promoting competitiveness and innovation;
(d) increasing the level of and deepening cooperation actions while taking into
account the association relation between the Parties.
2. The Parties re-affirm the importance of economic, financial and technical cooperation, as means to
contribute to implementing the objectives and principles derived from the present Agreement.

TITLE I
ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Article 17
Industrial cooperation
1. Industrial cooperation will support and promote industrial policy measures to develop and
consolidate the Parties’ efforts and establish a dynamic, integrated and decentralised approach to
managing industrial cooperation, so as to create a favourable environment to serve their mutual
interests.
2. The central aims will be: 
(a) to boost contacts between the Parties’ economic operators, with the aim of
identifying sectors of mutual interest, especially in the area of industrial cooperation,
transfers of technology, trade and investment;
(b) to strengthen and promote dialogue and exchanges of experience between
networks of European and Chilean economic operators;
(c) to promote industrial cooperation projects, including projects deriving from the
process of privatisation and/or opening-up of the Chilean economy; these could cover
the establishment of forms of infrastructure stimulated by European investment
through industrial cooperation between businesses; and
(d) to strengthen innovation, diversification, modernisation, development and product
quality in businesses.
Article 18
Cooperation on standards, technical regulations and conformity assesment procedures
1. Cooperation on standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment is a key objective in
order to avoid and reduce technical barriers to trade and to ensure the satisfactory functioning of trade
liberalisation as provided for in Part IV, Title II.
2. Cooperation between the Parties will seek to promote efforts in:
(a) regulatory cooperation;
(b) compatibility of technical regulations on the basis of international and European
standards; and
(c) technical assistance to create a network of conformity assessment bodies on a
non discriminatory basis.
3. In practice, cooperation will:
(a) encourage any measures aimed at bridging the gaps between the Parties in the
areas of conformity assessment and standardisation;
(b) provide organisational support between the Parties to foster the establishment of
regional networks and bodies, and increase coordination of policies to promote a
common approach to the use of international and regional standards and similar
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures; and
(c) encourage any measure aiming at improving convergence and compatibility
between the respective system of the Parties in the above areas, including
transparency, good regulatory practices and the promotion of quality standards for
products and business practices.
Article 19
Cooperation on small and medium-sized enterprises
1. The Parties will promote a favourable environment for the development of small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs).
2. Cooperation shall consist, amongst other actions, in:
(a) technical assistance;
(b) conferences, seminars, prospecting for industrial and technical opportunities,
participation in round tables and general and sectoral fairs; 
(c) promoting contacts between economic operators, encouraging joint investment
and establishing joint ventures and information networks through existing horizontal
programs;
(d) facilitating access to finance, providing information and stimulating innovation.
Article 20
Cooperation on services
In compliance with the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services (the “GATS”) and within the
bounds of their own fields of competence, the Parties will support and intensify cooperation with each
other, reflecting the growing importance of services in the development and growth of their economies.
Cooperation aimed at promoting the development and diversification of productivity and
competitiveness in Chile’s service sector will be stepped up. The Parties will determine the sectors on
which cooperation will concentrate, and they will also focus on the means available for this purpose.
Activities will be directed particularly at SMEs and at facilitating their access to sources of capital and
market technology. In that connection, special attention will be devoted to promoting trade between
the Parties and third countries.
Article 21
Promoting investment
1. The aim of cooperation will be to help the Parties to promote, within the bounds of their own
competence, an attractive and stable reciprocal investment climate.
2. Cooperation will cover in particular the following:
(a) establishing mechanisms for providing information, identifying and disseminating
investment rules and opportunities;
(b) developing a legal framework for the Parties that favours investment, by
conclusion, where appropriate, of bilateral agreements between the Member States
and Chile to promote and protect investment and avoid dual taxation;
(c) incorporating technical assistance activities for training initiatives between the
Parties’ government agencies dealing with the matter; and
(d) developing uniform and simplified administrative procedures.
Article 22
Cooperation on energy
1. The aim of the cooperation between the Parties is to consolidate economic relations in key sectors
such as hydroelectricity, oil and gas, renewable energy, energy-saving technology and rural
electrification.
2. Among the objectives of cooperation will be:
(a) exchanges of information in all suitable forms, including developing databases
shared by institutions of both Parties, and training and conferences;
(b) transfers of technology;
(c) diagnostic studies, comparative analyses and implementation of programmes by
institutions from both Parties;
(d) involvement of public and private operators from both regions in technological
development and common-infrastructure projects, including networks with other
countries in the region;
(e) conclusion, where appropriate, of specific agreements in key fields of mutual
interest; and
(f) assistance for Chilean institutions dealing with energy matters and the formulation
of energy policy.
Article 23
Transport
1. Cooperation will focus on restructuring and modernising Chile’s transport systems, improving the
movement of passengers and goods and providing better access to the urban, air, maritime, rail and
road transport markets by refining the management of transport from the operational and
administrative points of view and by promoting operating standards.
2. Cooperation will cover matters including the following:
(a) exchanges of information on the Parties’ policies, especially regarding urban
transport and the interconnection and interoperability of multimodal transport networks
and other issues of mutual interest;
(b) training programmes in economics, legislation and technical matters for economic
operators and senior civil servants; and
(c) cooperation projects for transfers of European technology in the Global Navigation
Satellite System and urban public transport centres.
Article 24
Cooperation on agriculture and rural sectors and sanitary and phytosanitary measures
1. Cooperation in this area is designed to support and stimulate agricultural policy measures in order
to promote and consolidate the Parties’ efforts towards a sustainable agriculture and agricultural and
rural development.
2. The cooperation will focus on capacity-building, infrastructure and technology transfer, addressing
matters such as:
(a) specific projects aimed at supporting sanitary, phytosanitary, environmental and
food quality measures, taking into account the legislation in force for both Parties, in
compliance with WTO rules and other competent international organisations;
(b) diversification and restructuring of agricultural sectors;
(c) the mutual exchange of information, including that concerning the development of
the Parties’ agricultural policies;
(d) technical assistance for the improvement of productivity and the exchange of
alternative crop technologies;
(e) scientific and technological experiments;
(f) measures aimed at enhancing the quality of agricultural products and supporting
trade promotion activities;
(g) technical assistance for the strengthening of sanitary and phytosanitary control
systems, with a view to supporting as far as possible the promotion of equivalence
and mutual recognition agreements. 
Article 25
Fisheries
1. In view of the importance of fisheries policy in the relations between them, the Parties undertake to
develop closer economic and technical collaboration, possibly leading to bilateral and/or multilateral
agreements covering fisheries on the high seas.
2. Furthermore, the Parties underline the importance they attach to fulfilment of the mutual
commitments specified in the Memorandum Of Understanding that they signed on 25 January 2001.
Article 26
Customs cooperation
1. The Parties shall promote and facilitate cooperation between their respective customs services in
order to ensure that the objectives set out in Article 79 are attained, particularly in order to guarantee
the simplification of customs procedures; facilitating legitimate trade while retaining their control
capabilities.
2. Without prejudice to the cooperation established by this Agreement, mutual assistance between the
administrative authorities in customs matters will be given in conformity with the Protocol of 13 June
2001 on Mutual Assistance in Customs matters to the Framework Cooperation Agreement.
3. The cooperation shall give rise among other things, to:
(a) the provision of technical assistance, including where appropriate, the organisation
of seminars and the placement of trainees;
(b) the development and sharing of best practices; and
(c) the improvement and simplification of customs matters relating to market access
and rules of origin and the customs procedures related to them.
Article 27
Cooperation on statistics
1. The main aim is to approximate methods, so that the Parties are able to use each other’s statistics
on trade in goods and services and more generally on any area covered by this Agreement for which
statistics can be collected.
2. Cooperation will focus on:
(a) homologation of statistical methods to generate indicators that are comparable
between the Parties;
(b) scientific and technological exchanges with statistical institutions of the Member
States of the European Union, and with Eurostat;
(c) statistical research directed at developing common methods for collecting,
analysing and interpreting data;
(d) organising seminars and workshops; and
(e) statistical training programmes, including other countries of the region.
Article 28
Cooperation on the enviroment
1. The aim of cooperation will be to encourage conservation and improvement of the environment,
prevention of contamination and degradation of natural resources and ecosystems, and rational use of
the latter in the interests of sustainable development.
2. In this connection, the following are particularly significant:
(a) the relationship between poverty and the environment;
(b) the environmental impact of economic activities;
(c) environmental problems and land-use management;
(d) projects to reinforce Chile’s environmental structures and policies;
(e) exchanges of information, technology and experience in areas including
environmental standards and models, training and education;
(f) environmental education and training to involve citizens more; and
(g) technical assistance and joint regional research programmes.
Article 29
Consumer protection
Cooperation in this field should seek to make the consumer-protection programmes in the Parties
compatible, and should as far as possible cover:
(a) making consumer legislation more compatible, to avoid trade barriers;
(b) establishing and developing mutual information systems for dangerous goods, and
interconnecting those systems (early-warning systems);
(c) exchanges of information and experts, and encouraging cooperation between both
Parties’ consumer bodies; and
(d) organising projects for training and technical assistance.
Article 30
Data protection
1. The Parties agree to cooperate on the protection of personal data in order to improve the level of
protection and avoid obstacles to trade that requires transfers of personal data.
2. Cooperation on personal data protection may include technical assistance in the form of exchange
of information and experts and the establishment of joint programmes and projects.
Article 31
Macroeconomic dialogue
1. The Parties will promote exchanges of information on their respective macroeconomic policies and
trends, and exchanges of experience regarding coordination of macroeconomic policies in the context
of regional integration.
2. With this aim in mind, the Parties will seek more in-depth dialogue between their authorities on
macroeconomic matters, in order to exchange ideas and opinions on issues such as:
(a) macroeconomic stabilisation;
(b) consolidation of public finances;
(c) tax policy;
(d) monetary policy;
(e) financial policy and regulation;
(f) financial integration and opening of the capital account;
(g) exchange-rate policy;
(h) international financial architecture and reform of the international monetary
system; and
(i) coordination of macroeconomic policy.
3. The methods of implementing such cooperation will include:
(a) meetings between macroeconomic authorities;
(b) organising seminars and conferences;
(c) providing training opportunities, where there is a demand; and
(d) producing studies on issues of mutual interest.
Article 32
Intellectual Property Rights
1. The Parties agree to cooperate, according to their own capabilities, in matters relating to the
practice, promotion, dissemination, streamlining, management, harmonisation, protection and effective
application of intellectual property rights, the prevention of abuses of such rights, the fight against
counterfeiting and piracy, and the establishment and strengthening of national organisations for
control and protection of such rights.
2. Technical cooperation can focus on one or more of the activities listed below:
(a) legislative advice: comments on draft laws relating to the general provisions and
basic principles of the international conventions listed in Article 170, copyright and
related rights, trademarks, geographical indications, traditional expressions or
complementary quality mentions, industrial designs, patents, layout-designs
(topographies) of integrated circuits, protection of undisclosed information, control of
anti-competitive practices in contractual licences, enforcement and other matters
relating to the protection of intellectual property rights;
(b) advice on the ways to organise administrative infrastructure, such as patent
offices, collecting societies, etc;
(c) training in the field of intellectual property rights administration and management
techniques;
(d) specific training of judges and Customs and Police Officers, in order to make the
enforcement of laws more effective; and
(e) awareness-building activities for the private sector and civil society.
Article 33
Public procurement
Cooperation between the Parties in this field will seek to provide technical assistance on issues
connected with public procurement, paying special attention to the municipal level.
Article 34
Cooperation on tourism
1. The Parties will promote mutual cooperation in developing tourism.
2. Such cooperation will focus on:
(a) projects intended to create and consolidate tourist products and services of mutual
interest or which hold an attraction for other markets of mutual interest;
(b) consolidation of long-haul tourist flows;
(c) reinforcing tourism promotion channels;
(d) training and education in tourism;
(e) technical assistance and pilot projects for developing special-interest tourism;
(f) exchanges of information on tourism promotion, integral planning of tourist
destinations and quality of services; and
(g) using promotion instruments to develop tourism at local level.
Article 35
Cooperation on mining
The Parties commit themselves to promoting cooperation on mining, mainly through agreements
aimed at :
(a) fostering exchanges of information and experience, in the application of clean
technologies in the mining productive processes.
(b) promoting joint efforts to develop scientific and technological initiatives in the field
of mining.
TITLE II
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INFORMATION SOCIETY
Article 36
Cooperation on science and technology
1. The aims of cooperation on science and technology, carried out in the mutual interest of both
Parties and in compliance with their policies, particularly as regards the rules for use of intellectual
property resulting from research, shall be:
(a) policy dialogue and exchanges of scientific and technological information and
experience at regional level, particularly in respect of policies and programmes;
(b) promotion of lasting relations between the two Parties’ scientific communities; and
(c) intensification of activities to promote linkage, innovation and technology transfer
between Chilean and European partners.
2. Special emphasis will be put on human potential building as the real long-lasting basis of scientific
and technological excellence and the creation of permanent links between both scientific and
technological communities, at both national and regional levels.
3. The following forms of cooperation should be encouraged:
(a) joint applied research projects in areas of common interest, with active
participation by business undertakings where appropriate;
(b) exchanges of researchers to promote project preparation, high-level training and
research;
(c) joint scientific meetings to foster exchanges of information and interaction and to
identify areas for joint research;
(d) the promotion of activities linked to scientific and technological forward studies
which contribute to the long term development of both Parties; and
(e) the development of links between the public and private sectors.
4. Furthermore, the evaluation of joint work and the dissemination of results will be promoted.
5. Higher-education institutions, research centres and productive sectors, including SMEs, on both
sides shall be involved in this cooperation in an appropriate manner.
6. The Parties shall promote their respective entities’ participation in their respective scientific and
technological programmes in pursuit of mutually beneficial scientific excellence and in accordance with
their respective provisions governing the participation of legal entities from third countries.
Article 37
Information society, information technology and telecommunications
1. Information technology and communications are key sectors in a modern society and are of vital
importance for economic and social development and the smooth transition to the information society.
2. Cooperation in this area shall aim in particular to promote:
(a) dialogue on the various issues of the information society, including promotion and
monitoring of the emergence of the information society;
(b) cooperation on regulatory and policy aspects of telecommunications;
(c) exchange of information on standards, conformity assessment and type approval;
(d) dissemination of new information and communication technologies;
(e) joint research projects on information and communication technologies and pilot
projects in the field of information society applications;
(f) promotion of exchange and training of specialists, in particular for young
professionals; and
(g) exchange and dissemination of experiences from government initiatives which
apply information technologies in their relationship with society.
TITLE III
CULTURE, EDUCATION AND AUDIO-VISUAL
Article 38
Education and training
1. The Parties will significantly support, within their respective competencies, pre-schooling, basic,
intermediate and higher education, vocational training and life-long learning. Within these fields,
special attention will be paid to access to education for vulnerable social groups such as the disabled,
ethnic minorities and the extremely poor.
2. Special attention will be paid to decentralised programmes, which forge permanent links between
specialised bodies of both Parties and encourage the pooling and exchange of experience and
technical resources as well as the mobility of students. 
Article 39
Cooperation in the audio-visual field
The Parties agree to promote the cooperation in this area, mainly through training programmes in the
audio-visual sector and means of communication, including co-production, training, development and
distribution activities.
Article 40
Exchange of information and cultural cooperation
1. In view of the Parties very close cultural ties, cooperation in this sphere, including information and
media contacts, should be enhanced.
2. The objective of Part III of this Agreement will be to promote the exchange of information and
cultural cooperation between the Parties, and account will be taken of bilateral schemes with the
Member States.
3. Special attention must be paid to promoting joint activities in various fields, including the press,
cinema and television, and to encouraging youth exchange schemes.
4. This cooperation could cover inter alia the following areas:
(a) mutual information programmes;
(b) translation of literary works;
(c) conservation and restoration of national heritage;
(d) training;
(e) cultural events;
(f) promotion of local culture;
(g) cultural management and production; and
(h) other areas.
TITLE IV
STATE REFORM AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
Article 41
Public administration
1. Cooperation in this area shall aim at the modernisation and decentralisation of public administration
and encompass overall organisational efficiency and the legislative and institutional framework,
drawing lessons from both Parties’ best practices.
2. Such cooperation may involve programmes of the following types:
(a) modernisation of the State and of public administration;
(b) decentralisation and the strengthening of regional and local government;
(c) strengthening of civil society and its incorporation into the process of defining
public policies;
(d) job creation and vocational training programmes;
(e) social service management and administration projects; 
(f) development, rural housing or land management projects;
(g) health and primary education programmes;
(h) support for civil society and grass-roots initiatives;
(i) any other programmes and projects which help combat poverty by creating
business and employment opportunities; and
(j) promotion of culture and its several manifestations and strengthening of cultural
identities.
3. The means of cooperation in this area will be:
(a) technical assistance to Chilean policy-making and executive bodies, including
meetings between staff of the European institutions and their Chilean counterparts;
(b) regular exchanges of information taking whatever form is appropriate, including
the use of computer networks; personal data protection will be ensured in all areas
where data are to be exchanged;
(c) transfers of know-how;
(d) preliminary studies and joint project implementation, involving comparable
financial input; and
(e) training and organisational support.
Article 42
Inter-institutional cooperation
1. The purpose of inter-institutional cooperation between the Parties is to promote closer cooperation
between the institutions concerned.
2. To that end, Part III of this Agreement will seek to encourage regular meetings between these
institutions; cooperation will be as broad as possible, and will include:
(a) any measures promoting regular exchanges of information, including the joint
development of computerised communication networks;
(b) advice and training; and
(c) transfers of know-how.
3. The Parties may, by common agreement, include other, additional fields of action.
TITLE V
SOCIAL COOPERATION
Article 43
Social Dialogue
The Parties recognise that:
(a) the participation of the social partners will be promoted as regards living conditions
and integration into society, 
(b) particular account will be taken of the need to avoid discrimination in the treatment
of nationals of one Party residing legally in the territory of the other Party.
Article 44
Social cooperation
1. The Parties recognise the importance of social development, which must go hand in hand with
economic development. They will give priority to the creation of employment and respect for
fundamental social rights, notably by promoting the relevant conventions of the International Labour
Organisation covering such topics as the freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining and
non-discrimination, the abolition of forced and child labour, and equal treatment between men and
women.
2. Cooperation may cover any area of interest to the Parties.
3. Measures may be coordinated with those of the Member States and the relevant international
organisations.
4. The Parties will give priority to measures aimed at:
(a) promoting human development, the reduction of poverty and the fight against
social exclusion, by generating innovative and reproducible projects involving
vulnerable and marginalised social sectors. Special attention will be paid to lowincome families and disabled persons;
(b) promoting the role of women in the economic and social development process and
promoting specific programmes for youth;
(c) developing and modernising labour relations, working conditions, social welfare
and employment security;
(d) improving the formulation and management of social policies, including social
housing, and improving access by beneficiaries;
(e) developing an efficient and equitable health system, based on solidarity principles;
(f) promoting vocational training and development of human resources;
(g) promoting projects and programmes which generate opportunities for the creation
of employment within micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises;
(h) promoting programmes of land management with special attention to areas with
higher social and environmental vulnerability;
(i) promoting initiatives contributing to social dialogue and the creation of consensus;
and
(j) promoting respect for human rights, democracy and citizens’ participation.
Article 45
Cooperation related to gender
1. Cooperation will contribute to strengthening policies and programmes that improve, guarantee and
extend the equitable participation of men and women in all sectors of political, economic, social and
cultural life. Cooperation will contribute to easing women’s access to all necessary resources for the
full exercise of their fundamental rights.
2. In particular, cooperation should promote the creation of an adequate framework to:
(a) ensure that gender and gender-related issues can be taken into account at every
level and in all areas of cooperation including macroeconomic policy, strategy and
development operations; and 
(b) promote the adoption of positive measures in favour of women.
TITLE VI
OTHER COOPERATION AREAS
Article 46
Cooperation on illegal immigration
1. The Community and Chile agree to cooperate in order to prevent and control illegal immigration. To
this end:
(a) Chile agrees to readmit any of its nationals illegally present on the territory of a
Member State, upon request by the latter and without further formalities;
(b) and each Member State agrees to readmit any of its nationals, as defined for
Community purposes, illegally present on the territory of Chile, upon request by the
latter and without further formalities.
2. The Member States and Chile will also provide their nationals with appropriate identity documents
for such purposes.
3. The Parties agree to conclude, upon request, an agreement between Chile and the Community
regulating the specific readmission obligations of Chile and the Member States, including an obligation
to readmit nationals of other countries and stateless persons.
4. Pending the conclusion of the agreement with the Community referred to in paragraph
3. Chile agrees to conclude, upon request of a Member State, bilateral agreements with individual
Member States regulating the specific readmission obligations between Chile and the Member State
concerned, including an obligation to readmit nationals of other countries and stateless persons.
5. The Association Council shall examine what other joint efforts can be made to prevent and control
illegal immigration.
Article 47
Cooperation on drugs and combating organised crime
1. Within their respective competencies, the Parties undertake to coordinate and increase their efforts
to prevent and reduce the illicit production of, trade in and consumption of drugs and the laundering of
profits from drug-trafficking, and to combat related organised crime through the intermediary of
international organisations and bodies.
2. The Parties will cooperate in this area to implement in particular:
(a) projects for the treatment, rehabilitation and family, social and labour reinsertion of
drug addicts;
(b) joint training programmes relating to prevention of consumption and trafficking of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and related crimes;
(c) joint study and research programmes, using methodologies and indicators applied
by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction, the Inter-American
Observatory of Drugs of the Organisation of American States and other international
and national organisations;
(d) measures and cooperation actions aimed at reducing the supply of drugs and
psychotropic substances, as part of the international conventions and treaties on the
matter which have been signed and ratified by the Parties to this Agreement;
(e) information exchange on policies, programmes, actions and legislation linked to
production, trafficking and consumption of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances; 
(f) exchange of relevant information and adoption of appropriate standards to combat
money laundering comparable to those adopted by the European Union and the
international bodies active in this field, such as the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering; and
(g) measures to prevent diversion of precursors and chemical substances essential to
the illicit production of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, equivalent to
those adopted by the European Community and competent international organisations
and in accordance with the “Agreement between the Republic of Chile and the
European Community on the prevention of the diversion of precursors and chemical
substances frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances” of 24 November 1998.
TITLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 48
Participation of civil society in cooperation
The Parties recognise the complementary role and potential contribution of civil society (social
interlocutors and Non Governmental Organisations) in the cooperation process. To that end, subject to
the legal and administrative provisions of each Party, civil society actors may:
(a) be informed about and participate in consultations on cooperation policies and
strategies, including strategic priorities, particularly in the areas concerning or directly
affecting them;
(b) receive financial resources, insofar as the internal rules of each Party allow it; and
(c) participate in the implementation of cooperation projects and programmes in the
areas that concern them.
Article 49
Regional cooperation and regional integration
1. Both Parties should use all existing cooperation instruments to promote activities aimed at
developing an active and reciprocal cooperation between the Parties and the Mercado Común del Sur
(Mercosur) as a whole.
2. This cooperation will be an important element in the Community's support for the promotion of
regional integration among the Southern Cone countries of Latin America.
3. Priority will be given to operations aimed at:
(a) promoting trade and investment in the region;
(b) developing regional cooperation on the environment;
(c) encouraging development of the communications infrastructure required for the
economic development of the region; and
(d) developing regional cooperation on fisheries matters.
4. The Parties will also cooperate more closely on regional development and land-use planning.
5. To this end, they may:
(a) undertake joint action with regional and local authorities in the area of economic
development; and 
(b) set up mechanisms for the exchange of information and know-how.
Article 50
Triangular and bi-regional cooperation
1. The Parties recognise the value of international cooperation for the promotion of equitable and
sustainable development processes and agree to give impetus to triangular cooperation programmes
and programmes with third countries in areas of common interest.
2. This cooperation may also be applied to bi-regional cooperation in accordance with the priorities of
Member States and other countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Article 51
Future developments clause
Within the Parties’ respective competencies, no opportunity for cooperation should be ruled out in
advance and the Parties could use the Association Committee to explore together the practical
possibilities for cooperation in their mutual interest.
Article 52
Cooperation within the association relationship
1. Cooperation between the Parties should contribute to achieving the general objectives of Part III of
this Agreement by identifying and developing innovative cooperation programmes capable of providing
added value to their new relationship as associated partners.
2. The participation of each Party as an associated partner in framework programmes, specific
programmes and other activities of the other Party shall be promoted, in so far as it is permitted by
each Party’s internal rules governing access to the programmes and activities concerned.
3. The Association Council may make recommendations to that effect.
Article 53
Resources
1. With the aim of contributing to fulfilling the cooperation objectives established in this Agreement, the
Parties commit themselves to providing, within the limits of their capacities and through their own
channels, the appropriate resources, including financial resources.
2. The Parties shall take all appropriate measures to promote and facilitate the European Investment
Bank’s activities in Chile, in accordance with its own procedures and financing criteria and with their
laws and regulations, and without prejudice to the powers of their competent authorities.
Article 54
Specific tasks of the Association Committee in cooperation matters
1. When the Association Committee performs any of the tasks conferred upon it in Part III of this
Agreement, it shall be composed of representatives of the Community and Chile with responsibility for
cooperation matters, normally at senior official level.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 6, the Association Committee shall have, in particular, the
following functions:
(a) assist the Association Council in the performance of its functions regarding
cooperation related matters;
(b) supervise the implementation of the cooperation framework agreed between the
Parties;
(c) make recommendations on the strategic cooperation between the Parties, which
shall serve to set long-term objectives, the strategic priorities and specific fields for
action, on the multiannual indicative programmes, which shall contain a description of
sectoral priorities, specific objectives, expected results and indicative amounts, and
annual action programmes; and
(d) report regularly to the Association Council on the application and fulfilment of the
objectives and matters of Part III of this Agreement. 

PART IV
TRADE AND TRADE-RELATED MATTERS
TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 55
Objectives
(a) the progressive and reciprocal liberalisation of trade in goods, in conformity with
Article XXIV of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (“the GATT 1994”);
(b) the facilitation of trade in goods through, inter alia, the agreed provisions regarding
customs and related matters, standards, technical regulations and conformity
assessment procedures, sanitary and phytosanitary measures and trade in wines and
spirit drinks and aromatised drinks;
(c) the reciprocal liberalisation of trade in services, in conformity with Article V of
General Agreement on Trade in Services (“the GATS”);
(d) the improvement of the investment environment and, in particular, the conditions
of establishment between the Parties, on the basis of the principle of nondiscrimination;
(e) the liberalisation of current payments and capital movements, in conformity with
the commitments undertaken in the framework of the international financial institutions
and with due consideration for each Party’s currency stability;
(f) the effective and reciprocal opening of the government procurement markets of the
Parties;
(g) the adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights, in accordance
with the highest international standards;
(h) the establishment of an effective cooperation mechanism in the field of
competition; and
(i) the establishment of an effective dispute settlement mechanism.
Article 56
Customs unions and free trade areas
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free
trade areas or other arrangements between either of the Parties and third countries, insofar as they do
not alter the rights and obligations provided for in this Agreement.
2. At the request of a Party, consultations between them shall take place within the Association
Committee concerning agreements establishing or adjusting customs unions or free trade areas and,
where required, on other major issues related to the Parties’ respective trade policies with third
countries. In particular, in the event of accession, such consultation shall take place so as to ensure
that account can be taken of the mutual interests of the Parties.
TITLE II 
FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS
Article 57
Objective
The Parties shall progressively and reciprocally liberalise trade in goods over a transitional period
starting from the entry into force of this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement and in conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994.
CHAPTER I
ELIMINATION OF CUSTOMS DUTIES
Section 1
Common Provisions
Article 58
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter concerning the elimination of customs duties on imports shall apply
to products originating in one Party and exported to the other Party. For the purposes of this Chapter,
"originating" means qualifying under the rules of origin set out in Annex III.
2. The provisions of this Chapter concerning the elimination of customs duties on exports shall apply
to all goods exported from one Party to the other Party.
Article 59
Customs duty
A customs duty includes any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the importation or
exportation of a good, including any form of surtax or surcharge in connection with such importation or
exportation, but does not include any:
(a) internal taxes or other internal charges imposed consistently with Article 77;
(b) antidumping or countervailing duties applied consistently with Article 78;
(c) fees or other charges imposed consistently with Article 63.
Article 60
Elimination of customs duies
1. Customs duties on imports between the Parties shall be eliminated in accordance with the
provisions of Articles 64 to 72.
2. Customs duties on exports between the Parties shall be eliminated as from the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.
3. For each product, the basic customs duty to which the successive reductions are to be applied
pursuant to Articles 64 to 72 shall be that specified in each Party’s Tariff Elimination Schedule set out
in Annexes I and II, respectively.
4. If a Party reduces its applied most favoured nation customs duty rate after the entry into force of this
Agreement and prior to the ending of the transitional period, the Tariff Elimination Schedule of that
Party shall apply to the reduced rates.
5. Each Party declares its readiness to reduce its customs duties more rapidly than is provided for in
Articles 64 to 72, or otherwise improve the conditions of access under such Articles, if its general
economic situation and the situation of the economic sector concerned so permit. A decision by the
Association Council to accelerate the elimination of a customs duty or otherwise improve conditions of
access shall supersede the terms established in Articles 64 to 72 for the product concerned.
Article 61
Standstill
1. No new customs duties shall be introduced nor shall those already applied be increased in trade
between the Parties as from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Nothwithstanding paragraph 1, Chile may maintain its price band system as established in Article 12
of Law 18,525 or succeeding system for the products covered by that law, provided it is applied
consistently with Chile’s rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement and in a manner that does
not afford more favourable treatment to imports of any third country, including countries with which
Chile has concluded or will conclude in the future an agreement notified under Article XXIV of the
GATT 1994.
Article 62
Classification of goods
The classification of goods in trade between the Parties shall be that set out in each Party's respective
tariff nomenclature in conformity with the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System
(“HS”).
Article 63
Fees and other charges
Fees and other charges referred to in Article 59 shall be limited in amount to the approximatecost of
services rendered and shall not represent an indirect protection for domestic products or a taxation of
imports or exports for fiscal purposes. They shall be based on specific rates that correspond to the real
value of the service rendered.
Section 2
Elimination of customs duties
Sub-section 2.1
Industrial products
Article 64
Scope
This sub-section applies to products of HS chapters 25-97 not covered by agricultural and processed
agricultural products as defined in Article 70.
Article 65
Customs duties on industrial imports originating in Chile
Customs duties on imports into the Community of industrial products originating in Chile listed in
Annex I (Tariff Elimination Schedule of the Community) under category "Year 0" and "Year 3" shall be
eliminated in accordance with the following timetable, so that these customs duties are completely
eliminated by the entry into force of the Agreement and on 1 January 2006, respectively:
Category Entry into force 1.1.04 1.1.05 1.1.06
Year 0 100%
Year 3 25% 50% 75% 100%
Article 66
Customs duties on industrial imports originating in the Community
Customs duties on imports into Chile of products originating in the Community listed in Annex II (Tariff
Elimination Schedule of Chile) under category "Year 0", "Year 5" and "Year 7" shall be eliminated in
accordance with the following timetable, so that these customs duties are completely eliminated by the
entry into force of this Agreement, 1 January 2008 and 1 January 2010, respectively:
Percentages of annual tariff reduction
Category Entry
into force 1.1.04 1.1.05 1.1.06 1.1.07 1.1.08 1.1.09 1.1.10
Year 0 100%
Year 5 16.7% 33.3% 50% 66.7% 83.3% 100%
Year 7 12.5% 25% 37.5% 50% 62.5% 75% 87.5% 100%
Sub-section 2.2
Fish and fisheries products
Article 67
Scope
This sub-section applies to fish and fisheries products as covered by HS chapter 3, HS headings 1604
and 1605, HS subheadings 051191 and 230120, and HS subheading ex1902201
.
1. Customs duties on imports into the Community of fish and fisheries products originating in Chile
listed in Annex I under category "Year 0", "Year 4", "Year 7" and "Year 10" shall be eliminated in
accordance with the following timetable, so that these customs duties are completely eliminated by the
entry into force of this Agreement, 1 January 2007, 1 January 2010 and 1 January 2013, respectively:
Percentages of annual tariff reduction
Category Entry
into force 1.1.04 1.1.05 1.1.06 1.1.07 1.1.08 1.1.09 1.1.10 1.1.11 1.1.12 1.1.13
Year 0 100%
Year 4 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Year 7 12,5% 25% 37,5% 50% 62,5% 75% 87,5% 100%
Year 10 9% 18% 27% 36% 45% 54% 63% 72% 81% 90% 100%
2. Tariff quotas on imports into the Community of certain fish and fisheries products originating in Chile
listed in Annex I under category “TQ” shall be applied as from entry into force of this Agreement, in
accordance with the conditions mentioned in that Annex. These quotas shall be managed on a firstcome first-served basis.
Article 69
Customs duties on fish and fisheries imports originating in the Community
1. Customs duties on imports into Chile of fish and fisheries products originating in the Community
listed in Annex II under category "Year 0" shall be eliminated at the entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Tariff quotas on imports into Chile of certain fish and fisheries products originating in the Community
listed in Annex II under category “TQ” shall be applied as from entry into force of this Agreement, in
accordance with the conditions mentioned in that Annex. These quotas shall be managed on a firstcome first-served basis.
Sub-section 2.3
Agricultural and processed agricultural products
Article 70
Scope
This sub-section applies to agricultural and processed agricultural products as covered by Annex I of
the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.
Article 71
Customs duties on agricultural and processed agricultural imports originating in Chile
1. Customs duties on imports into the Community of agricultural and processed agricultural products
originating in Chile listed in Annex I under category "Year 0", "Year 4", "Year 7" and "Year 10" shall be
eliminated in accordance with the following timetable, so that these customs duties are completely
eliminated by the entry into force of this Agreement, 1 January 2007, 1 January 2010 and 1 January
2013, respectively:
Percentages of annual tariff reduction
Category Entry
into force 1.1.04 1.1.05 1.1.06 1.1.07 1.1.08 1.1.09 1.1.10 1.1.11 1.1.12 1.1.13
Year 0 100%
Year 4 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Year 7 12,5% 25% 37,5% 50% 62,5% 75% 87,5% 100%
Year 10 9% 18% 27% 36% 45% 54% 63% 72% 81% 90% 100%
2. For the agricultural products originating in Chile covered by chapters 7 and 8 and headings 20.09
and 22.04.30 of the Combined Nomenclature and listed in Annex I under category “EP”, for which the 
Common Customs Tariff provides for the application of ad valorem customs duties and a specific
customs duty, the tariff elimination shall only apply to the ad valorem customs duty.
3. For agricultural and processed agricultural products originating in Chile listed in Annex I under
category “SP”, for which the Common Customs Tariff provides for the application of ad valorem
customs duties and a specific customs duty, the tariff elimination shall only apply to the ad valorem
customs duty.
4. The Community shall allow imports of processed agricultural products originating in Chile listed in
Annex I under category “R” to enter the Community with a customs duty of 50% of the basic customs
duty as from the entry into force of this Agreement.
5. Tariff quotas on imports into the Community of certain agricultural and processed agricultural
products originating in Chile listed in Annex I under category “TQ” shall be applied as from the entry
into force of this Agreement, in accordance with the conditions mentioned in that Annex. These quotas
shall be managed on a first-come first-served basis, or, as applicable in the Community, on the basis
of a system of import and export licences.
6. Tariff concessions shall not apply to imports into the Community of products originating in Chile
listed in Annex I under category “PN” as these products are covered by denominations protected in the
Community.
Article 72
Customs duties on agricultural and processed agricultural imports originating in the
Community
1. Customs duties on imports into Chile of agricultural and processed agricultural products originating
in the Community listed in Annex II under category "Year 0", "Year 5" and "Year 10" shall be
eliminated in accordance with the following timetable, so that these customs duties are completely
eliminated by the entry into force of this Agreement, 1 January 2008 and 1 January 2013, respectively:
Percentages of annual tariff reduction
Category Entry
into force 1.1.04 1.1.05 1.1.06 1.1.07 1.1.08 1.1.09 1.1.10 1.1.11 1.1.12 1.1.13
Year 0 100%
Year 5 16.7% 33.3% 50% 66.7% 83.3% 100%
Year 10 9% 18% 27% 36% 45% 54% 63% 72% 81% 90% 100%
2. Tariff quotas on imports into Chile of certain agricultural products originating in the Community listed
in Annex II under category “TQ” shall be applied as from the entry into force of this Agreement, in
accordance with the conditions mentioned in that Annex. These quotas shall be managed on a firstcome first served basis.
Article 73
Emergency clause for agricultural and processed agricultural products
1. Notwithstanding Article 92 of this Agreement and Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture, if,
given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural markets, a product originating in a Party is being
imported into the other Party in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or
threaten to cause serious injury or disturbance in the markets of like or directly competitive products of
the other Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance
with the procedures laid down in this Article.
2. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, the importing Party may:
(a) suspend the further reduction of any customs duties on the products concerned
provided for under this Title; or
(b) increase the customs duty on the product to a level which does not exceed the
lesser of:
(i) the most-favoured-nation customs duty; or
(ii) the basic customs duty referred to in Article 60(3).
3. Before applying the measure as defined under paragraph 2, the Party concerned shall refer the
matter to the Association Committee for a thorough examination of the situation, with a view to seeking 
a mutually acceptable solution. If the other Party so requests, the Parties shall hold consultations
within the Association Committee. If no solution is found within 30 days of the request for such
consultation, safeguard measures may be applied.
4. Where exceptional circumstances require immediate action, the importing Party may take the
measures provided for in paragraph 2 on a transitional basis without complying with the requirements
of paragraph 3 for a maximum period of 120 days. Such measures shall not exceed what is strictly
necessary to limit or redress the injury or disturbance. The importing Party shall inform the other Party
inmediately.
5. The measures taken under this Article shall not exceed what is necessary to remedy the difficulties
which have arisen. The Party imposing the measure shall preserve the overall level of preferences
granted for the agricultural sector. To achieve this objective, the Parties may agree on compensation
for the adverse effects of the measure on their trade, including the period during which a transitional
measure applied in accordance with paragraph 4 is in place. To this effect, the Parties shall hold
consultations to reach a mutually agreed solution. If no agreement is reached within 30 days, the
affected exporting Party may, after notification to the Association Council, suspend the application of
substantially equivalent concessions under this Title.
6. For the purposes of this Article:
(a) “serious injury” shall be understood to mean a significant overall impairment in the
position of the producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive products
operating in a Party.
(b) “threat of serious injury” shall be understood to mean serious injury that is clearly
inminent based on facts and not merely on allegations, conjecture or remote
possibility.
Article 74
Evolution clause
During the third year after the entry into force of this Agreement the Parties shall assess the situation,
taking account of the pattern of trade in agricultural products and processed agricultural products
between the Parties, the particular sensitivities of such products and the development of agricultural
policy on both sides. The Parties shall examine, in the Association Committee, product by product and
on an orderly and appropriate reciprocal basis, the opportunities for granting each other further
concessions with a view to improving liberalisation of trade in agricultural and processed agricultural
products.
CHAPTER II
NON TARIFF MEASURES
Section 1
Common provisions
Article 75
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to trade in goods between the Parties.
Article 76
Prohibition of quantitative restrictions
All import or export prohibitions or restrictions in trade between the Parties, other than customs duties
and taxes, whether made effective through quotas, import or export licenses or other measures, shall
be eliminated upon the entry into force of this Agreement. No new such measures shall be introduced.
Article 77
National treatment on internal taxation and regulation2
1. Imported products of the territory of the other Party shall not be subject, either directly or indirectly,
to internal taxes or other internal charges of any kind in excess of those applied, directly or indirectly,
to like domestic products. Moreover, the Parties shall not otherwise apply internal taxes or other
internal charges so as to afford protection to domestic production.3
2. Imported products of the territory of the other Party shall be accorded treatment no less favourable
than that accorded to like domestic products in respect of all laws, regulations and requirements
affecting their internal sale, offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use. The
provisions of this paragraph shall not prevent the application of differential internal transportation
charges which are based exclusively on the economic operation of the means of transport and not on
the nationality of the product.
3. Neither Party shall establish or maintain any internal quantitative regulation relating to the mixture,
processing or use of products in specified amounts or proportions which requires, directly or indirectly,
that any specified amount or proportion of any product which is the subject of the regulation must be
supplied from domestic sources. Moreover, neither Party shall otherwise apply internal quantitative
regulations so as to afford protection to domestic production.
4. The provisions of this Article shall not prevent the payment of subsidies exclusively to domestic
producers, including payments to domestic producers derived from the proceeds of internal taxes or
charges applied consistently with the provisions of this Article and subsidies effected through
governmental purchases of domestic products.4
5. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to laws, regulations, procedures or practices governing
public procurement, which shall be subject exclusively to the provisions of Title IV of this Part of the
Agreement.
Section 2
Antidumping and countervailing measures
Article 78
Antidumping and countervailing measures
If a Party determines that dumping and/or countervailable subsidisation is taking place in its trade with
the other Party, it may take appropriate measures in accordance with the WTO Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures.

Section 3
Customs and related matters
Article 79
Customs and related matters
1. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Title as they relate to customs and traderelated matters, and to facilitate trade without prejudice to the need for effective control, the Parties
undertake to:
(a) cooperate and exchange information concerning customs legislation and
procedures;
(b) apply customs rules and procedures agreed by the Parties at a bilateral or
multilateral level;
(c) simplify requirements and formalities in respect of the release and clearance of
goods, including, to the extent possible, collaboration on the development of
procedures enabling the submission of import or export data to a single agency; and
to coordinate between customs and other control agencies so as to enable official
controls upon import or export to be carried out, as far as possible, by a single
agency;
(d) cooperate on all issues concerning rules of origin and the customs procedures
related to them; and
(e) cooperate on all customs valuation matters, in accordance with the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VII of the GATT 1994, particularly with the aim of reaching
common views regarding the application of valuation criteria, the use of indicative or
reference indices, operational aspects and working methods. 
2. In order to improve working methods and to ensure transparency and efficiency of
customs operations, the Parties shall:
(a) ensure that the highest standards of integrity be maintained, through application of
measures reflecting the principles of the relevant international conventions and
instruments in this field, as provided for in each Party’s legislation;
(b) take further steps wherever possible, towards the reduction, simplification and
standardisation of data in the documentation required by customs, including the use of
a single customs entry document or data message and a single customs exit
document or data message, based on international standards and relying as far as
possible on commercially available information;
(c) collaborate wherever possible on legislative and operational initiatives relating to
import, export and customs procedures, and, to the extent possible, towards
improving the service to the business community;
(d) cooperate where appropriate on technical assistance, including the organisation of
seminars and placements;
(e) cooperate on the computerisation of customs procedures and collaborate, where
possible, towards the establishment of common standards;
(f) apply the international rules and standards in the field of customs, including
wherever possible, the substantive elements of the revised Kyoto Convention on the
Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs Procedures;
(g) as far as possible, establish common positions in international organisations in the
field of customs such as the WTO, the World Customs Organisation (WCO), the
United Nations Organization (UN) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD);
(h) provide effective and prompt procedures enabling the right of appeal, against
customs and other agency administrative actions, rulings and decisions affecting
import or export of goods, in conformity with Article X of the GATT 1994; and
(i) collaborate wherever possible towards facilitating transhipment operations and
transit movements through their respective territories.
3. The Parties agree that their respective trade and customs provisions and procedures shall be based
upon:
(a) legislation that avoids unnecessary burdens on economic operators, that will not
hinder the fight against fraud and provides further facilitation for operators that meet
high levels of compliance;
(b) the protection of legitimate trade through the effective enforcement of legislative
requirements;
(c) the application of modern customs techniques, including risk assessment,
simplified procedures for entry and release of goods, post release controls, and
company audit methods, whilst respecting the confidential nature of commercial data
in accordance with the provisions applicable in each Party. Each Party will take the
necessary measures to ensure the effectiveness of the risk assessment methods;
(d) procedures that are transparent, efficient and where appropriate simplified, in
order to reduce costs and increase predictability for economic operators; 
(e) the development of information technology-based systems, for both export and
import operations, between economic operators and customs administrations, and
between customs and other agencies. Such systems may also provide for the
payment of duties, taxes and other fees by electronic transfer;
(f) rules and procedures that provide for advance binding rulings on tariff classification
and rules of origin. A ruling may be modified or revoked at any time but only after
notification to the affected operator and without retroactive effect unless the ruling has
been made on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information being provided;
(g) provisions that in principle facilitate the importation of goods through the use of
simplified or pre-arrival customs procedures and processes; and
(h) import provisions that do not include any requirements for pre-shipment
inspections as defined by the WTO Agreement on Pre-shipment Inspection;
(i) rules that ensure that any penalties imposed for minor breaches of customs
regulations or procedural requirements are proportionate and, in their application, do
not give rise to undue delays in customs clearance, in accordance with Article VIII of
the GATT 1994.
4. The Parties agree:
(a) on the need for timely consultation with economic operators on substantial matters
concerning legislative proposals and general procedures related to customs. To that
end, appropriate consultation mechanisms between administrations and the operators
shall be established by each Party;
(b) to publish, as far as possible through electronic means, and publicise new
legislation and general procedures related to customs, as well as any modifications,
no later than the entry into force of such legislation and procedures. They shall also
make publicly available general information of interest to economic operators, such as
the hours of operation for customs offices, including those at ports and border
crossing points, and the points of contact for information enquiries;
(c) to foster cooperation between operators and customs administrations via the use
of objective and publicly accessible Memoranda of Understanding, based on those
promulgated by the WCO; and
(d) to ensure that their respective customs and related requirements and procedures
continue to meet the needs of the trading community and follow best practices.
5. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 to 4, the administrations of both Parties shall provide mutual
administrative assistance in customs matters in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol of 13
June 2001 on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters to the Framework Cooperation
Agreement.
Article 80
Customs valuation
The WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the GATT 1994, without the reserves and
options provided for in Article 20 and paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Annex III of that Agreement, shall
govern customs valuation rules applied to trade between the Parties.
Article 81
Special Committee on Customs Cooperation and Rules of Origin
1. The Parties hereby establish a Special Committee on Customs Cooperation and Rules of Origin,
composed of representatives of the Parties. The Committee shall meet on a date and with an agenda 
agreed in advance by the Parties. The office of chairperson of the Committee shall be held alternately
by each of the Parties. The Committee shall report to the Association Committee.
2. The functions of the Committee shall include:
(a) monitoring the implementation and administration of Articles 79 and 80 and of
Annex III and any other customs matters related to market access;
(b) providing a forum to consult and discuss on all issues concerning customs,
including in particular, rules of origin and related customs procedures, general
customs procedures, customs valuation, tariff regimes, customs nomenclature,
customs cooperation and mutual administrative assistance in customs matters;
(c) enhancing cooperation on the development, application and enforcement of rules
of origin and related customs procedures, general customs procedures and mutual
administrative assistance in customs matters;
(d) any other issues agreed by the Parties.
3. In order to fulfil the tasks referred to in this Article, the Parties may agree to hold ad hoc meetings.
Article 82
Enforcement of preferential treatment
1. The Parties agree that administrative cooperation is essential for the implementation and control of
the preferences granted under this Title and reaffirm their commitment to combat irregularities and
fraud related to origin, including customs classification and customs value.
2. In this regard, a Party may temporarily suspend the preferential treatment granted under this Title
for a product or products in respect of which that Party determines, in accordance with this Article, that
there has been systematic failure to provide administrative cooperation or fraud by the other Party.
3. For the purpose of this Article, systematic failure to provide administrative cooperation shall mean:
(a) the absence of administrative cooperation, such as a failure to provide names and
addresses of customs or government authorities responsible for issuing and checking
certificates of origin, or specimens of stamps used to authenticate the certificates, or a
failure to update that information where appropriate;
(b) a systematic lack or inadequacy of action in verifying the originating status of
products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of Annex III and identifying or
preventing contravention of the rules of origin;
(c) a systematic refusal or undue delay to carry out subsequent verification of the
proof of origin at the request of the other Party, and to communicate its results in time;
(d) the absence or systematic lack of administrative cooperation in verifying conduct
where there is a presumption of origin-related fraud. For this purpose, a Party may
presume the existence of fraud, inter alia, where imports of a product or products
under this Agreement massively exceed the usual levels of production and export
capacity of the other Party.
4. The Party which has made a finding of systematic failure to provide administrative cooperation or
presumption of fraud shall, before applying the temporary suspension provided under this Article,
supply the Association Committee with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of
the situation with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties. At the same time, it shall
publish in its Official Journal a notice to the importers indicating the product or products for which a
finding of systematic failure to provide administrative cooperation or presumption of fraud has been
made. The legal consequences of this publication shall be governed by the domestic law of each
Party.
5. Within 10 days after the day of notification of the information referred to in paragraph 4, the Parties
shall hold consultations within the Association Committee. If the Parties do not reach an agreement on 
a solution to avoid application of the temporary suspension of the preferential treatment within 30 days
from the initiation of such consultations, the Party concerned may suspend temporarily the preferential
treatment of the product or products concerned.
The temporary suspension shall not exceed what is necessary to protect the financial interests of the
Party concerned.
6. Temporary suspensions under this Article shall be notified immediately after their adoption to the
Association Committee. They shall not exceed a period of six months which may be renewed. They
shall be subject to periodic consultations within the Association Committee, particularly with a view to
their abolition as soon as circumstances permit.
Section 4
Standards, technical regulations and confromity assesment procedures
Article 83
Objective
The objective of this section is to facilitate and increase trade in goods by eliminating and preventing
unnecessary barriers to trade while taking into account the legitimate objectives of the Parties and the
principle of non-discrimination, within the meaning of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to
Trade ( “the TBT Agreement”).
Article 84
Scope and coverage
The provisions of this section apply to trade in goods in the area of standards, technical regulations
and conformity assessment procedures, as defined in the TBT Agreement. It does not apply to
measures covered by section 5 of this Chapter. Technical specifications prepared by governmental
bodies for public procurement purposes are not subject to the provisions of this section but are
addressed in Title IV of this Part of the Agreement.
Article 85
Definitions
For the purpose of this section, the definitions of Annex I of the TBT Agreement shall apply. In this
respect, the Decision of the Committee on Principles for the Development of International Standards,
Guides and Recommendations with relation to Articles 2, 5 and Annex 3 of the Agreement, of the
WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, shall also apply.
Article 86
Basic rights and obligations
The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under the TBT Agreement and their commitment to its
comprehensive implementation. In this respect and in line with the objective of this section,
cooperation activities and measures pursued under this section shall be conducted with a view to
enhancing and reinforcing the implementation of those rights and obligations.
Article 87
Specific actions to be pursued under this Agreement
With a view to fulfilling the objective of this section:
1. The Parties shall intensify their bilateral cooperation in the field of standards, technical regulations
and conformity assessment with a view to facilitating access to their respective markets, by increasing
the mutual knowledge, understanding and compatibility of their respective systems.
2. In their bilateral cooperation the Parties shall aim at identifying which mechanisms or combination of
mechanisms are the most appropriate for particular issues or sectors. Such mechanisms include
aspects of regulatory co-operation, inter alia convergence and/or equivalence of technical regulations
and standards, alignment to international standards, reliance on the supplier’s declaration of
conformity and use of accreditation to qualify conformity assessment bodies, and mutual recognition
agreements.
3. Based on progress made in their bilateral cooperation, the Parties shall agree on what specific
arrangements should be concluded with a view to implementing the mechanisms identified.
4. To this end, the Parties shall work towards: 
(a) developing common views on good regulatory practices, including, but not limited
to:
(i) transparency in the preparation, adoption and application of
technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment
procedures;
(ii) necessity and proportionality of regulatory measures and related
conformity assessment procedures, including the use of suppliers
declaration of conformity;
(iii) use of international standards as a basis for technical regulations,
except when such international standards would be an ineffective or
inappropriate means for the fulfilment of the legitimate objectives
pursued;
(iv) enforcement of technical regulations and market surveillance
activities;
(v) the necessary technical infrastructure, in terms of metrology,
standardisation, testing, certification and accreditation, to support
technical regulations; and
(vi) mechanisms and methods for reviewing technical regulations and
conformity assessment procedures;
(b) reinforcing regulatory co-operation through, for example, exchange of information,
experiences and data, and through scientific and technical cooperation with a view to
improving the quality and level of their technical regulations and making efficient use
of regulatory resources;
(c) compatibility and/or equivalence of their respective technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment procedures;
(d) promoting and encouraging bilateral cooperation between their respective
organisation, public and/or private, responsible for metrology, standardisation, testing,
certification and accreditation;
(e) promoting and encouraging full participation in international standard setting
bodies, and reinforcing the role of international standards as a basis for technical
regulations; and
(f) increasing their bilateral cooperation in the relevant international organisations and
fora dealing with the issues covered by this section.
Article 88
Committee on Standards, Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment
1. The Parties hereby establish a Special Committee on Technical Regulations, Standards and
Conformity Assessment in order to achieve the objectives set out in this section. The Committee,
made up of representatives of the Parties, shall be co-chaired by a representative of each Party. The
Committee shall meet at least once a year, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties. The Committee
shall report to the Association Committee.
2. The Committee may address any matter related to the effective functioning of this section. In
particular, it shall have the following responsibilities and functions: 
(a) monitoring and reviewing the implementation and administration of this section. In
this connection, the Committee shall draw up a work program aimed at achieving the
objectives of the section and in particular those set out in Article 87;
(b) providing a forum for discussion and exchanging information on any matter related
to this section and in particular as it relates to the Parties’ systems for technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures, as well as
developments in related international organisations;
(c) providing a forum for consultation and prompt resolution of issues that act or can
act as unnecessary barriers to trade, within the scope and meaning of this section,
between the Parties;
(d) encouraging, promoting and otherwise facilitating cooperation between the Parties’
organisations, public and/or private, for metrology, standardisation, testing,
certification, inspection and accreditation; and
(e) exploring any means aimed at improving access to the Parties’ respective markets
and enhancing the functioning of this section.
Section 5
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Article 89
Sanitary and phytosanitary measures
1. The objective of this section is to facilitate trade between the Parties in the field of sanitary and
phytosanitary legislation, whilst safeguarding public, animal and plant health by further implementing
the principles of the WTO on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (“the WTO SPS
Agreement”). An additional objective of this section is to consider animal welfare standards.
2. The objectives of this section are pursued through the “Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures Applicable to Trade in Animals and Animal Products, Plants, Plant Products and other
Goods and Animal Welfare", which is attached as Annex IV.
3. By way of derogation from Article 193, the Association Committee, when dealing with sanitary or
phytosanitary measures, shall be composed of representatives of the Community and Chile with
responsibility for sanitary and phytosanitary matters. This Committee shall then be called the "Joint
Management Committee for Sanitary and Phytosanitary Matters". The functions of the Committee are
set out in Article 16 of Annex IV.
4. For the purpose of Article 184, consultations held under Article 16 of Annex IV shall bedeemed to
constitute the consultations referred to in Article 183, unless the Parties decide otherwise.

Section 6
Wines and Spirits
Article 90
Wines and spirits
The Agreement on Trade in Wine and the Agreement on Trade in Spirit Drinks and Aromatised Drinks
are attached as Annex V and VI, respectively.

CHAPTER III
EXCEPTIONS
Article 91
General exceptions clause
Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a
means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where the same conditions
prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties, nothing in this Title shall be construed
to prevent the adoption or enforcement by either Party of measures which:
(a) are necessary to protect public morals;
(b) are necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) are necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with this Agreement, including those relating to customs enforcement, the
protection of intellectual property rights, and the prevention of deceptive practices;
(d) relate to the importation or exportation of gold or silver;
(e) relate to the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological
value;
(f) relate to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are
made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption;
or
(g) relate to the products of prison labour.
Article 92
Safeguard clause
1. Unless otherwise provided by this Article, the provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and of the
WTO Agreement on Safeguards are applicable between the Parties. The provisions of paragraphs 2,
3, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9 of this Article apply only when a Party has a substantial interest as exporter of the
product concerned, as defined in paragraph 10.
2. Each Party shall provide, immediately and in any case no later than seven days from the event, ad
hoc written notification to the Association Committee of all pertinent information on the initiation of a
safeguard investigation and on the final findings of the investigation.
3. The information provided under paragraph 2 shall include in particular an explanation of the
domestic procedure on the basis of which the investigation will be carried out and an indication of the
time schedules for hearings and other appropriate opportunities for interested parties to present their
views on the matter. Furthermore, each Party shall provide advance written notification to the
Association Committee of all pertinent information on the decision to apply provisional safeguard
measures. Such notice must be received at least seven days before the application of such measures.
4. Upon notification of the final findings of the investigation and before applying safeguard measures
pursuant to the provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards,
the Party intending to apply such measures shall refer the matter to the Association Committee for a
thorough examination of the situation with a view to seeking a mutually acceptable solution. In order to
find such a solution and if the Party concerned so requests, the Parties shall hold prior consultations
within the Association Committee.
5. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, nothing shall prevent a Party from applying measures pursuant to the
provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and of the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.
6. In the selection of safeguard measures referred to in this Article, the Parties shall give priority to
those which cause least disturbance to the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement. Such
measures shall not exceed what is necessary to remedy the serious injury, and shall preserve the
level/margin of preference granted under this Title.
7. The Parties confirm their rights and obligations under paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 8 of the WTO
Safeguard Agreement.
8. The right of suspension referred to in Article 8(2) of the WTO Safeguard Agreement shall not be
exercised between the Parties for the first 18 months that a safeguard measure is in effect, provided 
that the safeguard measure has been taken as a result of an absolute increase in imports and that
such a measure conforms to the provisions of the WTO Safeguard Agreement.
9. Safeguard measures shall upon application be notified immediately to the Association Committee
and shall be the subject of consultations once a year within the Committee, particularly with a view to
their liberalisation or abolition.
10. For the purposes of this Article, it is considered that a Party has a substantial interest when it is
among the five largest suppliers of the imported product during the most recent three-year period of
time, measured in terms of either absolute volume or value.
11. In the event of either Party subjecting to a surveillance procedure imports of products liable to give
rise to the conditions for the application of a safeguard measure pursuant to this Article, it shall inform
the other Party.
Article 93
Shortage clause
1. Where compliance with the provisions of this Title leads to:
(a) a critical shortage, or threat thereof, of foodstuffs or other products essential to the
exporting Party; or
(b) a shortage of essential quantities of domestic materials for a domestic processing
industry during periods when the domestic price of such materials is held below the
world price as part of a governmental stabilisation plan;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to major difficulties for the
exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance
with the procedures laid down in this Article.
2. In the selection of measures, priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of
the arrangements in this Agreement. Such measures shall not be applied in a manner which would
constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination where the same conditions prevail, or a
disguised restriction on trade, and shall be eliminated when the conditions no longer justify their
maintenance. In addition, the measures which may be adopted pursuant to paragraph 1(b) shall not
operate to increase the exports of or the protection afforded to the domestic processing industry
concerned, and shall not depart from the provisions of this Agreement relating to non-discrimination.
3. Before taking the measures provided for in paragraph 1, or as soon as possible in cases to which
paragraph 4 applies, the Party intending to take the measures shall supply the Association Committee
with all relevant information, with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties. The Parties
within the Association Committee may agree on any means needed to put an end to the difficulties. If
no agreement is reached within 30 days of the matter being referred to the Association Committee, the
exporting Party may apply measures under this Article on the exportation of the product concerned.
4. Where exceptional and critical circumstances requiring immediate action make prior information or
examination impossible, the Party intending to take the measures may apply forthwith the
precautionary measures necessary to deal with the situation and shall inform the other Party
immediately thereof.
5. Any measures applied pursuant to this Article shall be immediately notified to the Association
Committee and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within that body, particularly with a view
to establishing a timetable for their elimination as soon as circumstances permit.

TITLE III
TRADE IN SERVICES AND ESTABLISHMENT
Article 94
Objectives
1. The Parties shall reciprocally liberalise trade in services, in accordance with the provisions of this
Title and in conformity with Article V of the GATS.
2. The aim of Chapter 3 is the improvement of the investment environment, and in particular the
conditions of establishment between the Parties, on the basis of the principle of non-discrimination.
 
CHAPTER I
SERVICES
Section 1
General Provisions
Article 95
Scope
1. For the purposes of this Chapter, trade in services is defined as the supply of a service through the
following modes:
(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party (mode 1);
(b) in the territory of a Party to the service consumer of the other Party (mode 2);
(c) by a service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in the territory of the
other Party (mode 3);
(d) by a service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural persons in the
territory of the other Party (mode 4).
2. This Chapter applies to trade in all service sectors with the exception of:
(a) financial services, which is subject to Chapter 2;
(b) audio-visual services;
(c) national maritime cabotage; and
(d) air transport services, including domestic and international air transportation
services, whether scheduled or non-scheduled, and services directly related to the
exercise of traffic rights, other than:
(i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during which an aircraft is
withdrawn from service;
(ii) the selling and marketing of air transport services; and
(iii) computer reservation system (CRS) services.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose any obligation with respect to government
procurement, which is subject to Title IV of this Part of the Agreement.
4. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to subsidies granted by the Parties. The Parties shall
review the issue of disciplines on subsidies related to trade in services in the context of the review of
this Chapter, as provided in Article 100, with a view to incorporating any disciplines agreed under
Article XV of the GATS.
5. Section 1 applies to international maritime transport and telecommunication services subject to the
provisions laid down in sections 2 and 3.
Article 96
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter: 
(a) "measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law,
regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative action, or any other form;
(b) "measure adopted or maintained by a Party" means measures taken by:
(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and
(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by
central, regional or local governments or authorities;
(c) “service supplier” means any legal or natural person that seeks to supply or
supplies a service;
(d) "commercial presence" means any type of business or professional establishment,
including through:
(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a legal person, or
(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office,
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a service;
(e) “legal person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised
under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture,
sole proprietorship or association;
(f) “legal person of a Party” means a legal person constituted or otherwise organised
under the law of the Community or its Member States or of Chile.
Should such a legal person have only its registered office or central administration in
the territory of the Community or of Chile, it shall not be considered as a Community
or a Chilean legal person respectively, unless it is engaged in substantive business
operations in the territory of the Community or of Chile, respectively.
(g) A “natural person” means a national of one of the Member States or of Chile
according to their respective legislation.
Article 97
Market access
1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in Article 95, each Party shall
accord services and service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that
provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its Schedule referred
to in Article 99.
2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a Party shall not
maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory,
unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined as:
(a) limitations on the number of services suppliers whether in the form of numerical
quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirements of an economic
needs test;
(b) limitations on the total value of service transactions or assets in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test; 
(c) limitations on the total number of service operations or on the total quantity of
service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form of quotas
or the requirement of an economic needs test;5
(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular service sector or that a service supplier may employ and who are necessary
for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific service in the form of numerical
quotas or a requirement of an economic needs test;
(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entities or joint ventures
through which a service supplier of the other Party may supply a service; and
(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage
limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
Article 98
National treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule, and subject to the conditions and qualifications set out
therein, each Party shall grant to services and service suppliers of the other Party, in respect of all
measures affecting the supply of services, treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own
like services and services suppliers.6
2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to services and service suppliers of
the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to that it accords to its
own like services and service suppliers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less favourable if it
modifies the conditions of competition in favour of services or service suppliers of a Party compared to
like services or service suppliers of the other Party.
Article 99
Schedule of specific commitments
1. The specific commitments undertaken by each Party under Articles 97 and 98 are set out in the
schedule included in Annex VII. With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken,
each Schedule specifies:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment;
(c) undertakings relating to additional commitments referred to in paragraph 3;
(d) where appropriate the time-frame for implementation of such commitments and
the date of entry into force of such commitments.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 97 and 98 are inscribed in the column relating to Article 97.
In this case the inscription is considered to provide a condition or qualification to Article 98 as well.
3. Where a Party undertakes specific commitments on measures affecting trade in services not subject
to scheduling under Articles 97 and 98, such commitments are inscribed in its Schedule as additional
commitments.
Article 100
Review
1. The Parties shall review this Chapter three years after the entry into force of this Agreement, with a
view to further deepening liberalisation and reducing or eliminating remaining restrictions on a mutually
advantageous basis and ensuring an overall balance of rights and obligations. 
2. The Association Committee shall examine the operation of this Chapter every three years after the
review undertaken under paragraph 1 and shall submit appropriate proposals to the Association
Council.
Article 101
Movement of natural persons
Two years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall review the rules and conditions
applicable to movement of natural persons (mode 4) with a view to achieving further liberalisation. This
review may also address the revision of the definition of natural person provided in Article 96(g).
Article 102
Domestic regulation
1. In sectors where a Party has undertaken commitments in its Schedule, and with a view to ensuring
that any measure relating to the requirements and procedures of licensing and certification of service
suppliers of the other Party does not constitute an unnecessary barrier to trade, that Party shall
endeavour to ensure that any such measure:
(a) is based on objective and transparent criteria, such as, inter alia, competence and
the ability to provide the service;
(b) is not more trade-restrictive than necessary to ensure the achievement of a
legitimate policy objective;
(c) does not constitute a disguised restriction on the supply of a service.
2. The disciplines of paragraph 1 may be reviewed within the framework of the procedure of Article
100 in order to take into account the disciplines agreed under Article VI of the GATS with a view to
their incorporation into this Agreement.
3. Where a Party recognises, unilaterally or by agreement, education, experience, licenses or
certifications obtained in the territory of a third country, that Party shall afford the other Party an
adequate opportunity to demonstrate that education, experience, licenses or certifications obtained in
the other Party’s territory should also be recognised or to conclude an agreement or arrangement of
comparable effect.
4. The Parties shall consult periodically with a view to determining the feasibility of removing any
remaining citizenship or permanent residency requirement for the licensing or certification of each
other’s service suppliers.
Article 103
Mutual recognition
1. Each Party shall ensure that its competent authorities, within a reasonable period of time after the
submission by a services supplier of the other Party of an application for a licence or certification:
(a) where the application is complete, make a determination on the application and
inform the applicant of that determination; or
(b) where the application is not complete, inform the applicant without undue delay of
the status of the application and the additional information that is required under the
Party’s domestic law.
2. The Parties shall encourage the relevant bodies in their respective territories to provide
recommendations on mutual recognition, for the purpose of enabling service suppliers to fulfil, in whole
or in part, the criteria applied by each Party for the authorisation, licensing, accreditation, operation
and certification of service suppliers and in particular professional services.
3. The Association Committee, within a reasonable period of time and considering the level of
correspondence of the respective regulations, shall decide whether a recommendation referred to in
paragraph 2 is consistent with this Chapter. If that is the case, such a recommendation shall be
implemented through an agreement on mutual recognition of requirements, qualifications, licences and
other regulations to be negotiated by the competent authorities. 
4. Any such agreement shall be in conformity with the relevant provisions of the WTO Agreement and,
in particular, Article VII of the GATS.
5. Where the Parties agree, each Party shall encourage its relevant bodies to develop procedures for
the temporary licensing of professional service suppliers of the other Party.
6. The Association Committee shall periodically, and at least once every three years, review the
implementation of this Article.
Article 104
Electronic commerce7
The Parties, recognising that the use of electronic means increases trade opportunities in many
sectors, agree to promote the development of electronic commerce between them, in particular by cooperating on the market access and regulatory issues raised by electronic commerce.
Article 105
Transparency
Each Party shall respond promptly to all requests by the other Party for specific informationon any of
its measures of general application or international agreements which pertain to or affect this Chapter.
The contact point referred to in Article 190 shall provide specific information on all such matters to
service suppliers of the other Party upon request. Contact points need not be depositories of laws and
regulations.

Section 2
International Maritime Transport
Article 106
Scope
1. Notwithstanding Article 95(5), the provisions of this section shall apply with respect to shipping
companies established outside the Community or Chile and controlled by nationals of a Member State
or of Chile, respectively, if their vessels are registered in accordance with their respective legislation,
in that Member State or in Chile and carry the flag of a Member State or Chile.
2. This Article applies to international maritime transport, including door-to-door and intermodal
transport operations involving a sea-leg.
Article 107
Definitions
For the purposes of this section:
(a) “intermodal transport operations” is defined as the right to arrange door-to-door
transport services of international cargo and to this effect directly contract with
providers of other modes of transport;
(b) “international maritime service suppliers” covers the suppliers of services relating
to international cargo for maritime services, cargo handling, storage and warehousing
services, customs clearance services, container station and depot services, agency
services and freight forwarding services.
Article 108
Market access and national treatment
1. In view of the existing levels of liberalisation between the Parties in international maritime transport:
(a) the Parties shall continue to effectively apply the principle of unrestricted access to
the international maritime market and traffic on a commercial and non-discriminatory
basis;
(b) each Party shall continue to grant to ships flying the flag of or operated by service
suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favourable than that accorded to its own 
ships with regard to, inter alia, access to ports, use of infrastructure and auxiliary
maritime services of the ports, and related fees and charges, customs facilities and
the assignment of berths and facilities for loading and unloading.
2. In applying the principles of paragraph 1, the Parties shall:
(a) not introduce cargo-sharing clauses in future bilateral agreements with third
countries, other than in those exceptional circumstances where liner shipping
companies from the Party concerned would not otherwise have an effective
opportunity to ply for trade to and from the third country concerned;
(b) prohibit cargo-sharing arrangements in future bilateral agreements concerning dry
and liquid bulk trade;
(c) abolish, upon the entry into force of this Agreement, all unilateral measures
andadministrative, technical and other barriers which could have restrictive or
discriminatory effects on the free supply of services in international maritime transport.
3. Each Party shall permit international maritime service suppliers of the other Party to have a
commercial presence in its territory under conditions of establishment and operation no less
favourable than those accorded to its own service suppliers or those of any third country, whichever
are the better, in accordance with the conditions inscribed in its Schedule.

Section 3
Telecommunications Services
Article 109
Definitions
For the purposes of this section:
(a) “telecommunications services” means the transport of electro-magnetic signals -
sound, data image and any combinations thereof, excluding broadcasting.8
 Therefore,
commitments in this sector do not cover the economic activity consisting of content
provision which require telecommunications services for its transport. The provision of
that content, transported via a telecommunications service, is subject to the specific
commitments undertaken by the Parties in other relevant sectors.
(b) a “regulatory authority” means the body or bodies with any of the regulatory tasks
assigned in relation to the issues mentioned in this section.
(c) “essential telecommunications facilities” mean facilities of a public
telecommunications transport network and service that:
(i) are exclusively or predominantly provided by a single supplier or a
limited number of suppliers; and
(ii) cannot feasibly be economically or technically substituted in order
to provide a service.
Article 110
Regulatory authority
1. Regulatory authorities for telecommunications services shall be separate from, and not accountable
to, any supplier of basic telecommunications services.
2. The decisions of and the procedures used by regulatory authorities shall be impartial with respect to
all market participants. 
3. A supplier affected by the decision of a regulatory authority shall have a right to appeal against that
decision.
Article 111
Supply of services
1. Where a licence is required, the terms and conditions for such a license shall be made publicly
available and the period of time normally required to reach a decision concerning an application for a
licence shall be made publicly available.
2. Where a licence is required, the reasons for the denial of a licence shall be made known to the
applicant upon request.
Article 112
Major suppliers
1. A major supplier is a supplier which has the ability to materially affect the terms of participation
having regard to price and supply in the relevant market for basic telecommunications services as a
result of:
(a) control over essential facilities; or
(b) the use of its position in the market.
2. Appropriate measures shall be maintained for the purpose of preventing suppliers who,alone or
together, are a major supplier from engaging in or continuing anti-competitive practices.
3. The anti-competitive practices referred to above shall include in particular:
(a) engaging in anti-competitive cross-subsidisation;
(b) using information obtained from competitors with anti-competitive results; and
(c) not making available to other services suppliers on a timely basis technical
information about essential facilities and commercially relevant information which are
necessary for them to supply services.
Article 113
Interconnection
1. This section applies to linking with suppliers providing public telecommunications transport networks
or services in order to allow the users of one supplier to communicate with users of another supplier
and to access services provided by another supplier.
2. Interconnection with a major supplier shall be ensured at any technically feasible point in the
network. Such interconnection shall be provided:
(a) under non-discriminatory terms, conditions (including technical standards and
specifications) and rates and of a quality no less favourable than that provided for its
own like services or for like services of non-affiliated service suppliers or for its
subsidiaries or other affiliates;
(b) in a timely fashion, on terms, conditions (including technical standards and
specifications) and cost-oriented rates that are transparent, reasonable, having regard
to economic feasibility, and sufficiently unbundled so that the supplier need not pay for
network components or facilities that it does not require for the service to be provided;
and
(c) upon request, at points in addition to the network termination points offered to the
majority of users, subject to charges that reflect the cost of construction of necessary
additional facilities.
4. The procedures applicable for interconnection to a major supplier shall be made publicly available. 
5. Major suppliers shall make interconnection agreements available to service suppliers of the Parties
to ensure non-discrimination, and/or shall publish reference interconnection offers in advance, unless
they are already available to the public.
Article 114
Scarce resources
Any procedures for the allocation and use of scarce resources, including frequencies, numbers and
rights of way, shall be carried out in an objective, timely, transparent and non-discriminatory manner.
Article 115
Universal service
1. Each Party has the right to define the kind of universal service obligation it wishes to maintain.
2. The provisions governing universal service shall be transparent, objective and non-discriminatory.
They shall also be neutral with respect to competition and be no more burdensome than necessary.

CHAPTER II
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Article 116
Scope
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by the Parties affecting trade in financial
services.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, trade in financial services is defined as the supply of a financial
service through the following modes:
(a) from the territory of a Party into the territory of the other Party (mode 1);
(b) in the territory of a Party to the financial service consumer of the other Party (mode
2);
(c) by a financial service supplier of a Party, through commercial presence in the
territory of the other Party (mode 3);
(d) by a financial service supplier of a Party, through presence of natural persons in
the territory of the other Party (mode 4).
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose any obligation with respect to government
procurement, which is subject to Title IV of this Part of the Agreement.
4. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to subsidies granted by the Parties. The Parties shall
review the issue of disciplines on subsidies related to trade in financial services, with a view to
incorporating in this Agreement any disciplines agreed under Article XV of GATS.
5. This Chapter does not apply to:
(i) activities conducted by a central bank or monetary authority or by any other public
entity in pursuit of monetary or exchange rate policies;
(ii) activities forming part of a statutory system of social security or public retirement
plans; and
(iii) other activities conducted by a public entity for the account or with the guarantee
or using the financial resources of the Government.
6. For the purposes of paragraph 5, if a Party allows any of the activities referred to in paragraph 5(ii)
or (iii) to be conducted by its financial service suppliers in competition with a public entity or a financial
service supplier, this Chapter applies to such activities. 
Article 117
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
1. "measure" means any measure by a Party, whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule, procedure,
decision, administrative action, or any other form;
2. “measures adopted or maintained by a Party” means measures taken by:
(i) central, regional or local governments and authorities; and
(ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional
or local governments or authorities;
3. “financial service supplier” means any natural or legal person that seeks to supply or supplies
financial services but the term "financial service supplier" does not include a public entity;
4. “public entity” means:
(i) a government, a central bank or a monetary authority of a Party, or an entity owned
or controlled by a Party, that is principally engaged in carrying out governmental
functions or activities for governmental purposes, not including an entity principally
engaged in supplying financial services on commercial terms; or
(ii) a private entity, performing functions normally performed by a central bank or
monetary authority, when exercising those functions;
5. "commercial presence" means any type of business or professional establishment, including
through:
(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a legal person, or
(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office, within the
territory of a Party for the purpose of supplying a financial service;
6. “legal person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organized under applicable law,
whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any
corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship or association;
7. “legal person of a Party” means a legal person constituted or otherwise organised under the law of
the Community or its Member States or of Chile. Should such a legal person have only its registered
office or central administration in the territory of the Community or Chile, it shall not be considered as a
Community or a Chilean legal person respectively, unless it is engaged in substantive business
operations in the territory of the Community or Chile, respectively.
8. “natural person” means a national of one of the Member States or of Chile according to their
respective legislation.
9. “financial service” means any service of a financial nature offered by a financial service supplier of a
Party. Financial services comprise the following activities:
Insurance and insurance-related services
(i) direct insurance (including co-insurance):
(A) life
(B) non-life
(ii) reinsurance and retrocession;
(iii) insurance intermediation, such as brokerage and agency; 
(iv) services auxiliary to insurance, such as consultancy, actuarial, risk assessment
and claim settlement services.
Banking and other financial services (excluding insurance)
(v) acceptance of deposits and other repayable funds from the public;
(vi) lending of all types, including consumer credit, mortgage credit, factoring and
financing of commercial transactions;
(vii) financial leasing;
(viii) all payment and money transmission services, including credit, charge and debit
cards, travellers cheques and bankers drafts;
(ix) guarantees and commitments;
(x) trading for own account or for account of customers, whether on an exchange, in
an over-the-counter market or otherwise, the following:
(A) money market instruments, including cheques, bills, certificates of
deposits;
(B) foreign exchange;
(C) derivative products including, but not limited to, futures and
options;
(D) exchange rate and interest rate instruments, including products
such as swaps, forward rate agreements;
(E) transferable securities;
(F) other negotiable instruments and financial assets, including
bullion.
(xi) participation in issues of all kinds of securities, including underwriting and
placement as agent (whether publicly or privately) and provision of services related to
such issues;
(xii) money broking;
(xiii) asset management, such as cash or portfolio management, all forms of
collective investment management, pension fund management, custodial, depository
and trust services;
(xiv) settlement and clearing services for financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other negotiable instruments;
(xv) provision and transfer of financial information, and financial data processing and
related software by suppliers of other financial services;
(xvi) advisory, intermediation and other auxiliary financial services on all the activities
listed in subparagraphs (v) through (xv), including credit reference and analysis,
investment and portfolio research and advice, advice on acquisitions and on corporate
restructuring and strategy.
10. “new financial service” means a service of a financial nature, including services related to existing
and new products or the manner in which a product is delivered, that is not supplied by any financial
service supplier in the territory of a Party but which is supplied in the territory of the other Party. 
Article 118
Market access
1. With respect to market access through the modes of supply identified in Article 116, each Party
shall accord financial services and financial service suppliers of the other Party treatment no less
favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed and specified in its
Schedule referred to in Article 120.
2. In sectors where market-access commitments are undertaken, the measures which a Party shall not
maintain or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or on the basis of its entire territory,
unless otherwise specified in its Schedule, are defined as:
(a) limitations on the number of financial services suppliers whether in the form of
numerical quotas, monopolies, exclusive service suppliers or the requirements of an
economic needs test;
(b) limitations on the total value of financial service transactions or assets in the form
of numerical quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;
(c) limitations on the total number of financial service operations or on the total
quantity of service output expressed in terms of designated numerical units in the form
of quotas or the requirement of an economic needs test;9
(d) limitations on the total number of natural persons that may be employed in a
particular financial service sector or that a financial service supplier may employ and
who are necessary for, and directly related to, the supply of a specific financial service
in the form of numerical quotas or a requirement of an economic needs test;
(e) measures which restrict or require specific types of legal entities or joint ventures
through which a financial service supplier of the other Party may supply a financial
service; and
(f) limitations on the participation of foreign capital in terms of maximum percentage
limit on foreign shareholding or the total value of individual or aggregate foreign
investment.
Article 119
National treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule, and subject to the conditions and qualifications set out
therein, each Party shall accord to financial services and financial service suppliers of the other Party,
in respect of all measures affecting the supply of financial services, treatment no less favourable than
that it accords to its own like financial services and financial service suppliers.10
2. A Party may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to financial services and financial
service suppliers of the other Party, either formally identical treatment or formally different treatment to
that it accords to its own like financial services and financial service suppliers.
3. Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to be less favourable if it
modifies the conditions of competition in favour of financial services or financial service suppliers of a
Party compared to like financial services or financial service suppliers of the other Party.
Article 120
Schedule of specific commitments
1. The specific commitment undertaken by each Party under Articles 118 and 119 are set out in the
Schedule included in Annex VIII. With respect to sectors where such commitments are undertaken,
each Schedule specifies:
(a) terms, limitations and conditions on market access;
(b) conditions and qualifications on national treatment; 
(c ) undertakings relating to additional commitments referred to in paragraph 3;
(d) where appropriate the time-frame for implementation of such commitments and
the date of entry into force of such commitments.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 118 and 119 are inscribed in the column relating to Article
118. In this case, the inscription is considered to provide a condition or qualification to Article 119 as
well.
3. Where a Party undertakes specific commitments on measures affecting trade in financial services
not subject to scheduling under Articles 118 and 119, such commitments are inscribed in its Schedule
as additional commitments.
Article 121
New financial services
1. A Party shall permit financial service suppliers of the other Party established in its territory to offer in
its territory any new financial service within the scope of the subsectors and financial services
committed in its Schedule and subject to the terms, limitations, conditions and qualifications
established in that Schedule and provided that the introduction of this new financial service does not
require a new law or the modification of an existing law.
2. A Party may determine the legal form through which the service may be provided and may require
authorisation for the provision of the financial service. Where such authorisation is required, a decision
shall be taken within a reasonable period of time and the authorisation may only be refused for
prudential reasons.
Article 122
Data processing in the financial services sector
1. Each Party shall permit a financial service supplier of the other Party to transfer information in
electronic or other form, into and out of its territory, for data processing where such processing is
required in the ordinary course of business of such financial service supplier.
2. Where the information referred to in paragraph 1 consists of or contains personal data, the transfer
of such information from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party shall take place in
accordance with the domestic law regulating the protection of individuals with respect to the
transferring and processing of personal data of the Party out of whose territory the information is
transferred.
Article 123
Effective and transparent regulation in the financial services sector
1. Each Party shall, to the extent practicable, provide in advance to all interested persons any
measure of general application that the Party proposes to adopt in order to allow an opportunity for
such persons to comment on the measure. Such measure shall be provided:
(a) by means of an official publication; or
(b) in other written or electronic form.
2. Each Party’s appropriate financial authority shall make available to interested persons its
requirements for completing applications relating to the supply of financial services.
3. On the request of an applicant, the appropriate financial authority shall inform the applicant of the
status of its application. If such authority requires additional information from the applicant, it shall
notify the applicant without undue delay.
4. Each Party shall make its best endeavours to implement and apply in its territory internationally
agreed standards for regulation and supervision in the financial services sector and for the fight
against money laundering. For this purpose, the Parties shall cooperate and exchange information
and experience within the Special Committee on Financial Services referred to in Article 127.
Article 124
Confidential information
Nothing in this Chapter: 
(a) shall require any of the Parties to provide confidential information, the disclosure of
which would impede law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest,
or which would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises,
public or private.
(b) shall be construed to require a Party to disclose information relating to the financial
affairs and accounts of individual customers of financial service suppliers, or any
confidential or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.
Article 125
Prudential carve out
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining
reasonable measures for prudential reasons, such as:
(a) the protection of investors, depositors, financial market participants, policy-holders,
or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial services supplier;
(b) the maintenance of the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of
financial services suppliers; and
(c) ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party’s financial system.
2. Where such measures do not conform with the provisions of this Chapter, they shall not be used as
a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations under the Chapter.
Article 126
Recognition
1. A Party may recognise prudential measures of the other Party in determining how the Party’s
measures relating to financial services shall be applied. Such recognition, which may be achieved
through harmonisation or otherwise, may be based upon an agreement or arrangement or may be
accorded autonomously.
2. A Party that is a party to an agreement or arrangement with a third party such as those referred to in
paragraph 1, whether future or existing, shall afford adequate opportunity for the other Party to
negotiate its accession to such agreements or arrangements, or to negotiate comparable ones with it,
under circumstances in which there would be equivalent regulation, oversight, implementation of such
regulation, and, if appropriate, procedures concerning the sharing of information between the Parties
to the agreement or arrangement. Where a Party accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford
adequate opportunity for the other Party to demonstrate that such circumstances exist.
Article 127
Special Committee on Financial Services
1. The Parties hereby establish a Special Committee on Financial Services. The Special Committee
shall be composed of representatives of the Parties. The principal representative of each Party shall
be an official of the Party’s authority responsible for financial services set out in Annex IX.
2. The functions of the Special Committee shall include:
(a) supervising the implementation of this Chapter;
(b) considering issues regarding financial services that are referred to it by a Party.
3. The Special Committee shall meet upon request of one of the Parties on a date and with an agenda
agreed in advance by the Parties. The office of chair person shall be held alternately. The Special
Committee shall report to the Association Committee the results of its meetings.
4. Three years after the entry into force of this Agreement the Special Committee on Financial
Services will consider actions with the aim of facilitating and expanding trade in financial services and
further contributing to the objectives of this Agreement, and shall report to the Association Committee. 
Article 128
Consultations
1. A Party may request consultations with the other Party regarding any matter arising under this
Chapter. The other Party shall give sympathetic consideration to the request. The Parties shall report
the results of their consultations to the Special Committee on Financial Services.
2. Consultations under this Article shall include officials of the authorities specified in Annex IX.
3. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require financial authorities participating in consultations
to disclose information or take any action that would interfere with individual regulatory, supervisory,
administrative or enforcement matters.
4. Where a financial authority of a Party requires information for supervisory purposes concerning a
financial service supplier in the other Party’s territory, such financial authority may approach the
competent financial authority in the other Party’s territory to seek the information. The provision of
such information may be subject to the terms, conditions and limitations contained in the other Party’s
relevant law or to the requirement of a prior agreement or arrangement between the respective
financial authorities.
Article 129
Specific provisions on dispute settlement
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any disputes under this Chapter shall be settled in
accordance with the provisions of Title VIII.
2. For the purpose of Article 184, consultations held under Article 128 shall be deemed to constitute
the consultations referred to in Article 183, unless the Parties otherwise agree.
Upon initiation of consultations, the Parties shall provide information to enable the examination of how
a measure of a Party or any other matter may affect the operation and application of this Chapter, and
give confidential treatment to the information exchanged during consultations. If the matter has not
been resolved within 45 days after holding the consultations under Article 128 or 90 days after the
delivery of the request for consultations under Article 128(1), whichever is earlier, the complaining
Party may request in writing the establishment of an arbitration panel. The Parties shall report the
results of their consultations directly to the Association Committee.
3. For the purpose of Article 185:
(a) the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall be a financial expert;
(b) the Association Committee shall, no later than six months after the entry into force
of this Agreement, establish a list of at least five individuals who are not nationals of
either Party, and who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators and be identified as
chairperson of arbitration panels in financial services. The Association Committee
shall ensure that the list always contains five individuals at any point in time. Those
individuals shall have expertise or experience in financial services law or practice,
which may include the regulation of financial institutions, be independent, serve in
their individual capacities and not be affiliated with, nor take instructions from, any
Party or organisation and shall comply with the Code of Conduct set out in Annex XVI.
Such list may be amended every three years;
(c) within three days of the request for establishment of the arbitration panel, the chair
person of the arbitration panel shall be selected by lot by the chairperson of the
Association Committee from the list referred to in paragraph (b). The other two
arbitrators of the panel shall be selected by lot by the chairperson of the Association
Committee from the list referred to in Article 185(2), one among the individuals
proposed to the Association Committee by the complaining Party, and the other
among the individuals proposed to the Association Committee by the Party
complained against.

CHAPTER III
ESTABLISHMENT
Article 130
Scope
This Chapter shall apply to establishment in all sectors with the exception of all services sectors,
including the financial services sector.
Article 131
Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter,
(a) “legal person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised
under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture,
sole proprietorship or association;
(b) “legal person of a Party” means a legal person constituted or otherwise organised
under the law of the Community or its Member States or of Chile.
Should such a legal person have only its registered office or central administration in
the territory of the Community or of Chile, it shall not be considered as a Community
or a Chilean legal person respectively, unless it is engaged in substantive business
operations in the territory of the Community or of Chile respectively.
(c) “natural person" means a national of one of the Member States or of Chile
according to their respective legislation.
(d) “establishment” means:
(i) the constitution, acquisition or maintenance of a legal person, or
(ii) the creation or maintenance of a branch or a representative office,
within the territory of a Party for the purpose of performing an
economic activity.
As regards natural persons, this shall not extend to seeking or taking employment in
the labour market or confer a right of access to the labour market of a Party.
Article 132
National treatment
In the sectors inscribed in Annex X, and subject to any conditions and qualifications set out therein,
with respect to establishment, each Party shall grant to legal and natural persons of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own legal and natural persons performing a like
economic activity.
Article 133
Right to regulate
Subject to the provisions of Article 132, each Party may regulate the establishment of legal and natural
persons.
Article 134
Final provisions
1. With respect to this Chapter, the Parties confirm their rights and obligations existing under any
bilateral or multilateral agreements to which they are parties.
2. With the objective of progressive liberalisation of investment conditions, the Parties affirm their
commitment to review the investment legal framework, the investment environment and the flow of
investment between them consistent with their commitments in international investment agreements,
no later than three years after the entry into force of this Agreement. 

CHAPTER 4
EXCEPTIONS
Article 135
Exceptions
1. Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute
a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where like conditions prevail, or
a disguised restriction on trade in services, financial services or establishment, nothing in this Title
shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by either Party of measures:
(a) necessary to protect public morals or to maintain public order and public security;
(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;
(c) relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are
applied in conjunction with restrictions on the domestic supply or consumption of
services or on domestic investments;
(d) necessary for the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or
archaeological value;
(e) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Title including those relating to:
(i) the prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or to deal with
the effects of a default on services contracts;
(ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the
processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of
confidentiality of individual records and accounts; or
(iii) safety.
2. The provisions of this Title shall not apply to the Parties respective social security systems or to
activities in the territory of each Party which are connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of
official authority.
3. Nothing in this Title shall prevent a Party from applying its laws, regulations and requirements
regarding entry and stay, work, labour conditions, and establishment of natural persons11 provided
that, in so doing, it does not apply to them in such a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits
accruing to the other Party under the terms of a specific provision of this Title.

TITLE IV
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
Article 136
Objective
In accordance with the provisions of this Title, the Parties shall ensure the effective and reciprocal
opening of their government procurement markets.
Article 137
Scope and coverage
1. This Title applies to any law, regulation, procedure or practice regarding any procurement, by the
entities of the Parties, of goods and services including works, subject to the conditions specified by
each Party in Annexes XI, XII and XIII.
2. This Title shall not be applicable to:
(a) contracts awarded pursuant to:
(i) an international agreement and intended for the joint
implementation or exploitation of a project by the contracting Parties;
(ii) an international agreement relating to the stationing of troops; and
(iii) the particular procedure of an international organisation.
(b) non-contractual agreements or any form of government assistance and
procurement made in the framework of assistance or cooperation programmes.
(c) contracts for :
(i) the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings, or other
immovable property or concerning rights thereon;
(ii) the acquisition, development, production or co-production of
programme material by broadcasters and contracts for broadcasting
time.
(iii) arbitration and conciliation services;
(iv) employment contracts; and
(v) research and development services other than those where the
benefits accrue exclusively to the entity for its use in the conduct of its
own affairs, on condition that the service is wholly remunerated by the
entity.
(d) financial services.
3. Public works concessions, as defined in Article 138(i), shall also be subject to this Title, as specified
in Annexes XI, XII and XIII.
4. Neither Party may prepare, design or otherwise structure any procurement contract in order to avoid
the obligations under this Title.
Article 138
Definitions
For the purpose of this Title, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "government procurement" means any type of procurement of goods, services or
a combination thereof, including works carried out by public entities of the Parties for
governmental purposes and not with a view to commercial resale or with a view to use
in the production of goods or the supply of services for commercial sale, unless
otherwise specified. It includes procurement by such methods as purchase or lease,
or rental or hire purchase, with or without an option to buy;
(b) “entities” means the public entities of the Parties, such as central, sub-central or
local government entities, municipalities, public undertakings and all other entities that
procure in accordance with the provisions of this Title, as set out in Annexes XI, XII
and XIII; 
(c) “public undertakings” means any undertaking over which the public authorities may
exercise directly or indirectly a dominant influence by virtue of their ownership of it,
their financial participation therein, or the rules which govern it. A dominant influence
on the part of the public authorities shall be presumed when these authorities, directly
or indirectly, in relation to an undertaking:
(i) hold the majority of the undertaking’s subscribed capital;
(ii) control the majority of the votes attaching to shares issued by the
undertaking; or
(iii) can appoint more than half of the members of the undertaking’s
administrative, managerial or supervisory body.
(d) “supplier of the Parties” means any natural or legal person or public body or group
of such persons of a Party and/or bodies of a Party which can provide goods, services
or the execution of works. The term shall cover equally a supplier of goods, a service
provider or a contractor;
(e) “legal person” means any legal entity duly constituted or otherwise organised
under applicable law, whether for profit or otherwise, and whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, joint venture,
sole proprietorship or association;
(f) “legal person of a Party” means a legal person constituted or otherwise organised
under the law of the Community or its Member States or of Chile;
Should such a legal person have only its registered office or central administration in
the territory of the Community or Chile, it shall not be considered as a Community or a
Chilean legal person respectively, unless it is engaged in substantive business
operations in the territory of the Community or Chile respectively.
(g) a natural person means a national of one of the Member States or of Chile
according to their respective legislation;
(h) “tenderer” means a supplier who has submitted a tender;
(i) “public" works concessionsö means a contract of the same type as public works
procurement contracts, except for the fact that the remuneration for the works to be
carried out consists either solely in the right to exploit the construction or in this right
together with a payment;
(j) “offsets” means those conditions imposed or considered by an entity prior to, or in
the course of its procurement process, that encourage local development or improve
its Party's balance of payments accounts by means of requirements of local content,
licensing of technology, investment, counter-trade or similar requirements;
(k) “in writing or written” means any expression of information in words, numbers or
other symbols, including electronic means, that can be read, reproduced and stored;
(l) "technical specifications" means a specification which lays down the characteristics
of the products or services to be procured, such as quality, performance, safety and
dimensions, symbols, terminology, packaging, marking and labelling, or the processes
and methods for their production and requirements relating to conformity assessment
procedures prescribed by procuring entities; 
(m) “privatisation” means a process by means of which government control over an
entity is effectively eliminated and is transferred to the private sector;
(n) “liberalisation” means a process as a result of which an entity enjoys no exclusive
or special rights and is exclusively engaged in the provision of goods or services on
markets that are subject to effective competition.
Article 139
National treatment and non-discrimination
1. Each Party shall ensure that the procurement of its entities covered by this Title takes place in a
transparent, reasonable and non-discriminatory manner, treating any supplier of either Party equally
and ensuring the principle of open and effective competition.
2. With respect to any laws, regulations, procedures and practices regarding government procurement
covered by this Title, each Party shall grant the goods, services and suppliers of the other Party a
treatment no less favourable than that accorded by it to domestic goods, services and suppliers.
3. With respect to any laws, regulations, procedures and practices regarding government procurement
covered by this Title, each Party shall ensure:
(a) that its entities do not treat a locally-established supplier less favourably than
another locally-established supplier on the basis of the degree of foreign affiliation to,
or ownership by, a person of the other Party; and
(b) that its entities do not discriminate against a locally-established supplier on the
basis that the goods or services offered by that supplier for a particular procurement
are goods or services of the other Party.
4. This Article shall not apply to measures concerning customs duties or other charges of any kind
imposed on or in connection with importation, the method of levying such duties and charges, other
import regulations, including restrictions and formalities, nor to measures affecting trade in services
other than measures specifically governing procurement covered by this Title.
Article 140
Prohibition of offsets and national preferences
Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not, in the qualification and selection of suppliers, goods or
services, in the evaluation of bids or in the award of contracts, consider, seek or impose offsets, nor
conditions regarding national preferences such as margins allowing price preference.
Article 141
Valuation rules
1. Entities shall not split up a procurement, nor use any other method of contract valuation with the
intention of evading the application of this Title when determining whether a contract is covered by the
disciplines of thereof, subject to the conditions set out in Annexes XI and XII, Appendices 1 to 3.
2. In calculating the value of a contract, an entity shall take into account all forms of remuneration,
such as premiums, fees, commissions and interests, as well as the maximum permitted total amount,
including option clauses, provided for by the contract.
3. When, due to the nature of the contract, it is not possible to calculate in advance its precise value,
entities shall estimate this value on the basis of objective criteria.
Article 142
Transparency
1. Each Party shall promptly publish any law, regulation, judicial decision and administrative ruling of
general application and procedure, including standard contract clauses, regarding procurement
covered by this Title in the appropriate publications referred to in Annex XIII, Appendix 2, including
officially designated electronic media.
2. Each Party shall promptly publish in the same manner all modifications to such measures.
Article 143
Tendereing procedures
1. Entities shall award their public contracts by open or selective tendering procedures according to
their national procedures, in compliance with this Title and in a non-discriminatory manner.
2. For the purposes of this Title:
(a) open tendering procedures are those procedures whereby any interested supplier
may submit a tender.
(b) selective tendering procedures are those procedures whereby, consistent with
Article 144 and other relevant provisions of this Title, only suppliers satisfying
qualification requirements established by the entities are invited to submit a tender.
3. However, in the specific cases and only under the conditions laid down in Article 145, entities may
use a procedure other than the open or selective tendering procedures referred to in paragraph 1 of
that Article, in which case the entities may choose not to publish a notice of intended procurement,
and may consult the suppliers of their choice and negotiate the terms of contract with one or more of
these.
4. Entities shall treat tenders in confidence. In particular, they shall not provide information intended to
assist particular participants to bring their tenders up to the level of other participants.
Article 144
Selective tendering
1. In selective tendering, entities may limit the number of qualified suppliers they will invite to tender,
consistent with the efficient operation of the procurement process, provided that they select the
maximum number of domestic suppliers and suppliers of the other Party, and that they make the
selection in a fair and non-discriminatory manner and on the basis of the criteria indicated in the notice
of intended procurement or in tender documents.
2. Entities maintaining permanent lists of qualified suppliers may select suppliers to be invited to
tender from among those listed, under the conditions foreseen in Article 146(7). Any selection shall
allow for equitable opportunities for suppliers on the lists.
Article 145
Other procedures
1. Provided that the tendering procedure is not used to avoid maximum possible competition or to
protect domestic suppliers, entities shall be allowed to award contracts by means other than an open
or selective tendering procedure in the following circumstances and subject to the following conditions,
where applicable:
(a) when no suitable tenders or request to participate have been submitted in
response to a prior procurement, on condition that the requirements of the initial
procurement are not substantially modified;
(b) when, for technical or artistic reasons, or for reasons connected with protection of
exclusive rights, the contract may be performed only by a particular supplier and no
reasonable alternative or substitute exists;
(c) for reasons of extreme urgency brought about by events unforeseeable by the
entity, the products or services could not be obtained in time by means of open or
selective tendering procedures;
(d) for additional deliveries of goods or services by the original supplier where a
change of supplier would compel the entity to procure equipment or services not
meeting requirements of interchangeability with already existing equipment, software
or services;
(e) when an entity procures prototypes or a first product or service which are
developed at its request in the course of, and for, a particular contract for research,
experiment, study or original development; 
(f) when additional services which were not included in the initial contract but which
were within the objectives of the original tender documentation have, through
unforeseeable circumstances, become necessary to complete the services described
therein. However, the total value of contracts awarded for the additional construction
services may not exceed 50 per cent of the amount of the main contract;
(g) for new services consisting of the repetition of similar services and for which the
entity has indicated, in the notice concerning the initial service, that tendering
procedures other than open or selective might be used in awarding contracts for such
new services;
(h) in the case of contracts awarded to the winner of a design contest, provided that
the contest has been organised in a manner which is consistent with the principles of
this Title; in case of several successful candidates, all successful candidates shall be
invited to participate in the negotiations; and
(i) for quoted goods purchased on a commodity market and for purchases of goods
made under exceptionally advantageous conditions which only arise in the very short
term in the case of unusual disposals and not for routine purchases from regular
suppliers.
2. The Parties shall ensure that, whenever it is necessary for entities to resort to a procedure other
than the open or selective tendering procedures based on the circumstances set forth in paragraph 1,
the entities shall maintain a record or prepare a written report providing specific justification for the
contract awarded under that paragraph.
Article 146
Qualification of suppiers
1. Any conditions for participation in procurement shall be limited to those that are essential to ensure
that the potential supplier has the capability to fulfil the requirements of the procurement and the ability
to execute the contract in question.
2. In the process of qualifying suppliers, entities shall not discriminate between domestic suppliers and
suppliers of the other Party.
3. A Party shall not impose the condition that, in order for a supplier to participate in a procurement,
the supplier has previously been awarded one or more contracts by an entity of that Party or that the
supplier has prior work experience in the territory of that Party.
4. Entities shall recognise as qualified suppliers all suppliers who meet the conditions for participation
in a particular intended procurement. Entities shall base their qualification decisions solely on the
conditions for participation that have been specified in advance in notices or tender documentation.
5. Nothing in this Title shall preclude the exclusion of any supplier on grounds such as bankruptcy or
false declarations or conviction for serious crime such as participation in criminal organisations.
6. Entities shall promptly communicate to suppliers that have applied for qualification their decision on
whether or not they qualify.
Permanent lists of qualified suppliers
7. Entities may establish permanent lists of qualified suppliers provided that the following rules are
respected :
(a) entities establishing permanent lists shall ensure that suppliers may apply for
qualification at any time.
(b) any supplier having requested to become a qualified supplier shall be notified by
the entities concerned of the decision in this regard.
(c) suppliers requesting to participate in a given intended procurement who are not on
the permanent list of qualified suppliers shall be given the possibility to participate in
the procurement by presenting the equivalent certifications and other means of proof
requested from suppliers who are on the list. 
(d) when an entity operating in the utilities sector uses a notice on the existence of a
permanent list as a notice of intended procurement, as provided in Article 147(7),
suppliers requesting to participate who are not on the permanent list of qualified
suppliers shall also be considered for the procurement, provided there is sufficient
time to complete the qualification procedure; in this event, the procuring entity shall
promptly start procedures for qualification and the process of, and the time required
for, qualifying suppliers shall not be used in order to keep suppliers of other Parties off
the suppliers list.
Article 147
Publication of notices
General provisions
1. Each Party shall ensure that its entities provide for effective dissemination of the tendering
opportunities generated by the relevant government procurement processes, providing suppliers of the
other Party with all the information required to take part in such procurement.
2. For each contract covered by this Title, except as set out in Articles 143(3) and 145, entities shall
publish in advance a notice inviting interested suppliers to submit tenders, or where appropriate,
requests for participation for that contract.
3. The information in each notice of intended procurement shall include at least the following.
(a) name, address, telefax number, electronic address of the entity and, if different,
the address where all documents relating to the procurement may be obtained;
(b) the tendering procedure chosen and the form of the contract;
(c) a description of the intended procurement, as well as essential contract
requirements to be fulfilled;
(d) any conditions that suppliers must fulfil to participate in the procurement;
(e) time-limits for submission of tenders and, where appropriate, other time limits;
(f) main criteria to be used for award of the contract; and
(g) if possible, terms of payment and any other terms.
Notice of planned procurement
4. Each Party shall encourage its entities to publish as early as possible in each fiscal year, a notice of
planned procurement containing information regarding entities future procurement plans. Such notice
should include the subject matter of the procurement and the planned date of the publication of the
notice of intended procurement.
5. Entities operating in the utilities sector may use a notice of planned procurement as a notice of
intended procurement, under the condition that such notice contains as much of the information
referred to in paragraph 3 as is available, and that it explicitly invites interested suppliers to express
their interest in the procurement to the entity.
6. Entities having used a notice of planned procurement as a notice of intended procurement shall
subsequently communicate to all suppliers who have expressed an initial interest further information
that shall include, at least, the information referred to in paragraph 3 and ask them to confirm their
interest on that basis.
Notice regarding permanent lists of qualified suppliers
7. Entities which intend to maintain permanent lists shall, consistently with paragraph 2, publish a
notice which shall identify the entity, and indicate the purpose of the permanent list and the availability
of the rules concerning its operation, including criteria for qualification and disqualification, as well as
its duration.
8. Where the permanent list is of a duration greater than three years, the notice shall be published
annually. 
9. Entities operating in the utilities sector may use a notice on the existence of permanent lists of
qualified suppliers as a notice of intended procurement. In that case, they shall provide, in a timely
manner, information which allows all those who have expressed an interest to assess their interest in
participating in the procurement. This information shall include the information contained in the notice
referred to in paragraph 3, to the extent that such information is available. Information provided to one
interested supplier shall be provided in a non-discriminatory manner to the other interested suppliers.
Common provisions
10. Each notice referred to in this Article shall be accessible during the entire time period established
for tendering for the relevant procurement.
11. Entities shall publish the notices in a timely manner through means which offer the widest possible
and non-discriminatory access to the interested suppliers of the Parties. These means shall be
accessible free of charge through a single point of access specified in Annex XIII, Appendix 2.
Article 148
Tender documentation
1. Tender documentation provided to suppliers shall contain all information necessary to permit them
to submit responsive tenders.
2. Where contracting entities do not offer free direct access to the entire tender documents and any
supporting documents by electronic means, entities shall make promptly available the tender
documentation at the request of any supplier of the Parties.
3. Entities shall promptly reply to any reasonable request for relevant information relating to the
intended procurement, on condition that such information does not give that supplier an advantage
over its competitors.
Article 149
Technical specifications
1. Technical specifications shall be set out in the notices, tender documents or additional documents.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not prepare, adopt or apply any technical specifications
with a view to, or with the effect of, creating unnecessary barriers to trade between the Parties.
3. Technical specifications prescribed by entities shall
(a) be in terms of performance and functional requirements rather than design or
descriptive characteristics; and
(b) be based on international standards, where these exist or, in their absence, on
national technical regulations12, recognised national standards13, or building codes.
4. The provisions of paragraph 3 do not apply when the entity can objectively demonstrate that the use
of technical specifications referred to in that paragraph would be ineffective or inappropriate for the
fulfilment of the legitimate objectives pursued.
5. In all cases, entities shall consider bids which do not comply with the technical specifications but
meet the essential requirements thereof and are fit for the purpose intended. The reference to
technical specifications in the tender documents must include words such as or equivalent.
6. There shall be no requirement for or reference to a particular trademark or trade name, patent,
design or type, specific origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or
intelligible way of describing the procurement requirements and provided that words, such as “or
equivalent”, are included in the tender documentation.
7. The tenderer shall have the burden of proving that his bid meets the essential requirements.
Article 150
Time-limits
1. All time-limits established by the entities for the receipt of tenders and requests to participate shall
be adequate to allow suppliers of the other Party, as well as domestic suppliers, to prepare and to
submit tenders, and where appropriate, requests for participation or applications for qualifying. In
determining any such time-limit, entities shall, consistent with their own reasonable needs, take into
account such factors as the complexity of the intended procurement and the normal time for
transmitting tenders from foreign as well as domestic points.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its entities shall take due account of publication delays when setting
the final date for receipt of tenders or of request for participation or for qualifying for the supplier’s list.
3. The minimum time-limits for the receipt of tenders are specified in Annex XIII, Appendix 3. 
Article 151
Negotiations
1. A Party may provide for its entities to conduct negotiations:
(a) in the context of procurements in which they have indicated such intent in the
notice of intended procurement; or
(b) when it appears from evaluation that no one tender is obviously the most
advantageous in terms of the specific evaluation criteria set forth in the notices or
tender documentation.
2. Negotiations shall primarily be used to identify the strengths and weaknesses in tenders.
3. Entities shall not, in the course of negotiations, discriminate between tenderers. In particular, they
shall ensure that:
(a) any elimination of participants is carried out in accordance with the criteria set forth
in the notices and tender documentation;
(b) all modifications to the criteria and to the technical requirements are transmitted in
writing to all remaining participants in the negotiations;
(c) on the basis of the revised requirements and/or when negotiations are concluded,
all remaining participants are afforded an opportunity to submit new or amended
tenders in accordance with a common deadline.
Article 152
Submission, receipt and opening of tenders
1. Tenders and requests to participate in procedures shall be submitted in writing.
2. Entities shall receive and open bids from tenderers under procedures and conditions guaranteeing
the respect of the principles of transparency and non-discrimination.
Article 153
Awarding of contracts
1. To be considered for award, a tender must, at the time of opening, conform to the essential
requirements of the notices or tender documentation and be submitted by a supplier which complies
with the conditions for participation.
2. Entities shall make the award to the tenderer whose tender is either the lowest tender or the tender
which, in terms of the specific objective evaluation criteria previously set forth in the notices or tender
documentation, is determined to be the most advantageous.
Article 154
Information on contract award
1. Each Party shall ensure that its entities provide for effective dissemination of the results of
government procurement processes.
2. Entities shall promptly inform tenderers of decisions regarding the award of the contract and of the
characteristics and relative advantages of the selected tender. Upon request, entities shall inform any
eliminated tenderer of the reasons for the rejection of its tender.
3. Entities may decide to withhold certain information on the contract award where release of such
information would prevent law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, would
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of suppliers, or might prejudice fair competition between
them.
Article 155
Bid challenges
1. Entities shall accord impartial and timely consideration to any complaints from suppliers regarding
an alleged breach of this Title in the context of a procurement procedure. 
2. Each Party shall provide non-discriminatory, timely, transparent and effective procedures enabling
suppliers to challenge alleged breaches of this Title arising in the context of procurements in which
they have, or have had, an interest.
3. Challenges shall be heard by an impartial and independent reviewing authority. A reviewing
authority which is not a court shall either be subject to judicial review or shall have procedural
guarantees similar to those of a court.
4. Challenge procedures shall provide for:
(a) rapid interim measures to correct breaches of this Title and to preserve
commercial opportunities. Such action may result in suspension of the procurement
process. However, procedures may provide that overriding adverse consequences for
the interests concerned, including the public interest, may be taken into account in
deciding whether such measures should be applied; and
(b) if appropriate, correction of the breach of this Title or, in the absence of such
correction, compensation for the loss or damages suffered, which may be limited to
costs for tender preparation and protest.
Article 156
Information technology
1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, endeavour to use electronic means of communication to
permit efficient dissemination of information on government procurement, particularly as regards
tender opportunities offered by entities, while respecting the principles of transparency and nondiscrimination.
2. With a view to improving access to government procurement markets, each Party shall endeavour
to implement an electronic information system, which is compulsory for their respective entities.
3. The Parties shall encourage the use of electronic means for the transmission of offers.
Article 157
Cooperation and assistance
The Parties shall endeavour to provide each other with technical cooperation and assistance through
the development of training programs with a view to achieving a better understanding of their
respective government procurement systems and statistics and better access to their respective
markets.
Article 158
Statistical reports
Where a Party does not ensure an acceptable level of compliance with Article 147(11), it shall, upon
request of the other Party,collect and provide to the other Party on an annual basis statistics on its
procurements covered by this Title. Such reports shall contain the information established in Annex
XIII, Appendix 4.
Article 159
Modifications to coverage
1. A Party may modify its coverage under this Title, provided that it:
(a) notifies the other Party of the modification; and
(b) provides the other Party, within 30 days following the date of such notification,
appropriate compensatory adjustments to its coverage in order to maintain a level of
coverage comparable to that existing prior to the modification.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1(b), no compensatory adjustments shall be provided to the other Party
where the modification by a Party of its coverage under this Title concerns:
(a) rectifications of a purely formal nature and minor amendments to Annexes XI and
XII; 
(b) one or more covered entities on which government control or influence has been
effectively eliminated as a result of privatisation or liberalisation.
3. Where appropriate, the Association Committee shall by decision modify the relevant Annex to
reflect the modification notified by the Party concerned.
Article 160
Further negotiations
If either Party should offer in the future a third party additional advantages with regard to access to
their respective procurement markets beyond what has been agreed under this Title, it shall agree to
enter into negotiations with the other Party with a view to extending these advantages to it on a
reciprocal basis by means of a decision of the Association Committee.
Article 161
Exceptions
Provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that would constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties or a disguised restriction on trade between them,
nothing in this Title shall be construed to prevent any Party from adopting or maintaining measures:
(a) necessary to protect public morals, order or safety;
(b) necessary to protect human life, health or security;
(c) necessary to protect animal or plant life or health;
(d) necessary to protect intellectual property; or
(e) relating to goods or services of handicapped persons, of philanthropic institutions
or of prison labour.
Article 162
Review and implementation
The Association Committee shall review the implementation of this Title every two years, unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties; it shall consider any issue arising from it, and take appropriate action
in the exercise of its functions. It shall, in particular, fulfil the following tasks:
(a) coordinate exchanges between the Parties regarding the development and
implementation of information technology systems in the field of public procurement;
(b) make appropriate recommendations regarding the cooperation between the
Parties; and
(c) adopt decisions where provided for under this Title.
TITLE V
CURRENT PAYMENTS AND CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
Article 163
Objective and scope
1. The Parties shall aim at the liberalisation of current payments and capital movements between
them, in conformity with the commitments undertaken in the framework of the international financial
institutions and with due consideration to each Party's currency stability.
2. This Title applies to all current payments and capital movements between the Parties. 
Article 164
Current Account
The Parties shall allow, in freely convertible currency and in accordance with the Articles of Agreement
of the International Monetary Fund, any payments and transfers of the Current Account between the
Parties.
Article 165
Capital Account
With regard to movement of capital of the Balance of Payments, from the entry into force of this
Agreement, the Parties shall allow the free movements of capital relating to direct investments made in
accordance with the laws of the host country and investments established in accordance with the
provisions of Title III of this Part of the Agreement, and the liquidation or repatriation of these capitals
and of any profit stemming therefrom.
Article 166
Exceptions and safeguard measures
1. Where, in exceptional circumstances, payments and capital movements between the Parties cause
or threaten to cause serious difficulties for the operation of monetary policy or exchange rate policy in
either Party, the Party concerned may take safeguard measures with regard to capital movements that
are strictly necessary for a period not exceeding one year.
The application of safeguard measures may be extended through their formal reintroduction.
2. The Party adopting the safeguard measures shall inform the other Party forthwith and present, as
soon as possible, a time schedule for their removal.
Article 167
Final provisions
1. With respect to this Title, the Parties confirm the rights and obligations existing under any bilateral
or multilateral agreements to which they are parties.
2. The Parties shall consult each other with a view to facilitating the movement of capital between
them in order to promote the objectives of this Agreement.

TITLE VI
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
Article 168
Objective
The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights in
accordance with the highest international standards, including effective means of enforcing such rights
provided for in international treaties.
Article 169
Scope
For the purposes of this Agreement, intellectual property rights embodies copyright including copyright
in computer programs and in databases - and related rights, the rights related to patents, industrial
designs, geographical indications including appellation of origins, trademarks, layout-designs
(topographies) of integrated circuits, as well as protection of undisclosed information and protection
against unfair competition as referred to in Article 10 bis of the Paris Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property (Stockholm Act 1967).
Article 170
Protection of intellectual property rights
In pursuance of the objectives set out in Article 168, the Parties shall:
(a) continue to ensure an adequate and effective implementation of the obligations
arising from the following conventions:
(i) Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property,
Annex 1C to the Agreement establishing the World Trade
Organisation (“the TRIPs”); 
(ii) Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property
(Stockholm Act, 1967);
(iii) Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
(Paris Act, 1971);
(iv) Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of
Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations (Rome, 1961); and
(v) International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of
Plants 1978 (“1978 UPOV Convention”), or the International
Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants 1991 (“1991
UPOV Convention”);
(b) by 1 January 2007 acceed to and ensure an adequate and effective
implementation of the obligations arising from the following multilateral
conventions: 
(i) Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of
Goods and Services for the Purposes of Registration of Marks
(Geneva Act, 1977, amended in 1979);
(ii) World Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty
(Geneva, 1996);
(iii) World Intellectual Property Organization Performances and
Phonograms Treaty (Geneva, 1996);
(iv) Patent Co-operation Treaty (Washington, 1970, amended in 1979
and modified in 1984); and
(v) The 1971 Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the International
Patent Classification (Strasbourg 1971, amended in 1979)
(c) by 1 January 2009 acceed to and ensure an adequate and effective
implementation of the obligations arising from the following multilateral conventions:
(i) Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against
the Unauthorised Reproduction of their Phonograms (Geneva 1971);
(ii) Locarno Agreement establishing an International Classification for
Industrial Designs (Locarno Union 1968, amended in 1979);
(iii) Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit
of Micro-organisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure (1977,
amended in 1980); and
(iv) Trademark Law Treaty (Geneva, 1994);
(d) make every effort to ratify and ensure an adequate and effective implementation of
the obligations arising from the following multilateral conventions at the earliest
possible opportunity:
(i) Protocol to the Madrid Agreement concerning the International
Registration of Marks (1989); 
(ii) Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of
Marks (Stockholm Act 1967, amended in 1979); and
(iii) The Vienna Agreement establishing an International
Classification of Figurative Elements of Marks (Vienna 1973,
amended in 1985).
Article 171
Review
While the Parties express their attachment to observing the obligations deriving from the above
multilateral conventions, the Association Council may decide to include in Article 170 other multilateral
conventions in this field.

TITLE VII
COMPETITION
Article 172
Objectives
1. The Parties undertake to apply their respective competition laws in a manner consistent with this
Part of the Agreement so as to avoid the benefits of the liberalisation process in goods and services
being diminished or cancelled out by anti-competitive business conduct. To this end, the Parties agree
to cooperate and coordinate among their competition authorities under the provisions of this Title.
2. With a view to preventing distortions or restrictions of competition which may affect trade in goods
or services between them, the Parties will give particular attention to anti-competitive agreements,
concerted practices and abusive behaviour resulting from single or joint dominant positions.
3. The Parties agree to cooperate and coordinate among themselves for the implementation of
competition laws. This cooperation includes notification, consultation, exchange of non-confidential
information and technical assistance. The Parties acknowledge the importance of embracing principles
on competition that would be accepted by both Parties in multilateral fora, including the WTO.
Article 173
Definitions
For the purpose of this Title:
1. competition laws includes:
(a) for the Community, Articles 81, 82 and 86 of the Treaty establishing the European
Community, Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and their implementing regulations or
amendments;
(b) for Chile, Decreto Ley No 211 of 1973 and Ley No 19.610 of 1999 and their
implementing regulations or amendments; and
(c) any changes that the above mentioned legislation may undergo after the entry into
force of this Agreement.
2. “competition authority” means:
(a) for the Community, the “Commission of the European Communities”; and
(b) for Chile, the "Fiscalía Nacional Económica" and the "Comisión Resolutiva".
3. enforcement activity means any application of competition laws by way of investigation or
proceeding conducted by the competition authority of a Party, which may result in the imposition of
penalties or remedies. 
Article 174
Notifications
1. Each competition authority shall notify the competition authority of the other Party of an enforcement
activity if it:
(a) is liable to substantially affect the other Party's important interests;
(b) relates to restrictions on competition which are liable to have a direct and
substantial effect in the territory of the other Party; or
(c) concerns anti-competitive acts taking place principally in the territory of the other
Party.
2. Provided that this is not contrary to the Parties’ competition laws and does not affect any
investigation being carried out, notification shall take place at an early stage of the procedure. The
opinions received may be taken into consideration by the other competition authority when taking
decisions.
3. The notifications provided for in paragraph 1 should be detailed enough to permit an evaluation in
the light of the interests of the other Party.
4. The Parties undertake to use their best efforts to ensure that notifications are made in the
circumstances set out above, taking into account the administrative resources available to them.
Article 175
Co-ordination of enforcement activities
The competition authority of one Party may notify the other Party's competition authority of its
willingness to coordinate enforcement activities with respect to a specific case. This coordination shall
not prevent the Parties from taking autonomous decisions.
Article 176
Consultations when the important interests of one Party are adversely affected in the territory
of the other Party
1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws, take into consideration, as necessary, the important
interests of the other Party in the course of its enforcement activities. If the competition authority of a
Party considers that an investigation or proceeding being conducted by the competition authority of
the other Party may adversely affect such Party's important interests it may transmit its views on the
matter to, or request consultation with, the other competition authority. Without prejudice to the
continuation of any action under its competition laws and to its full freedom of ultimate decision, the
competition authority so addressed should give full and sympathetic consideration to the views
expressed by the requesting competition authority.
2. The competition authority of a Party which considers that the interests of that Party are being
substantially and adversely affected by anti-competitive practices of whatever origin that are or have
been engaged in by one or more enterprises situated in the other Party may request consultations with
the competition authority of that Party. Such consultations are without prejudice to the full freedom of
ultimate decision of the competition authority concerned. A competition authority so consulted may
take whatever corrective measures under its competition laws it deems appropriate, consistent with its
own domestic law, and without prejudice to its full enforcement discretion.
Article 177
Exchange of information and confidentiality
1. With a view to facilitating the effective application of their respective competition laws, the
competition authorities may exchange non-confidential information.
2. For the purpose of improving transparency, and without prejudice to the rules and standards of
confidentiality applicable in each Party, the Parties hereby undertake to exchange information
regarding sanctions and remedies applied in the cases that, according to the competition authority
concerned, are significantly affecting important interests of the other Party and to provide the grounds
on which those actions were taken, when requested by the competition authority of the other Party.
3. Each Party shall provide to the other Party information on state aid on an annual basis, including
the overall amount of aid and, if possible, the segregation by sector. Each Party may request 
information on individual cases affecting trade between the Parties. The requested Party will use its
best efforts to provide non-confidential information.
4. All exchange of information shall be subject to the standards of confidentiality applicable in each
Party. Confidential information whose dissemination is expressly prohibited or which, if disseminated,
could adversely affect the interest of the Parties, shall not be provided without the express consent of
the source of the information.
5. Each competition authority shall maintain the confidentiality of any information provided to it in
confidence by the other competition authority, and oppose any application for disclosure of such
information by a third party that is not authorised by the competition authority that supplied the
information.
6. In particular, where the laws of a Party so provides, confidential information may be provided to their
respective courts of justice, subject to maintaining its confidentiality by the respective courts.
Article 178
Technical assistance
The Parties may provide each other technical assistance in order to take advantage of their respective
experience and to strengthen the implementation of their competition laws and policies.
Article 179
Public enterprises and enterprises entrusted with special or exclusive rights, including
designated monopolies
1. Nothing in this Title prevents a Party from designating or maintaining public or private monopolies
according to their respective laws.
2. With regard to public enterprises and enterprises to which special or exclusive rights have been
granted, the Association Committee shall ensure that, following the date of entry into force of this
Agreement, there is neither enacted nor maintained any measure distorting trade in goods or services
between the Parties to an extent contrary to the Parties interests and that such enterprises shall be
subject to the rules of competition insofar as the application of such rules does not obstruct the
performance, in law or in fact, of the particular tasks assigned to them.
Article 180
Dispute settlement
Neither Party may have recourse to dispute settlement under this Agreement for any matter arising
under this Title.

TITLE VIII
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
CHAPTER I
OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
Article 181
Objective
The objective of this Title is to avoid and settle disputes between the Parties concerning the good faith
application of this Part of the Agreement and to arrive to a mutually satisfactory resolution of any
matter that might affect its operation.
Article 182
Scope
The provisions of this Title shall apply with respect to any matter arising from the interpretation and
application of this Part of the Agreement, except otherwise expressly provided.
CHAPTER II
DISPUTE AVOIDANCE
Article 183
Consultations
1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this Part of
the Agreement and shall make every attempt through cooperation and consultations to avoid and
settle disputes between them and to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that
might affect its operation.
2. Each Party may request consultations within the Association Committee with respect to an existing
or proposed measure or any matter relating to the application or interpretation of this Part of the
Agreement or any other matter that it considers might affect its operation. For the purposes of this
Title, a measure shall also include a practice. The Party shall state in the request the measure or
other matter complained of, indicate the provisions of this Agreement that it considers applicable and
deliver the request to the other Party.
3. The Association Committee shall convene within 30 days of delivery of the request. Upon initiation
of consultations, the Parties shall provide information to enable the examination of how the measure or
any other matter might affect the operation and application of this Part of the Agreement, and give
confidential treatment to the information exchanged during consultations. The Association Committee
shall endeavour to resolve the dispute promptly by means of a decision. That decision shall specify the
implementing measures to be taken by the Party concerned, and the timeframe for doing so.

CHAPTER III
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE
Article 184
Initiation of the procedure
1. Parties shall at all times endeavour to reach a mutually satisfactory agreement on the dispute.
2. Where a Party considers that an existing measure of the other Party is in breach of an obligation
under the provisions referred to in Article 182 and such matter has not been resolved within 15 days
after the Association Committee has convened pursuant to Article 183(3) or 45 days after the delivery
of the request for consultations within the Association Committee, whichever is earlier, it may request
in writing the establishment of an arbitration panel.
3. The complaining Party shall state in the request the existing measure it considers to be in breach of
this Part of the Agreement and indicate the provisions of this Agreement that it considers relevant, and
shall deliver the request to the other Party and to the Association Committee.
Article 185
Appointment of arbitrators
1. Arbitration panels shall consist of three arbitrators.
2. The Association Committee shall, no later than six months after the entry into force of this
Agreement, establish a list of at least 15 individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators, a
third of whom must not be national of either Party and are identified as chairperson of arbitration
panels. The Association Committee shall ensure that the list always contains 15 individuals at any
point in time. Those individuals shall have specialised knowledge or experience in law, international
trade or other matters relating to this Part of the Agreement or in the resolution of disputes deriving
from international trade agreements, be independent, serve in their individual capacities and not be
affiliated with, nor take instructions from, any Party or organisation and shall comply with the Code of
Conduct set out in Annex XVI. Such list may be amended every three years.
3. Within three days of the request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, the three arbitrators
shall be selected by lot by the chairperson of the Association Committee from the list referred to in
paragraph 2, one among the individuals proposed to the Association Committee by the complaining
Party, one among the individuals proposed to the Association Committee by the Party complained
against and the chairperson among the individuals identified for that purpose under paragraph 2.
4. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the three arbitrators
are selected by lot.
5. Where a Party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the requirements of the Code of
Conduct, the Parties shall consult and, if so agreed, they shall replace that arbitrator and select a new
one pursuant to paragraph 6.
6. If an arbitrator is unable to participate in the proceeding, withdraws or is replaced, a replacement
shall be selected within three days in accordance with the selection procedure followed to select that
arbitrator. In such a case, any timeframe applicable to the arbitration panel proceeding shall be
suspended for a period beginning on the date the arbitrator is unable to participate in the proceeding,
withdraws or is replaced and ending on the date the replacement is selected. 
Article 186
Information and technical advice
At the request of a Party or on its own initiative, the panel may obtain the information and technical
advice of persons and bodies that it deems appropriate. Any information so obtained shall be
submitted to the Parties for comments.
Article 187
Arbitration panel ruling
1. The arbitration panel shall transmit its ruling containing its findings and conclusions to the Parties
and the Association Committee, as a general rule not later than three months from the date of
establishment of the arbitration panel. In no case should it do so later than five months from this date.
The arbitration panel shall base its ruling on the submissions and communications of the Parties and
on any information it has received pursuant to Article 186. The ruling is final and shall be publicly
available.
2. The ruling shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions of this
Agreement and the basic rationale behind any findings and conclusions that it makes.
3. Arbitration panels shall interpret the provisions of this Agreement in accordance with customary
rules of interpretation of public international law, due account being taken of the fact that the Parties
must perform this Agreement in good faith and avoid circumvention of their obligations.
4. A Party asserting that a measure of the other Party is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part of
the Agreement shall have the burden of establishing such inconsistency. A Party asserting that a
measure is subject to an exception under this Part of the Agreement shall have the burden of
establishing that the exception applies.
5. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods, the arbitration panel shall make
every effort to issue its ruling to the Parties within 75 days from the date of establishment of the
arbitration panel. In no case should it do so later than four months from that date. The arbitration panel
may give a preliminary ruling on whether a case is urgent.
6. All decisions of the arbitration panel, including the adoption of the ruling and of any preliminary
ruling, shall be taken by majority vote.
7. The complaining Party may, with the agreement of the Party complained against, withdraw its
complaint at any time before the ruling is transmitted to the Parties and the Association Committee.
Such withdrawal is without prejudice to its right to introduce a new complaint regarding the same
matter at a later point in time.
8. The arbitration panel may, with the agreement of the Party complained against, suspend its work at
any time at the request of the complaining Party for a period not to exceed 12 months. In the event of
such a suspension, the time-frame set out in paragraphs 1 and 5 shallbe extended by the amount of
time that the work was suspended. If the work of the panel has been suspended for more than 12
months, the authority for establishment of the panel shall lapse, without prejudice to the right of the
complaining Party to request at a later stage the establishment of an arbitration panel on the same
subject matter.
Article 188
Compliance
1. Each Party shall be bound to take the measures necessary to comply with the ruling of the
arbitration panel.
2. The Parties shall endeavour to agree on the specific measures that are required for complying with
the ruling.
3. Within 30 days after the ruling has been transmitted to the Parties and the Association Committee,
the Party complained against shall notify the other Party:
(a) of the specific measures required for complying with the ruling;
(b) of the reasonable timeframe for doing so; and
(c) of a concrete proposal for a temporary compensation until the full implementation
of the specific measures required for compliance with the ruling.
4. In the event of disagreement between the Parties on the content of such notification, the
complaining Party shall request the original arbitration panel to rule on whether the proposed 
measures referred to under paragraph 3(a) would be consistent with this Part of the Agreement, on the
duration of the timeframe and on whether the compensation proposal is manifestly disproportionate.
The ruling shall be given within 45 days after that request.
5. The Party concerned shall notify to the other Party and to the Association Committee the
implementing measures adopted in order to put an end to the violation of its obligations under this Part
of the Agreement, before the expiry of the reasonable timeframe agreed by the Parties or determined
in accordance with paragraph 4. Upon that notification, that other Party may request the original
arbitration panel to rule on the conformity of those measures with this Part of the Agreement if they are
not similar to the measures which the arbitration panel, acting under paragraph 4, has ruled that they
would be consistent with this Part of the Agreement. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be given
within 45 days from that request.
6. If the Party concerned fails to notify the implementing measures before the expiry of the reasonable
timeframe or if the arbitration panel rules that the implementing measures notified by the Party
concerned are inconsistent with its obligations under this Part of the Agreement, the complaining Party
shall, if no agreement on compensation has been found, be entitled to suspend the application of
benefits granted under this Part of the Agreement equivalent to the level of nullification and
impairment caused by the measure found to violate this Part of the Agreement.
7. In considering what benefits to suspend, a complaining Party should first seek to suspend benefits
in the same Title or Titles of this Part of the Agreement as that affected by the measure that the
arbitration panel has found to violate this Part of the Agreement. A complaining Party that considers
that it is not practicable or effective to suspend benefits in the same Title or Titles may suspend
benefits in other Titles, provided it submits written justification. In the selection of the benefits to
suspend, priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.
8. The complaining Party shall notify the other Party and the Association Committee of the benefits
which it intends to suspend. Within five days from that notification, the other Party may request the
original arbitration panel to rule on whether the benefits which the complaining Party intends to
suspend are equivalent to the level of nullification and impairment caused by the measure found to
violate this Part of the Agreement, and whether the proposed suspension is in accordance with
paragraph 7. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be given within 45 days from that request.
Benefits shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has issued its ruling.
9. The suspension of benefits shall be temporary and shall only be applied by the complaining Party
until the measure found to violate this Part of the Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to
bring it into conformity with this Part of the Agreement, or the Parties have reached agreement on a
resolution of the dispute.
10. At the request of any of the Parties, the original arbitration panel shall rule on the conformity with
this Part of the Agreement of any implementing measures adopted after the suspension of benefits
and, in the light of such ruling, whether the suspension of benefits should be terminated or modified.
The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be given within 45 days from the date of that request.
11. The rulings provided for in this Article shall be final and binding. They shall be transmitted to the
Association Committee and be publicly available.

CHAPTER IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 189
General provisions
1. Any time period mentioned in this Title may be modified by mutual agreement of the Parties.
2. Unless the Parties otherwise agree, the procedure before the arbitration panel shall be governed by
the Model Rules of Procedure set out in Annex XV. The Association Committee may, whenever it
considers necessary, amend the Model Rules of Procedure and the Code of Conduct set out in Annex
XVI, by means of a decision.
3. The hearings of the arbitration panels shall be closed to the public, unless the Parties decide
otherwise.
4.
(a) When a Party seeks redress of a violation of an obligation under the WTO
Agreement, it shall have recourse to the relevant rules and procedures of the WTO
Agreement, which apply notwithstanding the provisions of this Agreement. 
(b) When a Party seeks redress of a violation of an obligation under this Part of the
Agreement, it shall have recourse to the rules and procedures of this Title.
(c) Unless the Parties otherwise agree, when a Party seeks redress of a violation of
an obligation under this Part of the Agreement which is equivalent in substance to an
obligation under the WTO, it shall have recourse to the relevant rules and procedures
of the WTO Agreement, which apply notwithstanding the provisions of this Agreement.
(d) Once dispute settlement procedures have been initiated, the forum selected, if it
has not declined its jurisdiction, shall be used to the exclusion of the other. Any
question on the jurisdiction of the arbitration panels established under this Title shall
be raised within 10 days of the establishment of the panel, and shall be settled by a
preliminary ruling of the panel within 30 days of the establishment of the panel.

TITLE IX
TRANSPARENCY
Article 190
Contact points and exchange of information
1. In order to facilitate communication between the Parties on any trade matter covered by this Part of
the Agreement, each Party shall designate a contact point. On the request of either Party, the contact
point of the other Party shall indicate the office or official responsible for the matter and provide the
required support to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.
2. On request of the other Party, and to the extent possible under its domestic laws and principles,
each Party shall provide information and reply to any question from the other Party relating to an
actual or proposed measure that might substantially affect the operation of this Part of the Agreement.
3. The information referred to under this Article shall be considered to have been provided when the
information has been made available by appropriate notification to the WTO or when the information
has been made available on the official, publicly and fee-free accessible website of the Party
concerned.
Article 191
Cooperation on increased transparency
The Parties agree to cooperate in bilateral and multilateral fora on ways to increase transparency in
trade matters.
Article 192
Publication
Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general
application relating to any trade matter covered by this Part of the Agreement are promptly published
or made publicly available.
TITLE X
SPECIFIC TASKS IN TRADE MATTERS OF THE BODIES ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS
AGREEMENT
Article 193
Specific tasks
1. When the Association Committee performs any of the tasks conferred upon it in this Part of the
Agreement, it shall be composed of representatives of the Community and Chile with a responsibility
for trade-related matters, normally at senior official level.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 6, the Association Committee shall have, in particular, the
following functions:
(a) supervise the implementation and proper application of the provisions of this Part
of the Agreement, as well as of any other instrument agreed by the Parties concerning
trade-related matters, within the framework of this Agreement; 
(b) oversee the further elaboration of the provisions of this Part of the Agreement and
evaluate the results obtained in its application;
(c) resolve disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation or application of this
Part of the Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Article 183;
(d) assist the Association Council in the performance of its functions regarding trade
related matters;
(e) supervise the work of all the special committees established under this Part of the
Agreement;
(f) carry out any other function assigned to it under this Part of the Agreement or
entrusted to it by the Association Council, concerning trade-related matters; and
(g) report annually to the Association Council.
3. In the performance of its duties under paragraph 2, the Association Committee may:
(a) set up any special committees or bodies to deal with matters falling within its
competence, and determine their composition and duties, and their rules of
procedure;
(b) meet at any time agreed by the Parties;
(c) consider any issues regarding trade-related matters, and take appropriate action in
the exercise of its functions;
(d) take decisions or make recommendations on trade-related matters, in accordance
with Article 6.
4. Pursuant to Articles 5 and 6(4), the Parties shall implement decisions resulting from the application
of Articles 60(5) and 74 and Article 38 of Annex III in accordance with Annex XVII.

TITLE XI
EXCEPTIONS IN THE AREA OF TRADE
Article 194
National security clause
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
(a) to require a Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers
contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) to prevent a Party from taking any action which it considers necessary for the
protection of its essential security interests
(i) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials
from which they are derived;
(ii) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war
and to such traffic in other goods and materials or relating to the
supply of services, as carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose
of supplying or provisioning a military establishment; 
(iii) relating to government procurement indispensable for national
security or for national defence purposes; or
(iv) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;
or
(c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in pursuance of its
obligations under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
2. The Association Committee shall be informed to the fullest extent possible of measures taken under
paragraphs 1(b) and (c) and of their termination.
Article 195
Balance of payments difficulties
1. Where a Party is in serious balance of payments and external financial difficulties, or under threat
thereof, it may adopt or maintain restrictive measures with regard to trade in goods and in services
and with regard to payments and capital movements, including those related to direct investment.
2. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the application of the restrictive measures referred to in
paragraph 1.
3. Any restrictive measure adopted or maintained under this Article shall be non-discriminatory and of
limited duration and shall not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance of payments and
external financial situation. They shall be in accordance with the conditions established in the WTO
Agreements and consistent with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, as
applicable.
4. The Party maintaining or having adopted restrictive measures, or any changes thereto, shall
promptly notify them to the other Party and present, as soon as possible, a time schedule for their
removal.
5. The Party applying restrictive measures shall consult promptly within the Association Committee.
Such consultations shall assess the balance of payments situation of the Party concerned and the
restrictions adopted or maintained under this Article, taking into account, inter alia, such factors as:
(a) the nature and extent of the balance of payments and the external financial
difficulties;
(b) the external economic and trading environment of the consulting Party;
(c) alternative corrective measures which may be available.
The consultations shall address the compliance of any restrictive measures with
paragraphs 3 and 4. All findings of statistical and other facts presented by the
International Monetary Fund relating to foreign exchange, monetary reserves and
balance of payments shall be accepted and conclusions shall be based on the
assessment by the Fund of the balance of payments and the external financial
situation of the consulting Party.
Article 196
Taxation
1. Nothing in this Part of the Agreement or in any arrangement adopted under this Agreement shall be
construed to prevent the Parties from distinguishing, in the application of the relevant provisions of
their fiscal legislation, between taxpayers who are not in the same situation, in particular with regard to
their place of residence or with regard to the place where their capital is invested.
2. Nothing in this Part of the Agreement or in any arrangement adopted under this Agreement shall be
construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement of any measure aimed at preventing the avoidance
or evasion of taxes pursuant to the tax provisions of agreements to avoid double taxation or other tax
arrangements or domestic fiscal legislation. 
3. Nothing in this Part of the Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of either Party under any
tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and any such convention,
that convention shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

PART V
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 197
Definition of the Parties
For the purposes of this Agreement, the Parties shall mean the Community or its Member States or
the Community and its Member States, within their respective areas of competence as derived from
the Treaty establishing the European Community, on the one hand, and the Republic of Chile, on the
other.
Article 198
Entry into force
1. This Agreement shall enter into force the first day of the month following that in which the Parties
have notified each other of the completion of the procedures necessary for this purpose.
2. Notifications shall be sent to the Secretary General of the Council of the European Union, who shall
be the depository of this Agreement.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Chile and the European Community agree to apply Articles 3 to 11,
Article 18, Articles 24 to 27, Articles 48 to 54, Article 55 (a), (b), (f), (h), (i), Article 56 to 93, Articles 136
to 162, and Articles 172 to 206, from the first day of the month following the date on which Chile and
the European Community have notified each other of the completion of the procedures necessary for
this purpose.
4. Where a provision of this Agreement is applied by the Parties pending its entry into force, any
reference in such provision to the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall be understood to be
made to the date from which the Parties agree to apply that provision in accordance with paragraph 3.
5. From the date of its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 1, this Agreement shall replace
the Framework Cooperation Agreement. By way of exception, the Protocol on Mutual Assistance in
Customs matters to the Framework Cooperation Agreement of 13 June 2001, shall remain in force
and become an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 199
Duration
1. This Agreement shall be valid indefinitely.
2. Either Party may give written notice to the other of its intention to denounce this Agreement.
3. Denunciation shall take effect six months after notification to the other Party.
Article 200
Fulfilment of the obligations
1. The Parties shall adopt any general or specific measures required for them to fulfil their obligations
under this Agreement and shall ensure that they comply with the objectives laid down in this
Agreement.
2. If one of the Parties considers that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under this
Agreement it may take appropriate measures. Before doing so, it must supply the Association Council
within 30 days with all the relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation with
a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties. In this selection of measures, priority must be
given to those which least disturb the functioning of this Agreement. These measures shall be notified
immediately to the
Association Committee and shall be the subject of consultations in the Committee if the other Party so
requests.
3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, any Party may immediately take appropriate measures in
accordance with international law in case of:
(a) denunciation of the Agreement not sanctioned by the general rules of international
law;
(b) violation by the other Party of the essential elements of the Agreement referred to
in Article 1, paragraph 1. 
The other Party may ask that an urgent meeting be called to bring the Parties together
within 15 days for a thorough examination of the situation with a view to seeking a
solution acceptable to the Parties.
4. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, if one of the Parties considers that the other Party has
failed to fulfil an obligation under Part IV of this Agreement, it shall exclusively have recourse to, and
abide by, the dispute settlement procedures established under Title VIII of Part IV of this Agreement.
Article 201
Future development
1. The Parties may mutually agree to extend this Agreement with the aim of broadening and
supplementing its scope in accordance with their respective legislation, by concluding agreements on
specific sectors or activities in the light of the experience gained during its implementation.
2. As regards the implementation of this Agreement, either Party may make suggestions oriented
towards expanding cooperation in all areas, taking into account the experience acquired during the
implementation thereof.
Article 202
Data Protection
The Parties agree to accord a high level of protection to the processing of personal and other data,
compatible with the highest international standards.
Article 203
National security clause
The provisions of Article 194 of Part IV shall apply to the entire Agreement.
Article 204
Territorial Applications
This Agreement shall apply to the territories in which the Treaty establishing the European Community
is applies under the conditions laid down in that Treaty, on the one hand, and to the territory of the
Republic of Chile, on the other.
Article 205
Authentic Texts
This Agreement is drawn in duplicate in the Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek,
Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish languages, each of these texts being equally authentic.
Article 206
Annexes, Appendices, Protocols and Notes
The Annexes, Appendices, Protocols and Notes to this Agreement are an integral part hereof. 