Economic Complementation Agreement No. 32 signed between Chile and Ecuador


The Government of the Republic of Chile and the Government of the Republic of Ecuador,
WHEREAS :
The convenience of stimulating greater economic complementarity between our countries and promoting a more active participation in the world economy.
The importance of strengthening the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), and achieving the objectives set forth in the Montevideo Treaty of 1980, through the conclusion of the broadest possible bilateral and multilateral agreements.
Ecuador's participation in the Cartagena Agreement and the commitments derived from it for this country.
The coincidences in the guidelines of the commercial policies of the two countries, both in tariff matters and in the basic orientations of their economic policies.
The significance that adequate cooperation in the commercial, industrial and service areas can have in the development of both countries.
The advisability of achieving a more active participation of economic agents, both public and private, from both countries, in efforts to increase reciprocal exchange.
AGREE:
In entering into an Economic Complementation Agreement for the establishment of an expanded economic space, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the ALADI Council of Ministers. This Agreement shall be governed by the aforementioned provisions and the rules established below:
CHAPTER I : Objectives of the Agreement
Article 1 - The present agreement has as objectives:
a ) Establish, in the shortest possible time, an expanded economic space between the two countries, which allows the free circulation of goods, services and productive factors;
b) Intensify economic and commercial relations between the signatory countries, through a total release of taxes and restrictions on imports originating from them;
c) Promote coordinated action in international economic forums, as well as in relation to industrialized countries, tending to improve the access of the products of the signatory countries to world markets;
d) Coordinate and complement economic activities, especially in the industrial and service areas;
e) Stimulate investments aimed at intensive use of the markets of the signatory countries and strengthen their competitive capacity in world exchanges, and,
f) Facilitate the creation and operation of regional binational and multinational companies.
CHAPTER II : Release Program
Article 2 - The products included in the tariff reduction program established in Article 3 of this Agreement will enjoy, as of January 1, 1995, the total elimination of non-tariff restrictions, with the exception of those referred to Article 50 of the Montevideo Treaty 1980.
Likewise, the signatory countries undertake not to introduce new restrictions on reciprocal trade.
Article 3 - The signatory countries agree to free their reciprocal trade from encumbrances no later than January 1, 2000. To this end, they agree:
a) The products included in Annex 1 of this Agreement, which are part of the Agreement of the Partial Scope of Renegotiation of the preferences granted in the period 1962 - 1980 (Agreement No. 15), signed between Chile and Ecuador within the framework of ALADI , will enjoy a reciprocal tariff preference of 100% from the date of signing this Agreement.
b) Apply, as of January 1, 1995, for reciprocal trade, the charges indicated below:
Chile Tax Reduction Program
For products whose current tariff at the signing of this Agreement is 11%:
Ecuador Tax Reduction Program
For products whose current tariff at the signing of this Agreement is:
c) Apply, as of January 1, 1995, for the products referred to in Annex 2 of this Agreement, the taxes indicated below:
Chile Tax Reduction Program
For products whose current tariff at the signing of this Agreement is 11%:

Ecuador Tax Reduction Program
For products whose current tariff at the signing of this Agreement is:


d) The tariff reduction program referred to in this article of this Agreement will not apply to the products contained in the exception lists referred to in Annex 3 .
e) If at any time a signatory country reduces its tariff charges to third countries, for one or several products included in this Agreement, it shall proceed to adjust the tax applicable to reciprocal trade in accordance with the proportionalities established in subparagraphs b and c, as appropriate.
Article 4 - The percentage reductions referred to in the previous article will be adopted on the basis of the levels of the National Tariff applicable to imports originating from and coming from outside the Region, in force at the time the reduction program begins.
Article 5 - The signatory countries may agree on special programs to incorporate the products contained in Annex 3 to the Liberation Program of this Agreement. Likewise, at any time, they may accelerate the tariff reduction program for those products or groups of products that are mutually agreed upon.
Article 6 - For the purposes of trade covered by this Agreement, "taxes" shall be understood as customs duties and any other surcharges with equivalent effects, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any nature, that affect imports or exports. Similar rates and surcharges are not included in this concept when they are equivalent to the cost of the services rendered.
"Restrictions" shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate or of any nature, through which one of the parties prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, its imports or exports.
CHAPTER III : Origin
Article 7 - The signatory countries will apply to the imports carried out under the Liberation Program of this Agreement, the ALADI General Regime of Origin, established by Resolution 78 and its modifications of the Committee of Representatives of the Association.
Merchandise transported in transit through a third country, from a signatory country to the territory of the other signatory country, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the supervision of the competent customs authority in such countries, will be considered as direct shipment provided that :
a) They are not intended for trade, use or employment in the country of transit; and,
b) They do not undergo, during their transport and storage, any operation other than loading and unloading or handling to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.
In addition to the documentation required in Article 7 of Resolution 78, the certificates of origin issued, for the purposes of enjoying the tariff reduction of this Agreement, must contain an affidavit from the final producer or exporter of the merchandise in which declares its full compliance with the provisions on origin of the Agreement.
Article 8 - Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Administrative Commission established in Article 33 of this Agreement will be empowered to set or modify the Rules of Origin for specific products or sectors other than the General Regime established in this Chapter.
CHAPTER IV : Automotive Sector
Article 9 - Imports of products included in annexes 4 and 5 without use, originating from the signatory countries will be freed from taxes and non-tariff restrictions according to the reduction schedule detailed below. The commercialization of these products, in the territory of the importing country, will be carried out without any other restriction than the taxes that each country applies internally.
Chile Tax Reduction Program
Ecuador Tax Reduction Program

Article 10 - Motor vehicles and vehicles for the transport of goods and people mentioned in Annex 4 , will be considered as originating from the signatory countries when the CIF port of destination value of the materials used in their packaging or assembly, originating from the countries does not members of this Agreement, does not exceed 65% of the FOB export value of the vehicle. This percentage will be calculated based on the procedures established by ALADI.
Article 11 - Regarding parts and pieces for vehicles indicated in the preceding articles, they will be governed by the Rules of Origin contained in Chapter III of this Agreement, without prejudice to the fact that they will benefit from the provisions of Article 9 of this Agreement. Chapter.
Article 12 - The commercial exchange between the signatory countries of the products referred to in this chapter will not benefit from subsidy or direct incentive.
CHAPTER V : Safeguard Clauses
Article 13 - With prior notice, the signatory countries may apply to imports made under the Liberation Program of this Agreement, the ALADI Regional Safeguard Regime, approved by Resolution 70 and its amendments of the Committee of Representatives of the Association with the following limitations:
a) In cases in which reasons of imbalance in the overall balance of payments of one of the signatory countries are invoked, the measures adopted may have a term of up to one year and may not be discriminatory or selective, applying even tariff surcharges that affect all imports.
b) In cases in which the importation of one or several products benefiting from the application of Chapter II of this Agreement causes or threatens to cause significant damage to domestic production of similar or directly competitive merchandise, the signatory countries may apply safeguard clauses. , transitory and in a non-discriminatory manner, for a period of one year.
The extension of the safeguard clauses, for a new period, will require a joint examination by the signatory parties, of the antecedents and grounds that justify their application, which must necessarily be reduced in its intensity and magnitude until its total expiration at the expiration of the new period, which may not exceed one year in duration.
The Administrative Commission established in Article 33 of this Agreement shall define, within 90 days following its constitution, what shall be understood as significant damage and shall define the procedures for the application of the rules of this Chapter.
CHAPTER VI : Unfair Trade Practices
Article 14 - In the event of reciprocal trade situations of dumping or other unfair trade practices, as well as distortions derived from the application of export subsidies or internal subsidies of an equivalent nature, the affected country may apply the measures provided for in its internal legislation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an exchange of information will simultaneously take place through the competent national agencies referred to in Article 33 of this Agreement.
For this purpose, countries may impose antidumping, compensatory or ad-valorem surtax duties, as provided by their respective national legislation, upon positive proof of material damage caused to domestic production, threat of material damage to said production, or delay sensitive at the beginning of it.
The rights or surcharges indicated herein will not exceed, in any case, the dumping margin or the amount of the subsidy, as appropriate, and will be limited as far as possible to what is necessary to avoid damage, threat of damage or delay.
In any case, both countries undertake to apply their rules in these matters, in accordance with the provisions of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and will adopt the Antidumping and Subsidies Codes of said General Agreement as a reference.
Article 15 - The signatory countries recognize that public price policies can have distorting effects on bilateral trade. Consequently, they agree not to resort to public pricing practices and policies that mean an annulment or impairment of the benefits derived directly or indirectly from this Agreement.
The Administrative Commission established in Article 33 of this Agreement will monitor public price practices and policies in specific sectors, in order to detect those cases that could cause significant distortions in bilateral trade.
CHAPTER VII : Treatment in Matters of Internal Taxes
Article 16 - In compliance with Article 46 of the Montevideo Treaty of 1980, the signatory countries of this Agreement undertake to grant imports originating in the territory of the member countries, a treatment no less favorable than that applied to similar national products, in terms of taxes, rates and other internal charges.
CHAPTER VIII : Government Purchases
Article 17 - The Administrative Commission, established in Article 33, will define during the first year of validity of the Agreement, the scope and terms that will regulate government purchases between the signatory countries. For this purpose, it will take into account the criteria established in the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT) so that the signatory countries enjoy open, transparent, equitable and competitive access in the case of public sector purchases.
CHAPTER IX : Commercial Promotion
Article 18 - The signatory countries of this Agreement, will arrange trade promotion programs that correspond, among other actions, to the realization of samples, fairs and exhibitions, as well as reciprocal meetings and visits of businessmen, information on supply and demand and studies of market.
Likewise, the signatory countries undertake to facilitate participation in fairs by streamlining the corresponding administrative procedures.
CHAPTER X : Investments
Article 19 - The signatory countries will promote the development of investments destined to the establishment and incorporation of companies in their territories, both with capital from one or both countries and with the eventual participation of third parties.
Article 20 - The signatory countries, with the participation of their respective private sectors, will foster the development of economic complementation actions in the productive areas of goods and services.
Article 21 - The signatory countries, within their respective laws on foreign investment, will grant the best treatment to the capital of the other signatory country, whether it is the corresponding national or foreign capital.
CHAPTER XI : Technical Standards
Article 22 - The Administrative Commission referred to in Article 33 of this Agreement will analyze the technical standards of the signatory countries, and will recommend the actions it deems necessary to prevent them from being developed or applied in order to create obstacles to trade.
For this purpose, the Administrative Commission must consider, among others, the following principles:
a) Use, as far as possible, of current international standards, when it is necessary to prepare technical standards and their specifications;
b) Granting to merchandise coming from the territory of the other signatory country, national treatment and treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar merchandise coming from any other country;
c) Notification and exchange of information between the signatory countries, with due notice, when it comes to adopting or modifying any standardization measure;
d) Compatibility, as far as possible, of the standardization measures of the signatory countries;
e) Seek mutual recognition of their certification systems, test and trial laboratories, and conformity assessment results, prior to the necessary assessments and the specifications of the procedures for these recognitions.
The Administrative Commission must create the procedures that allow dealing with the differences that a country presents, when it is affected by some measure of the other signatory country related to technical standards.
CHAPTER XII : Phyto and Zoosanitary Standards
Article 23 - The signatory countries undertake to prevent phytosanitary and animal health regulations from becoming non-tariff barriers to reciprocal trade. With this purpose and to facilitate and expedite the exchange of plant and livestock products, both signatory countries agree to sign a " Cooperation and Coordination Agreement on Agricultural Health ", between the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock of the Republic of Ecuador, which is included as an annex to this Agreement.
CHAPTER XIII : Other Services
Article 24 - The signatory countries will promote the improvement of conditions tending to facilitate the provision of services from one country to another, considering the General Agreement on Trade in Services of the Uruguay Round. To this end, they entrust the Administrative Commission, established by Article 33, to propose the formulation of a Services negotiation Protocol at its first meeting.
CHAPTER XIV : Coordination of Economic Policies
Article 25 - The signatory countries will initiate a process of reciprocal exchange of information on various economic matters, such as financial, monetary and fiscal policies, in order to facilitate the convergence of said policies and contribute to the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement.
Article 26 - The signatory countries undertake to harmonize all those other norms that are considered essential for the perfection of this Agreement. For this purpose, the signatory countries will analyze the treatments and incentives for exports, as well as those measures that considerably alter relative prices, in order to correct distortions that could significantly affect trade flows between the signatory countries.
CHAPTER XV : Maritime and Air Transport
Article 27 - The signatory countries recognize free access to the transport of their foreign trade cargo to ships owned, chartered or operated by the shipping companies of both countries, under conditions of effective reciprocity, in accordance with their respective legislation, applicable in the Bilateral trade and from or to third countries.
Regarding the transportation of hydrocarbons, in the event that Ecuador's internal provisions or international agreements provide for hydrocarbon concessions to other countries or groups of countries, these will be granted under the same conditions to the Republic of Chile.
The Maritime Authorities of the signatory countries will ensure transparency in the provision of these services.
Article 28 - In terms of air transport, taking as a framework the current Agreement on air services, signed between both Parties, the signatory countries agree that companies from both countries may carry out and market regular, mixed, passenger, air services. cargo and mail between points in both territories and between these territories and third countries, with full traffic rights within the Latin American Region (LACAC member countries), under the terms already established by the aeronautical authorities.
Traffic rights not contemplated in this Article are subject to negotiations between the aeronautical authorities.
CHAPTER XVI : Scientific and Technological Cooperation
Article 29 - The signatory countries undertake to facilitate and sponsor joint initiatives that promote the development and transfer of technologies, using, in particular, the Basic Agreement on Scientific and Technical Cooperation, signed between both countries in 1993.
Article 30 - Both countries agree to promote the coordination of specific cooperation and technical assistance projects in sectors of priority interest, particularly among national science and technology entities, universities, and public and private research centers.
CHAPTER XVII : Evaluation
Article 31 - The signatory countries will periodically evaluate the progress of this Agreement in order to seek its improvement and ensure a process of bilateral integration that consolidates and develops an expanded economic space, based on adequate reciprocity, the promotion of fair competition and an active participation of public and private economic agents.
CHAPTER XVIII : Settlement of Controversies
Article 32 - For the solution of disputes that may arise as a reason for the interpretation of the provisions contained in this Agreement, as well as its application or non-compliance, or of any other nature, different from that provided for in Chapter VI, the signatory countries will undergo the following procedure:
a) The affected party will claim the competent national body referred to in Article 33 of this Agreement, which will immediately initiate consultations on the case with the competent body of the other Party.
If within a period of twenty days, counted from the filing of the claim, it is not possible to solve the conflict raised, the competent national body that initiated the consultations will request the intervention of the Administrative Commission contemplated in Article 33 of this Agreement.
b) The Administrative Commission will conscientiously appreciate the corresponding charges and discharges, being able to request the technical reports of the case, in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution, either by action of the Commission itself, or with the participation of a mediator chosen from among the names included in a list of experts that the Commission will draw up annually for this purpose.
The procedure indicated in this literal may not be extended beyond thirty days, counted from the date on which the intervention of the Commission was requested.
c) If the dispute cannot be resolved in this way, the Administrative Commission will immediately designate an arbitration group made up of an expert from each signatory country, chosen from the list indicated in the preceding paragraph and a third arbitrator who will chair it, the who may not be a national of the signatory countries.
If there is no agreement on the appointment of the third arbitrator, the appointment must fall to the Secretary General of ALADI, or to the person designated by him.
d) The arbitration procedure will be subject to the Regulations issued by the Administrative Commission for that purpose.
Without prejudice to the fact that the arbitrators conscientiously decide the controversy submitted to them, they must take into account, mainly, the norms contained in this Agreement and the rules and principles of the International Agreements that were applicable in the species, including those of the Treaty of Montevideo of 1980, as well as the general principles of International Law.
If applicable, the Resolution of the arbitrators will contain the specific measures that the defendant country must comply with or the affected country may apply, either due to non-compliance, misinterpretation, or due to any action or omission that undermines the rights derived from the execution of the Agreement.
The specific measures indicated in the previous paragraph may refer to the adaptation of the regulations to the provisions of the Agreement, to the granting of new concessions that equivalently repair the damages caused, to a suspension of concessions equivalent to the damages caused, to a partial or total withdrawal of concessions, or any other measure framed in the application of the provisions of the Agreement.
The arbitrators will have a period of thirty days, extendable for the same period, counted from the date of their appointment, to issue their Resolution.
This Resolution will not be subject to any appeal and its non-compliance will lead to the suspension of the Agreement as long as the causes that motivated it do not cease. If this situation persists, the affected signatory country may invoke non-compliance as grounds for denouncement of the Agreement.
CHAPTER XIX : Administration of the Agreement
Article 33 - In order to achieve the best functioning of this Agreement, the signatory countries agree to establish an Administrative Commission, chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, in the case of Chile; and by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, in the case of Ecuador; or by the people they designate on their behalf. In special cases, depending on the nature of the issues to be considered, the Administrative Commission may be chaired by the Ministers with competence in the respective area.
This Commission must be constituted within thirty days following the signing of this Agreement and will establish its own Regulations.
Each signatory country will designate a competent national body that will act as the national secretariat of this Agreement. The functions of these bodies will be established in the regulations of the Administrative Commission.
The Commission will have the following powers:
a) Evaluate and ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement;
b) Recommend to the Governments of the signatory countries, modifications to this Agreement;
c) Propose to the Governments of the signatory countries, the recommendations it deems appropriate, to resolve conflicts that may arise from the interpretation and application of this Agreement;
d) Appoint the mediators and arbitrators for the solution of controversies;
e) Regulate the procedures for dispute resolution;
f) Propose and set specific requirements of origin;
g) Define the procedures for the application of the Safeguard Clauses Regime;
h) Carry out, at the request of one of the parties, an examination of the practices and pricing policies in specific sectors, in order to detect those cases that could cause significant distortions in bilateral trade;
i) Establish mechanisms and instances that ensure an active participation of the representatives of the business sectors;
j) Submit to the signatory countries a periodic report on the operation of this Agreement, accompanied by the recommendations it deems appropriate for its improvement and its most complete use;
k) Any others derived from this Agreement or entrusted to them by the signatory countries; and,
l) Exchange information on the agendas of the meetings in the international economic forums, with the purpose of improving the conditions of access to the markets.
CHAPTER XX : Validity
Article 34 - This Agreement will be in force from the moment of its signing and will have an indefinite validity.
The parties undertake to comply as soon as possible with the formalities provided for in their respective legislation, for the internal application of the Agreement.
CHAPTER XXI : Complaint
Article 35 - The signatory country that wishes to disassociate itself from this Agreement, must communicate its decision to the other signatory countries, one hundred and eighty (180) days in advance of the deposit of the respective denunciation instrument with the ALADI General Secretariat.
From the formalization of the denunciation, the rights acquired and the obligations contracted under this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing country, except for what refers to the treatments, received and granted, for the importation of negotiated products, the which will continue in force for a term of one year from the deposit of the respective denunciation instrument, unless at the time of denunciation, the signatory countries agree to a different term.
CHAPTER XXII : Accession
Article 36 - In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement, through the corresponding negotiation, remains open to the adhesion of the other ALADI member countries.
CHAPTER XXIII : Other Provisions
Article 37 - The signatory countries undertake to grant adequate protection to intellectual property and industrial property, within their national legislation.
Article 38 - The signatory countries undertake to keep themselves informed about their foreign trade regimes and statistics, through the competent national organizations established in Article 33 of this Agreement. Any modification to the foreign trade regimes must be communicated within thirty days following its promulgation.
Article 39 - The signatory countries will promote the active participation of their economic agents in their actions inherent to the application and operation of this Agreement, which corresponds to them.
Transitory dispositions
The signatory countries will proceed to immediately comply with the necessary procedures to formalize this Economic Complementation Agreement in ALADI, in accordance with the provisions of the Montevideo Treaty of 1980, and the Resolutions of the Council of Ministers.
Likewise, they will carry out the corresponding formalities to annul Partial Scope Agreement No. 15, signed by both countries within the framework of ALADI and the reciprocal treatments agreed upon in the trade agreements to which they are party.
This Economic Complementation Agreement, for the establishment of an expanded economic space, is signed in two copies of equal value and tenor, equally authentic.
 
Done in the city of Quito, Ecuador on the twentieth day of December 1994.

ANNEX TEXT: 

Economic Complementation Agreement No. 32 signed between Chile and Ecuador
Cooperation and Coordination Agreement on Agricultural Health between the
 Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock of the Republic of Ecuador


WHEREAS
1. That it is in the interest of the Governments of Chile and Ecuador to increase the exchange of agricultural and livestock goods and technical cooperation in phytosanitary and zoosanitary aspects between the two countries.
2. That the scientific, technological and regulatory aspects of Animal Health and Plant Health are of special interest to facilitate international trade in animals, plants and their products and the preservation of their territories from pests and diseases.
3. That the recognition, harmonization and expediting of the technical and administrative requirements and procedures required for imports of agricultural and livestock goods will facilitate trade in these goods and their products.
4. Both parties agree that their respective official health agencies have an organization that provides guarantees to control strict compliance with their health requirements.
AGREE:
CHAPTER I: OBJECTIVE
Article 1 - The Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile, represented by the Agricultural and Livestock Service SAG, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock of the Republic of Ecuador, represented by the General Directorate of Ecuadorian Agricultural Health Services SESA, hereinafter called the parties, undertake to:
a) Prepare and execute a Coordinated Program for Technical and Commercial Cooperation in agricultural matters in order to achieve better control of existing phytosanitary and animal health problems and facilitate trade in agricultural goods between the two countries.
b) Establish plans to prevent the introduction and spread in the territory of parts of plant and animal health problems subject to quarantine regulations and standardize and harmonize, as the case may be, their tolerance limits.
c) Adopt the technical and administrative measures so that, with observance of the phytosanitary and zoosanitary requirements and conditions established by their corresponding national legislations, the export and import of agricultural goods between both countries is facilitated.
CHAPTER II: ACTIONS
Article 2 - The cooperation referred to in this Agreement will be carried out through the following modalities:
a) Exchange of technical information, of the legislation of each one of the parties and of the phytosanitary and zoosanitary situation of each one of them.
b) Exchange of specialized personnel in order to supervise and pre-inspect animal and plant production processes at source and phytosanitary and zoosanitary certification when deemed appropriate.
c) Exchange of technical information about animals, plants, their products, as well as the phytosanitary and zoosanitary practices to which they are subjected.
d) Exchange of technical information on control methods for diseases and pests, diagnostic techniques, way of manufacturing products and by-products of agricultural origin.
e) Define specific programs to expedite procedures and exchange of goods and agricultural products.
Article 3 - In order to execute the coordinated program referred to in Article 1, the parties agree to:
a) Provide reciprocal collaboration of a technical nature in the aspects of recognition, diagnosis and prevention measures of health risks occurring in the parties.
b) Without reducing the level of protection of life and human and animal health and plant health, achieve to the greatest degree possible and in accordance with this chapter the equivalence of its sanitary measures.
CHAPTER III: RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE PARTIES
Article 4 - The rights and obligations of the parties will include:
a) Comply with the Agreement and its amendments.
b) Promote in each country the participation of institutions and associations in the fulfillment of the objectives and activities set forth in this Agreement.
c) Grant the necessary technical and administrative facilities to comply with the technical, cooperative and commercial exchanges of this Agreement.
d) Cooperate immediately in the solution of modifications or possible conflicts arising from the application of the activities of the Agreement.
e) Verify that the animals, plants and products exported to the signatory countries are subject to strict sanitary monitoring.
f) Grant the necessary facilities to carry out the controls, inspections, approvals and verifications of a phytosanitary and zoosanitary nature of the other country.
g) Each of the parties may, in accordance with this Chapter, adopt, maintain or apply any phytosanitary or animal health measure or residue verification measure for the protection of human and animal health and plant health. That is, they will have the right to set their levels of protection, but always based on scientific principles and risk assessments. In the case of residues, a special regulation will be established in accordance with the CODEX Alimentarius.
h) Establish harmonization systems for the methods of sampling, diagnosis and inspection of animals, plants and their products. These systems shall be specified for sampling, diagnostics, and inspections in the field, in packaging, and at the port of entry.
i) Establish reference laboratories for the analysis that is necessary to carry out on animals, plants and their products and by-products that enter the territory of the other signatory country.
j) By mutual agreement, the parties will indicate the specific regions where the cooperation work and technical projects established within the scope of this Agreement will be carried out, taking into account regional conditions, particularly those related to free areas and areas with low prevalence of pests. and diseases.
k) The parties will grant the necessary facilities for the training and specialization of phytosanitary and zoosanitary technical personnel in technical, teaching and research institutions.
l) Each of the parties will ensure that they do not apply sanitary measures whose purpose is to create a disguised restriction on trade.
Article 5 - For the elaboration of the exchange requirements, the national norms, the International Animal Health Code (CIE), the International Phytosanitary Convention of FAO and the norms of other organizations or supranational agreements of which both countries are members will be taken into account. signatories.
Article 6 - The parties will notify by fax or telephone within a period of no more than twenty-four hours, the appearance in their respective territories of foci or outbreaks of pests and diseases of quarantine importance. For these cases, the geographical location of the pest or disease and the epidemiological aspects will be detailed, as well as the measures adopted for its control and eventual eradication.
Article 7 - By mutual agreement, the necessary requirements will be established for the quarantine stations and posts established for the organization of controls and verifications of a phytosanitary and animal health nature.
Article 8 - Technical cooperation projects related to products and by-products of animal and vegetable origin, as well as agricultural inputs, will be implemented.
Article 9 - The provisions of this Agreement must be applied to any shipment containing agricultural products and by-products for Consulates and Diplomatic Missions.
Article 10 - The party that on its own initiative sends representatives and specialists to the other party, will bear the relevant expenses. The country to visit will facilitate the access of officials and provide the necessary assistance for the fulfillment of the mission.
CHAPTER IV: THE EXECUTING AUTHORITIES
Article 11 - The direction and supervision of the agreement will be in charge of a mixed commission of work plans integrated as follows:
For Chile :
- The National Director of the Agricultural and Livestock Service SAG or his representative.
- The representatives of the Department of Agricultural Protection and two representatives of the Department of Livestock Protection of the Agricultural and Livestock Service SAG, designated by the National Director of the same.
For Ecuador:
- The General Director of the Ecuadorian Agricultural Health Service SESA.
- The representatives of the Animal Health and Plant Health areas of Ecuadorian Agricultural Health Services SESA, appointed by the General Director of SESA.
Article 12 - The execution of this Agreement will be carried out through work plans agreed by the Mixed Commission provided for in Article 11 of this Agreement.
PARAGRAPH:
The executing authorities of the activities of this Agreement will be: the Agricultural and Livestock Service SAG, on the part of Chile, and the Ecuadorian Agricultural Health Service SESA, on the part of Ecuador.
Article 13 - The executing authorities of the parties undertake to prepare in a coordinated manner an annual report on the development and results of this Agreement.
Article 14 - To discuss technical, scientific, and phytosanitary and animal health certification matters, as well as other matters that arise during the execution of the Agreement, the executing authorities of the parties will meet once a year on the date and place mutually agreed upon. , being the headquarters of a rotating nature in the two countries.
PARAGRAPH:
The Mixed Commission of work plans may invite to its meetings the technicians or people it deems appropriate for the best success of its management.
Article 15 - The parties will provide the necessary budgets to be able to fulfill the programmed activities and may request cooperation from producers, importers and exporters of agricultural goods. Likewise, the parties may request the collaboration of international technical cooperation organizations to carry out activities aimed at the implementation of this Agreement.
CHAPTER V: DURATION AND MODIFICATIONS
Article 16 - The emergency measures aimed at controlling sources or outbreaks of diseases will be of immediate compliance, unlike the others that are considered to be of a general nature.
Article 17 - This Agreement may be modified by the parties by written notification, presented three months in advance of the date of execution of the new quarantine provisions or at the beginning of the export seasons, unless it is a question of emergency measures.
Article 18 - This Agreement will enter into force together with the Economic Complementation Agreement and will be valid indefinitely unless one of the parties notifies the other of its decision to terminate it. The notification must be made in writing six months prior to the expiration date.
Article 19 - The termination of this Agreement will not affect the performance of cooperative activities in progress or those that have been formalized during its validity.
Signed on the 20th day of December 1994.
