Economic Complementation Agreement No 38 signed between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru

The Government of the Republic of Chile and the Government of the Republic of Peru.

CONSIDERING:

The need to strengthen the Latin American Integration process, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, through the conclusion of the broadest possible bilateral and multilateral agreements;

The active participation of Chile and Peru in the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), as signing members of the Treaty;

The advantages of taking full advantage of the negotiation mechanisms provided in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty;

Peru's participation in the Cartagena Agreement and the commitments derived from it for this country;

The different efforts to revitalize integration in the American continent, which show the need for economic-commercial complementarity aimed at cementing an open regionalism that can be inserted efficiently in a globalized world and with regionalization initiatives in other latitudes;

The coincidences of the economic and commercial opening of both countries, both in tariff matters and in the elimination of non-tariff restrictions and in the basic orientations of their economic policies;

The convenience of offering economic agents clear and predictable rules for the development of trade and investment;

The significance that adequate cooperation in the productive areas of goods and services has for the economic development of both Parties;

The convenience of achieving a more active participation of the economic agents of both countries;

AGREE:

enter into an Economic Complementation Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and Resolution 2 of the ALALC Council of Ministers incorporated into the ALADI legal system. This Agreement shall be governed by the aforementioned provisions and the rules established below:

CHAPTER I

Objectives of the Agreement

Article 1. Chile and Peru, hereinafter referred to as "Signatory Countries", establish the following objectives for this Agreement:

a) Establish, in the shortest possible time, an expanded economic space between the Signatory Countries, which allows the free circulation of goods and services and facilitates the full use of productive factors;

b) Intensify economic and commercial relations between the Signatory Countries;

c) Promote coordinated action in international economic forums, as well as in relation to industrialized countries, tending to improve the access of the products of the Signatory Countries to world markets;

d) Promote complementarity and economic cooperation;

e) Promote investments aimed at an intensive use of the markets of the Signatory Countries and strengthen their competitive capacity in world exchanges;

CHAPTER II

release program

Article 2. No Signatory Country will maintain or apply new non-tariff restrictions on the import or export of products from its territory to that of the other Signatory Country, whether through quotas, licenses or through other measures, without prejudice to the provisions of Article Article 50 of the Montevideo Treaty and Articles XX and XXI of the GATT 1994 Agreement.

Article 3. For the purposes of this Agreement, "restrictions" shall be understood as any measure of an administrative, financial, exchange rate, or of any other nature, through which one of the Signatory Countries prevents or hinders, by unilateral decision, their imports.

Article 4. The Signatory Countries agree to free their reciprocal trade from taxes according to the following tariff reduction schedule:

a) A total relief from import duties for reciprocal trade as of July 1, 1998, for products that, in the NALADISA nomenclature, appear with D-0, in Annex No. 1 of this Agreement.

b) The products in the NALADISA nomenclature included in Annex No. 1 of this Agreement identified with D-5, will be subject to the following tax reduction schedule:

Tax relief in 5 years

CHILE SCHEDULE:

Tax relief period for products whose current tax is:
l) Products in the NALADISA nomenclature, included in Annex No. 1 of this Agreement, which have an asterisk (*) in addition to one of the aforementioned codes, will be immediately deducted in favor of Peru, in the case of Chile the reduction will be the one assigned to the pertinent literal of this article.

m) The products contained in Annex No. 2 of this Agreement will be subject to the conditions indicated therein . In said Annex, where appropriate, the preferences and conditions established in Partial Scope Agreement No. 28 are recorded .

The deductions provided for in this Article shall be applied on the CIF value or on the customs value, as appropriate, in accordance with the Agreement relating to the application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 on Customs Valuation.

Article 5. If at any time a Signatory Country reduces its tariff charges to third countries, for one or several products included in this Agreement, it shall proceed to collect the tax applicable to reciprocal trade in accordance with the proportionalities established (referential margin of preference) in the literals indicated in the previous article, as appropriate.

Article 6. The Signatory Countries will exchange, at the time of signing this Agreement, the tariffs in force and will keep each other informed, through the competent bodies, about subsequent modifications.

Article 7. Used goods will not benefit from the Release Program established in this Agreement, even those that have a specific sub-heading in the NALADISA nomenclature.

Article 8. The Signatory [sic] Countries, within the framework of the Administrative Commission, may accelerate the tariff reduction program for those products or groups of products that are mutually agreed upon.

Article 9. For the purposes of this Agreement, "taxes" shall be understood as customs duties and any other charges with equivalent effects, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affect imports. Similar rates and surcharges are not included in this concept when they are equivalent to the cost of the services actually provided.

Article 10. The Signatory Countries may not adopt or maintain levies and charges of equivalent effects other than customs duties that affect bilateral trade under this Agreement. However, the liens and charges existing on the date of signing the Agreement and that appear in the Complementary Notes to this Agreement may be maintained, but without increasing their incidence. The aforementioned Notes appear in Annex No. 10 .

The encumbrances and charges of equivalent effects identified in the aforementioned Complementary Notes will not be subject to the Release Program.

Article 11. In the use of the Price Band System, in force in Chile, or of Variable Specific Duties in force in Peru, related to the importation of merchandise, the Signatory Countries undertake, within the scope of this Agreement, not to include new products or to modify the mechanisms or apply them in such a way that means a deterioration of the conditions of access to their respective territories.

The Release Program of this Agreement will not be applied to the Specific Rights derived from the aforementioned mechanisms.

The Signatory Countries incorporate in Annex No. 9 of this Agreement the List of Products that are currently incorporated into the aforementioned systems .

Article 12. Notwithstanding the provisions of the WTO agreements, the Signatory Countries shall not apply export taxes to reciprocal trade.

 

 

CHAPTER III

Customs Valuation

Article 13. The Agreement relating to the application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1994), including the respective reservations notified to the WTO by each of the Signatory Countries, will regulate the customs valuation regime applied in its reciprocal trade.

CHAPTER IV
Origin

Article 14. The Signatory Countries will apply to imports made under the Liberation Program of this Agreement, the Origin Regime contained in Annex No. 3 of this Agreement.

CHAPTER V
Safeguard Clauses

Article 15. The Signatory Countries may apply safeguard measures to imports made under the Liberation Program of this Agreement in accordance with the Regime for the Application of Safeguards contained in Annex No. 4 .

CHAPTER VI
Unfair Trade Practices

Article 16. The Signatory Countries condemn all unfair trade practices and undertake to eliminate measures that may cause distortions in bilateral trade.

In this regard, they agree not to grant new subsidies to exports that affect trade between the two countries and, no later than December 31, 2002, will not apply to reciprocal trade covered by the Liberalization Program of this Agreement, programs or incentives that constitute export subsidies. Those products that after 12.31.2002 enjoy export subsidies will not benefit from the Liberation Program.

Article 17. In case of reciprocal trade distortions derived from the application of export subsidies or appealable subsidies according to the WTO and other unfair trade practices, the affected country may apply the measures provided for in its internal legislation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an exchange of information will simultaneously take place through the competent national agencies referred to in Article 33 of this Agreement.

The Signatory Countries will apply their rules and procedures in these matters, in accordance with the provisions of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1994) and the Agreements of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

Article 18. The Signatory Countries recognize that public price policies may have distorting effects on bilateral trade. Consequently, they agree not to resort to public pricing practices and policies that directly or indirectly mean an annulment or impairment of the benefits derived from this Agreement.

CHAPTER VII
National Treatment

Article 19. Each Signatory Country will grant in its territory, national treatment to the products of the other Signatory Country in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes.

In this sense, said products will enjoy a treatment no less favorable than that applicable to similar national products, in terms of taxes, rates or other internal charges, as well as laws, regulations and other norms that affect the sale, purchase, distribution and use of the same s in the internal market or

CHAPTER VIII
Government Purchases

Article 20. The Administrative Commission, established in Article 31 of this Agreement, will study and propose, during the first term of the Agreement, the terms that will regulate the negotiation of the Signatory Countries, in matters of government purchases.

CHAPTER IX
Investments

Article 21. The Signatory Countries will encourage investment and the establishment of companies, both with capital from both countries and with the participation of third parties.

Article 22. For this purpose, the Signatory Countries, within their respective laws on foreign investment, will grant national treatment to the investments of the other Signatory Country. Likewise, they will study the possibility and convenience of entering into an Agreement to avoid Double Taxation.

CHAPTER X
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures

Article 23. The Signatory Countries undertake to prevent sanitary and phytosanitary standards from becoming obstacles to trade. For such purposes, the rules established in Annex No. 5 shall apply.of this Agreement and in the Cooperation and Coordination Agreement on Agricultural Health signed between the National Agrarian Health Service (SENASA) of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Peru and the Agricultural and Livestock Service (SAG) of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile, which is an integral part of this Agreement and appears in Annex No. 6 .

CHAPTER XI
Measures related to Standardization and Metrology

Article 24. The Signatory Countries undertake to eliminate unnecessary technical obstacles to trade, which may arise from the application of measures related to standardization and metrology. For such purposes, the Regime that appears in Annex No. 7 of this Agreement is established .

CHAPTER XII
Tourism

Article 25. The Signatory Countries agree to sign an Agreement for cooperation between the respective competent bodies of the tourism sector, in order to achieve, among other matters, the joint promotion of integrated tourism circuits in third countries and technical assistance.

CHAPTER XIII
Other services

Article 26. The Signatory Countries will adopt measures aimed at the liberalization of bilateral trade in services. For this purpose, they entrust the Administrative Commission, established in Article 31 of this Agreement, to formulate the proposals of the case within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of this Agreement, taking into account, among other considerations, the negotiations carried out in the World Trade Organization (WTO-GATS) and in the regional and hemispheric spheres on these matters.

CHAPTER XIV
Cooperation

Article 27. The Signatory Countries will promote cooperation in economic matters such as commercial policies and techniques; financial, monetary and public finance policies; customs matters; zoo and phytosanitary and bromatological regulations; energy and fuels, transport and communications; modern services, such as technology, engineering, consulting and others.

To carry out specific cooperation actions in economic matters, the competent entities of the respective areas may enter into agreements within the framework of their competence.

Article 28. The Signatory Countries, with the participation of their respective private sectors, will foster the development of economic complementarity actions in the areas of goods and services.

CHAPTER XV
Commercial Promotion

Article 29. The Signatory Countries will arrange joint commercial promotion programs that include, among other actions, the holding of samples, fairs and exhibitions, as well as reciprocal meetings and visits by businessmen and information on supply and demand and market studies.

CHAPTER XVI
Dispute Resolution

Article 30. Disputes arising from the interpretation, application or breach of this Agreement, its Annexes and the Protocols entered into within its framework, will be settled in accordance with the Dispute Settlement Regime contained in Annex 8 of the Agreement . this Agreement.

CHAPTER XVII
Agreement Administration

Article 31. In order to achieve the best execution of this Agreement, the Signatory Countries agree to establish an Administrative Commission, chaired by the Director General of International Economic Relations of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in the case of Chile, and by the Vice Minister of Tourism, Integration and International Trade Negotiations of the Ministry of Industry, Tourism, Integration and International Trade Negotiations, in the case of Peru, or by the persons designated by them on their behalf.

Said Commission must be installed within sixty (60) days from the entry into force of this Agreement and at its first Meeting it will establish its Internal Regulations or

Article 32. Without prejudice to the powers conferred in this Agreement and its Annexes, the Commission shall have the following powers:

to. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement;

b. Propose modifications to this Agreement;

c. Propose the recommendations it deems appropriate, to resolve conflicts that may arise from the interpretation and application of this Agreement;

d. Regulate the procedure for dispute resolution;

and. Review the regime of origin of this Agreement and modify it, when appropriate;

F. Establish, modify, suspend or eliminate specific origin requirements;

g. Monitor public price practices and policies in specific sectors, in order to detect those cases that could cause significant distortions in bilateral trade;

h. Carry out a follow-up of the export promotion mechanisms applied in the Signatory Countries, in order to detect possible distortions to competition, derived from their application and promote their harmonization, as the liberalization of reciprocal trade progresses;

Yo. Prepare a periodic report on the operation of this Agreement accompanied by the recommendations it deems appropriate for its improvement and its most complete use;

j. Establish mechanisms and instances that ensure an active participation of the representatives of the business sectors;

k. Review, modify and update the Complementary Notes of this Agreement, in the sense of contributing to the Liberalization of Trade.

he. The others that are entrusted to it by the Signatory Countries.

Article 33. The Government of Peru designates the Ministry of Industry, Tourism, Integration and International Trade Negotiations, through the Vice Ministry of Tourism, Integration and International Trade Negotiations, as the competent national body of this Agreement, in turn, the Government of Chile designates the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as such, through the General Directorate of International Economic Relations. The functions of these competent national bodies will be established in the Regulations of the Administrative Commission.

CHAPTER XVIII
Validity

Article 34. This Agreement will be effective as of July 1, 1998 and will have an indefinite duration.

As of the entry into force of this Agreement, in accordance with the previous paragraph, the Partial Scope Agreement No. 28 signed between the Signatory Countries within the scope of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty is null and void .

CHAPTER XIX
Complaint

Article 35. The Signatory Country that wishes to denounce this Agreement must communicate its decision to the other Signatory Country, one hundred and eighty (180) days in advance of depositing the respective instrument of denunciation with the ALADI General Secretariat.

As of the formalization of the denunciation, the rights and obligations derived from this Agreement will automatically cease for the denouncing Signatory Country, except in what refers to the treatments, received and granted, for the importation of negotiated products, which will continue in force for a period of one year from the date of deposit of the respective denunciation instrument, unless the Signatory Countries agree to a different term upon denunciation.

CHAPTER XX
Other provisions

Article 36. The Signatory Countries undertake to grant adequate protection to intellectual property, within their national legislation, undertaking that the defense of such rights do not constitute unjustified obstacles to bilateral trade.

Article 37. Goods made or coming from free zones or companies that enjoy the benefits of free zone users, in accordance with the national legislation of the Signatory Countries, will be excluded from the Liberation Program of this Agreement. Said merchandise must be duly identified.

Article 38. The Signatory Countries will promote coordinated action in international economic forums and in relation to industrialized countries, tending to improve the access of their products to the large international markets.

Article 39. The Signatory Countries undertake to keep themselves informed about their foreign trade regimes and statistics, through the competent national organizations referred to in Article 33 of this Agreement. All notification to the foreign trade regimes must be communicated within 30 days of its promulgation.

Article 40. This Agreement does not compromise the rights and obligations arising from the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization - WTO - and from the regional or subregional integration agreements in which the Signatory Countries participate.

Article 41. The Signatory Countries undertake to form a working group that will focus on the study of the possibilities of industrial complementation in the Automotive Sector, including the regulations of origin, in order to deliver within a period not exceeding 24 months, as of the entry into force of this Agreement, a proposal in this regard to the Administrative Commission.

CHAPTER XXI
Accession

Article 42. In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement, through the corresponding negotiation, remains open to the adhesion of the other ALADI member countries.

CHAPTER XXII
Transitory dispositions

First Transitory Article.- The Signatory Countries will immediately proceed to comply with the necessary procedures to formalize this Economic Complementation Agreement in ALADI, in accordance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty and the Resolutions of the Council of Ministers.

Second Transitory Article.- The Signatory Countries agree that the release for consumption or the importation of merchandise under certificates of origin in accordance with AAP No. 28 may be carried out up to a period not exceeding 60 days from the entry into force of the this Agreement, unless said certificate expires on an earlier date, and may even take advantage of the preferences derived from the Release Program of this Agreement.

Third Transitory Article.- In order to evaluate the possibility of granting some special treatment to the goods manufactured or coming from free zones, under the Agreement, the Administrative Commission, within a period of one year, counted from the validity of this Agreement , will focus on the analysis of these special regimes in force in both countries.

Done in the city of Lima on June 22, 1998 in two originals, equally authentic. (Signed) For the Government of the Republic of Chile: José Miguel Insulza; For the Government of the Republic of Peru: Gustavo Cailleaux

ANNEX TEXT:

Economic Complementation Agreement No 38 signed between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru

Annex III

Origin Regime

Area of ​​application

ARTICLE 1. This regime establishes the rules of origin applicable to the exchange of goods between the Signatory Countries, for the purposes of:

qualification and determination of the originating merchandise;

issuance of certificates of origin; and

Verification, Control and Sanctions processes.

ARTICLE 2. The Signatory Countries will apply the present Regime of Origin to the goods subject to the Trade Liberalization Program of the Agreement, without prejudice to the fact that it may be modified by Resolution of the Administrative Commission.

In order to access the Release Program, the goods must prove compliance with the origin requirements in accordance with the provisions of this Regime. This requirement will proceed only for goods that require preferential treatment.

Origin Qualification 

ARTICLE 3.  Unless otherwise provided in this annex, the following shall be considered originating:

Merchandise made entirely in the territory of the Signatory Countries when materials originating from the Signatory Countries were used solely and exclusively in its manufacture;

The products of the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms including those of hunting and fishing extracted, harvested or collected, born and bred, or captured, in its territory or in its patrimonial territorial waters and exclusive economic zones, by ships of its flags or chartered or leased by companies established in the territory of any Signatory Country, provided that such vessels are registered or registered in accordance with its internal legislation;

The products of the sea extracted outside its patrimonial territorial waters and exclusive economic zones by ships of its flags or chartered or leased by companies established in the territory of any Signatory Country, provided that such ships are registered or registered in accordance with its internal legislation;

Goods produced on board factory ships from fish, crustaceans and other marine species, obtained from the sea, by ships of their flags or chartered or leased by companies established in the territory of any Signatory Country, provided that such ships are registered or registered in accordance with their internal legislation;

Assets obtained by a natural or legal person of one of the Signatory Countries or by one of the Signatory Countries, from the sea bed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that natural or legal person or Signatory Country has the right to exploit said bed or marine subsoil.

Goods made with non-originating materials, as long as they result from a production or transformation process carried out in the Signatory Countries that gives them a new individuality. This individuality is present in the fact that the merchandise is classified in a heading other than the materials, according to the NALADISA nomenclature.
However, the goods that, despite being classified in headings other than materials, are the result of the operations established in Article 4 carried out in the Signatory Countries, by which they acquire the final form in which they will be marketed, will not be considered originating. when non-originating materials have been used in such operations. The provisions of this paragraph do not constitute a production or transformation process.

Merchandise that does not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification, because the production or transformation process does not imply a change of heading in the NALADISA nomenclature, provided that the CIF port of destination or CIF seaport value of non-originating materials does not exceed the 50% of the FOB Export Value of the merchandise.

Goods resulting from assembly or assembly operations carried out within the territory of the Signatory Countries, using non-originating materials, whether or not there is a change of item, provided that the CIF value of the destination port or CIF seaport of the non-originating materials does not exceed the 50% of the FOB Export Value of the merchandise.

The sets or assortments of merchandise, provided that each of the merchandise contained in them, comply with the standards established in this annex.

Goods that meet the specific requirements, in accordance with Article 6.

ARTICLE 4. The following operations by themselves do not confer origin:

manipulations intended to ensure the conservation of merchandise such as: aeration, ventilation, refrigeration, freezing, addition of substances, extraction of damaged parts;

dusting, shaking, husking, shelling, maceration, drying, thinning, classification, selection, fractioning, washing or cleaning, painting and trimming;

the formation of games or assortments of merchandise;

the packaging, packaging or repackaging;

the division or assembly of packages or packages;

the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs to the goods or their packaging;

mixtures of materials, dilution in water or other substances, dosage, provided that the characteristics of the goods obtained are not essentially different from the characteristics of the materials that have been mixed;

the assembly, assembly or assembly of parts and pieces to constitute a complete merchandise;

the simple sacrifice of animals; and

the accumulation of two or more of these operations.

ARTICLE 5 . The packages, containers, cases, packages, wrappers and the like, presented containing the respective goods will be considered originating if the main good meets the origin criteria of this annex. This provision will not be applicable to containers, packaging, cases, packaging, wrappers and the like when they are presented separately or give the product that it contains its essential character.

Origin Specific Requirements

ARTICLE 6. The Parties may agree on the establishment of Specific Origin Requirements, in those cases in which it is deemed that the general rules are not adequate to qualify the origin of a good or group of goods. The Specific Origin Requirements will prevail over the general criteria.

Goods with specific requirements are included in Appendix No. 1.

Accumulation

ARTICLE 7.  For the determination of the origin of the goods, the originating materials of the other Signatory Country, incorporated in the production or transformation of said goods, shall be considered as originating from a Signatory Country. This criterion will be applied to both the General Rules of Origin and the Specific Origin Requirements.

Of the expedition, transport and transit of the goods

ARTICLE 8.  In order for merchandise to benefit from preferential treatment, it must have been shipped directly from the exporting Signatory Country to the importing Signatory Country. For this purpose, direct dispatch is considered:

Goods transported without passing through the territory of any country not participating in the Agreement;

Goods in transit, through one or more countries not participating in the Agreement, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the surveillance of the customs authority of the transited country provided that:

The transit was justified for geographical reasons or considerations related to transportation requirements;

They were not intended for trade, use or employment in the country of transit; and

They do not undergo, during their transport or storage, any operation other than loading, unloading or handling to keep them in good condition or ensure their conservation.

For the purposes of the provisions of paragraph b) above, the importer of the goods at the request of the customs authority of the importing Signatory Country, must deliver a copy of any customs control document that, to the satisfaction of said customs authority, indicates that the merchandise remained under the customs supervision of the transited country, in the territory of the country not participating in the Agreement.

Billing by a third country operator 

ARTICLE 9.  When the merchandise object of exchange is invoiced by an operator from a third country, the producer or exporter of the country of origin must indicate in the respective certificate of origin, in the area related to "observations", that the merchandise object of Your statement will be invoiced from a third country, identifying the name, denomination or business name and address of the operator who will ultimately be the one that invoices the operation to the destination.

In the situation referred to in the preceding paragraph and, exceptionally, if at the time of issuing the certificate of origin, the number of the commercial invoice issued by an operator from a third country is not known, the corresponding area of ​​the certificate must not be filled. In this case, the importer will present to the corresponding customs administration an affidavit that justifies the fact, in which he must indicate, at least, the numbers and dates of the commercial invoice and the certificate of origin that cover the import operation.

Issuance of Certificates of Origin

ARTICLE 10 . The certificate of origin is the document that serves to certify that a merchandise that is exported from the territory of a Signatory Country to the territory of the other Signatory Country qualifies as originating, in the terms and provisions of this Annex, in order that the merchandise may benefit of the preferential treatment enshrined in this Agreement.

ARTICLE 11.  For the declaration and certification of origin of the products, the format found in Appendix No. 2 of this Annex will be used, which will have the character of a sworn declaration of the final producer or exporter of the merchandise in which the Full compliance with the provisions on the origin of this Annex and the veracity of the data and information contained in the certificate.

ARTICLE 12 . The request for the certificate of origin must be accompanied by the commercial invoice and an affidavit from the producer or exporter with the necessary background documents that demonstrate that the goods meet the requirements, such as:

Company or company name;

legal address;

Denomination of the merchandise to be exported NALADISA code;

FOB value of the merchandise;

The materials used in the production or transformation process, indicating:

materials from the exporting Signatory Country;

materials from the importing Signatory Country;

non-originating materials indicating:

NALADISA codes, CIF value in US dollars and Percentage of participation in the FOB Value of the merchandise.  

The aforementioned statements must be submitted sufficiently in advance for each certification application. In the case of merchandise or goods that were regularly exported, and as long as the process and component materials were not altered, the declaration will be valid for up to two years from the date of its issuance.

When the exporter is not the producer of the merchandise, the exporter must provide the producer's declaration of origin.

ARTICLE 13 . The issuance of certificates of origin must be in charge of official departments, to be nominated by each Signatory Country, which may delegate their issuance to other public or private organizations that act with national jurisdiction.

The Signatory Countries will keep in force the current official distributions and the public or private organizations authorized to issue certificates of origin, with the record and facsimile of the signatures of the officials accredited for this purpose, duly registered in the ALADI General Secretariat.

The modifications made to said records will enter into force within 30 days, counted from the date of communication to the ALADI General Secretariat.

ARTICLE 14 . The certificate of origin must be issued within the seven days following the presentation of the respective application and will be valid for 180 days from its issuance. Said certificate must be issued exclusively in the form attached in Appendix No. 2, which will not be valid if it is not duly completed in the corresponding fields.

Certificates of origin may not be issued before the date of issuance of the commercial invoice corresponding to the operation in question, but rather on the same date or within the following 60 days.

Notwithstanding what is stated in the preceding paragraph and in the first paragraph of Article 12, if a provisional invoice is issued before a final one due to the marketing modalities of a certain merchandise, the certificate of origin issued on the basis of to the first, and must be entered in the "COMMENTS" box such circumstance and the reasons why the final commercial invoice is not available at that time. However, when importing, the respective commercial invoice must be available.

ARTICLE 15 . The certifying entities must correlatively number the certificates issued and archive a copy for a minimum period of three years, from the date of issue. Said file must also include all the background information that served as the basis for the issuance of the certificate.

Likewise, the aforementioned entities will keep a permanent record of all certificates of origin issued, which must contain at least the number of the certificate, the applicant for it and the date of its issuance.

Verification and Control Processes 

ARTICLE 16 . Notwithstanding the presentation of the certificate of origin under the conditions established in this regime and those that may be established by the Administrative Commission, the customs authorities of the Signatory Countries may, in the case of well-founded doubts in relation to the declared standard of origin and/or the authenticity or veracity of the certificate, request additional information from the entity that issued the certificate in the exporting Signatory Country, through the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Country, in order to clarify the issue or initiate investigations when the circumstances so require. merit. The competent authority of the importing Signatory Country will be informed of the proceedings.

Once the investigation has begun, the customs authority of the importing country, through its competent authority, will notify the competent authority of the exporting country, being able to order the suspension of preferential treatment, demand guarantees or adopt the measures it deems necessary, to protect the fiscal interest, but in no case will it stop the import process of the goods.

Once the case has been resolved, the resolution will be finalized, or the rights received in excess will be reinstated, the guarantees will be released or they will be made effective, as appropriate.

ARTICLE 17 . The certifying entity, through its competent authority, must provide the information requested by application of the provisions of the previous Article, within a period not exceeding 30 business days, counted from the date of receipt of the respective request. The information will be confidential and will be used exclusively to clarify such situations.

In the cases in which the requested information was not provided or was unsatisfactory, the customs authority of the Signatory Country importing such merchandise, through its competent authority, may preemptively order the suspension of the preferential treatment of new operations referring to the same merchandise from the same operator.

ARTICLE 18 . Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding articles, the customs authorities of the importing Signatory Country, through its competent authority , ex officio or at the well-founded request of interested third parties, may:

send written questionnaires to exporters or producers of the exporting Signatory Country;

request, in justified cases, that the competent authority of the exporting Signatory Country take the pertinent steps in order to be able to carry out verification visits to the facilities of an exporter, in order to examine the production processes, the facilities used in the production of the merchandise, as well as other actions that contribute to the verification of its origin;

carry out other procedures that may be established through the Administrative Commission.  

For these purposes, the Signatory Countries may facilitate reciprocal external audits, in accordance with their national legislation.

The results of the investigation must be communicated to the competent authorities of both Signatory Countries.

ARTICLE 19 . Once the investigation instance has been exhausted, if the conclusions are not satisfactory to those involved, the Signatory Countries will hold bilateral consultations. If the results of these consultations are not satisfactory to the affected Signatory Country, it may resort to the Agreement's Dispute Settlement system.

sanctions

ARTICLE 20 . When it is verified that the certificate of origin does not comply with the provisions contained in this Annex, or it is detected in it or in its records or other documents related to the origin of the goods, falsification, adulteration or any other circumstance that gives rise to fiscal or economic damage, the Signatory Countries may adopt the corresponding sanctions in accordance with their legislation.

Definitions

ARTICLE 21. For the purposes of this Annex, the following shall be understood as:

Competent Authority:

In Chile: the General Directorate of International Economic Relations.

In Peru: the National Directorate for Integration and International Trade Negotiations.

a) Material: It is a good that is used in the production or transformation of another good and includes components, inputs, raw materials and/or parts and pieces;

b) NALADISA: Identifies the Tariff Nomenclature of the Latin American Integration Association, based on the Harmonized System for the Designation and Coding of Goods;

c) Section: Refers to a section of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or the NALADISA Nomenclature.

d) Chapter: Refers to the first two digits of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or the NALADISA Nomenclature.

e) Heading: Refers to the first four digits of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or the NALADISA Nomenclature.

f) Subheading: Refers to the first six digits of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or the NALADISA Nomenclature.

Change of Heading: change of the tariff classification at the four-digit level of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or of the NALADISA Nomenclature.

h) Change of Chapter: change of the tariff classification at the two-digit level of the Harmonized System for the Description and Coding of Merchandise or of the NALADISA Nomenclature.

i) Value CIF port of destination or CIF maritime port: corresponds to the value of the materials, including the expenses of their transfer to the port or place of introduction in the importing country.

j) FOB export value: corresponds to the value of the goods free on board, regardless of the means of transport, at the port or place of final shipment abroad.

k) Value: It will correspond to the value of a good or material, in accordance with the rules of the WTO Valuation Code (Agreement Relative to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994).

l) Days: means calendar days, unless expressly stated otherwise.

m) Non-originating materials: materials imported from third countries and materials purchased locally or imported from the other Signatory Country, when they do not comply with the rules of origin of this regime.
Economic Complementation Agreement No 38 signed between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru

Annex 4
Regime for the Application of Safeguards
ARTICLE 1. Bilateral safeguards

1. A Signatory Country may apply bilateral safeguard measures, if it is established, by virtue of the procedures set forth in this Regime, that as a result of unforeseen circumstances and particularly as a result of the agreed tariff concessions, imports into its territory of a good originating from the other Signatory Country in absolute terms or in relation to national production and in such conditions that imports of that good constitute a substantial cause of serious damage or a threat thereof to a branch of national production that produces a good. either similar or directly competitive. The Signatory Country into whose territory the good is being imported may, to the minimum extent necessary to remedy or prevent the damage:  

suspend the future reduction of any rate of duty established in the Agreement for the good;

partially reduce the margin of preference achieved by the reduction program;

increase the rate of duty for the good, to a level not to exceed the lesser of:

the most-favoured-nation rate of duty at the time the measure is taken, or

the tariff rate applied to the most favored nation on the day immediately prior to the entry into force of this Agreement;

2. The procedure that may lead to the application of a safeguard measure in accordance with paragraph 1, shall be subject to the following conditions:

A Signatory Country shall promptly notify the other Signatory Country in writing of the initiation of the procedure that could result in the application of a safeguard measure against a good originating in the territory of the other Signatory Country, while requesting consultations .

Any measure of this nature will begin to be applied no later than one year from the date of initiation of the procedure.

The safeguard measures will have a term of application of up to two years, including the term in which provisional measures would have been in force.
If the causes that motivated the measure persist, the safeguards may be extended for one year, for which the corresponding justification shall be presented to the other Signatory Country thirty days in advance.  

Throughout the extension period, the measure will be less restrictive than the original. The Signatory Countries will hold consultations, prior to the adoption of the extension, to examine the effectiveness of the easing of the extended measure. The Signatory Country that applies the extension will provide evidence to support that the industry in question is in the process of readjustment.

A Signatory Country that has applied safeguard measures to a product originating in the other Signatory Country, may not apply them again to the importation of that product, unless a period of non-application equal to the period of validity of the measure has elapsed and which In any case, it may not be less than twenty-four months.

At the end of the period of application of the measure, the tariff that will be applied to the product subject to it, will be the one that would have been in force if the measure had not been applied, according to the Liberation Program established in the Agreement.

The safeguard measures that are applied in accordance with this Annex will not affect the commercial operations in progress.

3. The imposition of a safeguard measure shall not reduce the imports in question below the average of the imports made in the last three representative years for which statistics are available, unless clear justification is given for the need to fix a different level to prevent or repair serious harm.

ARTICLE 2. Provisional safeguards:

1. In critical circumstances, in which any delay entails damage that is difficult to repair, the Signatory Country that applies a measure in accordance with Article 1 of this Annex, may adopt a provisional safeguard measure by virtue of a preliminary but objective determination, of the existence of clear evidence that increased imports have caused or threaten to cause serious injury to a domestic industry. Immediately after the provisional safeguard measure has been adopted, it will be notified and justified, and the affected Signatory Country may request consultations in accordance with the provisions of Art. 1.2 (a).  

2. The duration of a provisional safeguard measure shall not exceed 180 days and shall adopt any of the forms provided for in Article 1.1 of this Annex.

3. Provisional safeguard measures shall not be applied to products whose imports have been subject to measures of this nature during the immediately preceding twenty-four months.

4. In the case of products included in Annexes No. 1 and 2 in the 10, 15 and 18-year tax reduction schedules, a Signatory Country may exceptionally apply special provisional measures for a period of 60 days, when a reduction occurs of export prices of such magnitude in a product originating from the other Signatory Country, which allows to objectively demonstrate within said period, a threat of serious damage to a branch of national production that produces a similar or directly competitive good of the importing country. In order to continue with the application of a provisional measure for up to a maximum period of 180 days, the Signatory Countries must accept and comply with the requirements established in this article.

The Signatory Country that applies this special safeguard may not invoke it again until 360 days have elapsed since the adoption of the original measure.

5. If in the subsequent investigation it is determined that the grounds invoked for the application of the measure have not caused or threatened to cause serious damage to a branch of national production, the amount received by way of provisional measures will be promptly reimbursed or will release the guarantee guaranteed for said concept, as appropriate.

6. During the period of validity of the provisional measures, the pertinent provisions of articles 1, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of this Annex shall be complied with.

ARTICLE 3. Global safeguards

1. Each Signatory Country retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards of the WTO Agreement.

2. Any exception in the application of measures adopted by virtue of Article XIX of the Gatt (1994) and the Agreement on Safeguards of the WTO, which is granted by any of the Signatory Countries to a third country will be extended, in the circumstances and conditions that the exception was granted , automatically to the other Signatory Country in this Agreement.

3. A Signatory Country shall promptly notify the other Signatory Country in writing of the initiation of a procedure that could result in the application of a global safeguard measure. In this sense, none of the Signatory Countries may apply a measure provided for in paragraph 1 that imposes restrictions on a good benefited by the Agreement without prior notification, submitted in writing to the Administrative Commission.

ARTICLE 4. Procedures related to safeguard measures

1. The Signatory Countries will not apply, in their reciprocal trade, safeguard measures of Article 1 and 3 simultaneously.

2. The Signatory Countries may only apply safeguard measures of a tariff nature in their reciprocal trade.

3. Each Signatory Country will establish or maintain equitable, timely, transparent and effective procedures for the application of safeguard measures, in accordance with the requirements indicated in Article 7.

4. For the adoption of safeguard measures, each Signatory Country will entrust the determination of the existence of serious damage or threat thereof to a competent investigating authority.

ARTICLE 5. Settlement of disputes regarding safeguard measures

None of the Signatory Countries may resort to the Dispute Settlement Procedure of the Agreement, before the safeguards have effectively been applied.

ARTICLE 6. Definitions

For purposes of this Annex:

threat of serious harm means the clear imminence of serious harm which must be based on facts and not simply on allegations, conjectures or remote possibilities;

competent investigating authority means the "competent investigating authority" of a Signatory Country, which shall be notified by the latter to the Administrative Commission;

good originating in the territory of a Signatory Country means an originating good in accordance with the provisions of Annex No. 3

critical circumstances means circumstances in which a delay may cause damage that is difficult to repair, in the domestic industry;

serious damage means a significant general deterioration of a branch of national production;

absolute increase means a significant increase in imports above trend during a recent representative base period;

I ncrease in relation to national production , means an increase in the share of preferential imports with respect to national production.

branch of national production means the group of producers of the similar or directly competitive good that operates in the territory of a Signatory Country;

ARTICLE 7. Administration of procedures related to safeguard measures

Start of procedure

1. The procedures for the adoption of safeguard measures may be initiated by request of an entity or entities that prove to be representative, in terms such that they constitute a significant proportion of national production, of the industry that manufactures a similar good or directly competitive with the imported good.

2. A Signatory Country may initiate the procedure ex officio requesting that the competent investigating authority carry it out.

Content of the request

3. When the investigation is carried out at the request of a representative entity of a branch of national production, the petitioner will provide the following information in said request, to the extent that such information is of a public nature and can be obtained from government sources or other and, in the event that it is not available, it will provide the best estimates that it can make on said information as well as the bases that support those estimates:

description of the product: the name and description of the imported good in question, the tariff subheading in which it is classified and the current tariff treatment, as well as the name and description of the similar or directly competitive national good;

representativeness:

the names and addresses of the entities submitting the request, as well as the location of the establishments where the national good in question is produced,

the percentage in the national production of the similar or directly competitive good that such entities represent and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of an industry, and

the names and location of other national establishments where the similar or directly competitive good is produced;

import figures: import data for not less than three and not more than five most recent years.

figures on national production: the data on the total national production of the similar or directly competitive good, corresponding to the period indicated in point (c) above;

data demonstrating the damage: the quantitative and objective indicators that denote the nature and scope of the damage caused to the industry in question, such as those that demonstrate changes in the levels of sales, prices, production, productivity, utilization of installed capacity , market share, profit or loss, and employment;  

cause of the damage: the enumeration and description of the presumed causes of the damage or threat thereof, and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports of that good, in absolute terms or relative to national production, is the cause of serious damage or threat thereof, supported by pertinent information; and

criteria for inclusion: quantitative and objective information indicating the share of imports from the territory of the other Signatory Country, as well as the applicant's considerations on the degree to which such imports contribute significantly to serious injury or threat thereof.

notification requirement

4. When initiating a procedure for the adoption of safeguard measures, the competent investigating authority will publish the notification of its initiation in the Official Gazette of the Signatory Country. The notification will contain the following information: the applicant's name; the indication of the imported good subject to the procedure and its tariff subheading; the nature and terms in which the resolution would be issued; the deadlines for the presentation of reports, declarations and other documents before the competent investigative authority; the place where the application and other documents submitted during the procedure can be inspected; and the name, address, and telephone number of the office where more information can be obtained.

5. When a proceeding for the adoption of safeguard measures is initiated by a request submitted by an entity that claims to be representative of a domestic industry, the competent investigating authority shall not publish the notification required in paragraph 4 without first carefully evaluating if the application meets the requirements set forth in paragraph 3, including that of representativeness.

Confidential information

6. Once the applications have been submitted, they will be public knowledge. The competent investigating authority shall not disclose in its report any information that has been provided to it in confidence or that it has undertaken to keep confidential during the proceedings.

The competent investigative authority will establish or maintain procedures for the handling of information that is provided to it as confidential and that which is protected as such by domestic law, that is provided during the procedure, and will require the interested parties to provide such information. by providing non-confidential written summaries thereof.

Non-confidential summaries must allow a reasonable understanding of the information supplied in confidence. If the interested parties point out the impossibility of summarizing this information, they will explain the reasons that prevent it.

Proof of damage and causal relationship

7. To carry out the procedure, the competent investigating authority will collect all the pertinent information to issue the corresponding resolution. It will assess the relevant factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that affect the situation of that branch of national production, including the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the good in question in absolute and relative terms, as appropriate; the proportion of the domestic market covered by imports; and changes in the levels of sales, production, productivity, utilization of installed capacity, profits or losses, and employment. In order to issue its decision, the competent investigating authority may, in addition,

8. The competent investigating authority will not issue an affirmative resolution on the existence of damage unless its investigation demonstrates, based on objective evidence, the existence of a clear causal relationship between the increase in imports of the good in question and the serious damage. or threat thereof. Except as provided in Article 2.4, when other factors, apart from the increase in imports, cause, at the same time, damage to a branch of national production, this damage will not be attributed to the aforementioned increase.

deliberation and report

9. In accordance with the legislation and practices of each Signatory Country, the competent investigating authority will make available to any interested party and the general public a report containing the background and non-confidential grounds that were taken into consideration to achieve the results. of the investigation and any reasoned conclusions relating to the relevant issues of fact and law. Likewise, a summary of said report, together with the Resolution that provides for the application of the adopted measure, will be published in a timely manner in the Official Gazette of the Signatory Country that applies the measure.

 

ANNEX 5

 SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

ARTICLE 1.  The Signatory Countries will be governed by the provisions of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the World Trade Organization (MSF/WTO), regarding the adoption and application of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

The definitions of that Agreement shall apply to this Annex.

ARTICLE 2.   The Signatory Countries will use international standards, guidelines and recommendations as the basis for the adoption or application of their sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

The Signatory Countries may establish or maintain sanitary and phytosanitary measures that offer a higher level of protection than that which would be achieved by means of a measure based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that there are scientific grounds.

Each Signatory Country will accept as equivalent the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the other Signatory Country, even when they differ from its own, provided that it is demonstrated that they achieve an adequate level of protection.

ARTICLE 3.   The Signatory Countries undertake to ensure that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures are based on an assessment appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks to the life and health of people, animals and plants, taking into account the guidelines they draw up. competent international organizations.

When establishing their appropriate level of protection, they will take into account the risk assessment techniques developed by the competent international organizations, as well as the objective of minimizing the negative effects on trade and will avoid making arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions in the levels they consider appropriate in different situations, if such distinctions result in discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade.

ARTICLE 4.  In order to prevent human health standards and the fishing sector from becoming obstacles to trade, the competent bodies in health matters of the Signatory Countries will sign Cooperation and Coordination Agreements to facilitate the exchange of products without the present a health risk for both countries.

ARTICLE 5.   The Signatory Countries will establish the necessary mechanisms and instruments to achieve transparency, fluidity and deadlines in the procedures for granting authorizations, certifications and registrations or sanitary registries.

The Signatory Countries undertake to issue the respective sanitary inscriptions and/or registries or other procedures concerning this area for commercialization, import and/or export, within the terms established in the respective laws and regulations of both countries, in accordance with way to guarantee access and trade in products subject to these regulations.

For the purposes of this Article, non-observance of the longer of the terms established in both national legislations for each category of products will be considered non-compliance, subject to the dispute resolution procedure of the Agreement. The deadlines established by the national legislation of the Signatory Countries, appear in Appendix No. 1 of this Annex.

In the event that the terms currently in force are the reason for modification, these must be communicated through the competent national bodies of the Agreement.

The Signatory Parties shall endeavor not to extend the indicated deadlines except for duly justified scientific or technical reasons.
Economic Complementation Agreement No 38 signed between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru

Annex 6

Cooperation and Coordination Agreement on Agricultural Health between the National Agrarian Health Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Peru and the Agricultural and Livestock Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile

The National Agrarian Health Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Peru and the Agricultural and Livestock Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile, hereinafter referred to as the "Contracting Parties".


CONSIDERING:

That it is in the interest of the Governments of the Republic of Peru and the Republic of Chile to increase the commercial exchange of agricultural and livestock products and technical cooperation in phytosanitary and zoosanitary aspects between the two countries;

That the scientific, technological and regulatory aspects of animal health and plant health are of special interest to facilitate international trade in animals, plants, their products and by-products and the preservation of their territories from pests and diseases;

That the recognition, harmonization and expediting of the requirements and technical and administrative procedures that are demanded in the importation of agricultural and livestock products will facilitate the trade of these animals, vegetables, their products and by-products.

That both Contracting Parties agree that their respective official sanitary organizations strictly comply with their phytosanitary and zoosanitary requirements;

That both Contracting Parties have ratified the Agreement on the application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the World Trade Organization (WTO); are Contracting Parties to the FAO International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC); and are members of the International Office of Epizootics, CODEX Alimentarius; and

That the dynamics of agricultural trade requires updating existing agreements:

They agree to the following:

CHAPTER I

General disposition

Art 1.  This Agreement refers to the principles, standards and procedures related to phytosanitary and zoosanitary requirements that regulate or may affect, directly or indirectly, trade and other exchanges between the Contracting Parties, of animals, plants, their products and byproducts.

Art 2.   The Contracting Parties undertake to facilitate agricultural trade between them, without this representing a plant or animal health risk, as well as to prevent the introduction and spread of pests and diseases, and to improve plant health and animal health through of mutual cooperation.

Art 3.   The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to any consignment containing agricultural products and by-products for Consulates and Diplomatic Missions, in accordance with the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

Art 4.   The provisions of this Agreement are in accordance with the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the World Trade Organization.

CHAPTER II

Goals

Art 5.   The objectives of this Agreement are:

Facilitate the exchange of animals and plants, their products and by-products, without this representing a phytosanitary or zoosanitary risk for the Contracting Parties.

Prevent the introduction and spread of pests and diseases of animals and plants in the territory of the Contracting Parties.

Improve plant health and animal health in the Contracting Parties through mutual cooperation.

CHAPTER III

Rights of the Parties 

Art 6.   The Contracting Parties will have the following rights.

Adopt, maintain or apply phytosanitary measures, in accordance with this Agreement, necessary for the protection of animal health and plant health, within the framework of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the World Trade Organization.

Verify that plants, animals, their products and by-products for export to the other Contracting Party are subject to rigorous phytosanitary and animal health monitoring, certifying compliance with the requirements of the importing Contracting Party.

Indicate, by mutual agreement, the specific regions where the cooperation work and technical projects established within the scope of this Agreement will be carried out.

Demand, when necessary, the phytosanitary, zoosanitary and sanitary certificates agreed between the Contracting Parties for the commercial exchange of agricultural products.

CHAPTER IV

Obligations of the Parties

Art 7.   The Contracting Parties will have the following obligations:

Promote in their respective territories the participation of institutions and associations from the public and private sectors in compliance with the objectives and activities set forth in this Agreement.

Grant the necessary facilities for the verification of the controls, inspections, approvals and programs of a phytosanitary or zoosanitary nature of the other Contracting Party, which may be agreed upon.

Grant the necessary technical and administrative facilities to carry out the technical and cooperative exchanges provided for in this Agreement.

Cooperate immediately in addressing proposals for modification of this Agreement and in resolving differences that may arise in the interpretation or application thereof.

Produce, register and exchange information on the laboratories for the analysis of animals, plants, their products and by-products to be exported to the other Contracting Party.

Promote the training and specialization of its technical personnel in educational and research institutions and in entities related to agricultural health.

CHAPTER V

Cooperation  

Art 8.  The Contracting Parties will carry out the following cooperation actions:

Facilitate trade in agricultural products between the two countries, and identify and give priority to technical cooperation actions in matters of common interest to achieve better control of plant and animal health pests and diseases.

Prepare plans to prevent the introduction and elimination of quarantine plant and animal health pests and diseases in the territory of the Contracting Parties.

Exchange technical information, legislation and the phytosanitary and zoosanitary situation of Biotechnology and Biosafety of the Contracting Parties, on methods of control and of pests and diseases, diagnostic techniques, handling and preparation of products and by-products of agricultural origin.

Exchange specialized personnel in order to supervise plant and animal production procedures at the origin to verify the phytosanitary and animal health conditions, as well as Biotechnology and Biosafety.

Exchange experts and specialized personnel in matters of this Agreement, for research and training purposes.

Define specific phytosanitary and zoosanitary programs and treatments that streamline procedures for the trade of agricultural products and by-products.

Provide reciprocal collaboration of a technical nature in the aspects of recognition, diagnosis and prevention measures of phytosanitary and zoosanitary risks, Biotechnology and Biosafety.

CHAPTER VI

Harmonization  

Art 9.   In order to harmonize as much as possible their phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures, the Contracting Parties:

They will base their phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures on standards, guidelines or recommendations of International and Regional Organizations of which both countries are members. In particular, in matters of plant health, they will follow the standards, guidelines and recommendations prepared under the auspices of the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention; and in terms of animal health those prepared under the auspices of the International Office of Epizootics.

They will take into account their national standards and the requirements of the importing Contracting Party for the elaboration of the phytosanitary and zoosanitary requirements for the exchange of agricultural products.

They will establish harmonization systems in the agro-sanitary field for the methods of sampling, diagnosis and inspection and certification of animals, plants, their products and by-products at the field level, industrial processing and place of entry.

CHAPTER VII

Equivalence

Art 10.   In compliance with the principle of equivalence, the Contracting Parties:

They will accept the sanitary and phytosanitary measures of the other as equivalent, even if they differ from their own, if it is shown that said measures achieve the appropriate level of phytosanitary or animal health protection.

They will try to approximate as much as possible the measure of equivalence of their phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures without reducing the level of protection of Agricultural Health.

CHAPTER VIII

Risk Assessment and Determination of the Appropriate Level of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Protection  

Art 11.   The Contracting Parties must undertake that:

The phytosanitary and zoosanitary measures are based on an evaluation appropriate to the circumstances of the existing risks for the life and health of people and animals or for the preservation of plant health and avoid harmful effects of the inputs used in protection and agricultural production, taking into account the guidelines and risk assessment techniques prepared by the competent International Organizations.

When evaluating the sanitary or phytosanitary conditions, they will take into account, among other things, the level of prevalence of certain diseases or pests, the existence of prevention, control and eradication programs, the structure and organization of the Agricultural Health Service, defense procedures , surveillance, diagnosis and treatments that ensure the phytosanitary and zoosanitary condition and the safety of the product.

CHAPTER IX

Recognition of Free Zones and Zones of Low Pest or Disease Prevalence

Art 12.   The Contracting Parties will recognize the concepts of areas free of pests or diseases and areas of low prevalence of pests or diseases. The determination of these zones will be based, among others, on factors such as the geographical situation, the ecosystems, the epidemiological surveillance and the effectiveness of the phytosanitary and zoosanitary controls.

Art 13.   When a Contracting Party declares an area of ​​its territory free or of low prevalence of a specific pest or disease, it must objectively demonstrate to the other Contracting Party such condition and grant the security that it will be maintained as such. For such purposes, the interested Party will present the respective request and provide the corresponding scientific and technical information to the other Contracting Party, who will pronounce itself within a term previously agreed with the other Contracting Party. To this end, the importing Contracting Party shall be provided, upon request, reasonable access for inspections, tests and other pertinent procedures. In case of non-acceptance, it will state in writing the technical grounds for its decision.

CHAPTER X

Ttansparency

Art 14.   The Contracting Parties undertake to notify:

Significant changes that occur in the animal health field, such as the appearance or suspicion of exotic diseases on lists A and B of the OIF, within 24 hours immediately following the detection of the problem.

Significant changes that occur in the phytosanitary field, such as the appearance of quarantine pests or spread of pests under official control, within 72 hours of verification.

Findings of epidemiological importance in relation to diseases and pests not included in the two previous numerals.

Changes to the current phytosanitary and animal health regulations that affect the commercial exchange of agricultural products between the Contracting Parties will be notified at least 60 days before the date of entry into force of the new provision to allow observations by the other Contracting Party. Emergency situations are exempt from the term indicated above.

To the different agents of the private sector involved in the production and commercialization process, in their respective territories, the current phytosanitary and animal health standards and procedures and any changes thereto.

The emergency measures that are implemented to control sources or outbreaks of pests of quarantine importance and diseases of mandatory reporting, defined bilaterally, will be immediately complied with.

CHAPTER XI

Technical Consultations  

Art 15.   A Contracting Party may initiate technical consultations with the other Contracting Party when:

Have doubts about the application or interpretation of this Agreement or,

Consider that a phytosanitary measure of the other Contracting Party is interpreted or applied inconsistently with the provisions of this Agreement.

CHAPTER XII

Executing Entities  

Art 16.   The coordination and supervision of the application of this Agreement will be in charge of the Executing Entities of the same, who will act through a Mixed Work Commission that will be integrated as follows:

The head of the National Agrarian Health Service (SENASA) of Peru or its representative;

The National Directorate of the Agricultural and Livestock Service (SAG) of Chile, or its representative; and

The respective technical teams deemed appropriate.

Art 17.   To discuss technical-scientific matters and phytosanitary and animal health certification, as well as other issues that arise during the application of this agreement, the Executing Entities will meet at least once a year, on a date and place that will be set by common agreement, and whose seat will be rotating.

Art 18.   The Contracting Party that sends, on its own initiative, under the terms of this Agreement, representatives and specialists to the other Contracting Party, will cover the pertinent expenses. The Contracting Party of the host country will facilitate the access of officials to the places where they have to carry out their work and will provide the necessary assistance for the fulfillment of the mission.

Art 19.   The Parties will obtain the necessary financial resources to fulfill the programmed activities for which they may request the cooperation of producers, importers and exporters of agricultural products. Likewise, the Contracting Parties may request the collaboration of International Technical Cooperation Organizations to carry out the activities aimed at the application of this Agreement.

Art 20.   The Executing Entities may, by virtue of this Agreement, sign specific protocols that involve greater technical-operational detail that allows its application, as well as other matters of interest related to the objectives of this Agreement.

CHAPTER XIII

Effective Period and Amendments  

Art 21.   This Agreement will enter into force on the date it has been ratified by both Contracting Parties and will have an indefinite validity, unless one of the Contracting Parties notifies the other of its decision to terminate it. The notification must be made in writing six months in advance of the date on which the Agreement is intended to be terminated.

Art 22.   This Agreement may be modified by decision of the Contracting Parties.

Art 23.   The termination of this Agreement will not affect the performance of the cooperative activities that are in progress.

Art 24.   This Agreement replaces the Cooperation and Coordination Agreement on Agricultural Health signed between the Agricultural and Livestock Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Chile and the National Agricultural Health Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Peru , signed on May 4, 1995.

Signed in Lima on the seventeenth day of March 1998, in two original copies, in Spanish, both texts being equally authentic.

 PRIVATE ELSA CARBONELL TORRES
NATIONAL CHIEF

NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL HEALTH SERVICE

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

PERU

ANTONIO YAKSIK SOULE
NATIONAL DIRECTOR

AGRICULTURAL AND LIVESTOCK SERVICE

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

CHILI

Annex 7

Measures Related to Standardization and Metrology

 

ARTICLE 1.  This Annex is applicable to measures related to the standardization and metrology of the Signatory Countries, both nationally and locally, which may directly or indirectly affect trade between them.

The provisions of this Annex are not applicable to sanitary and phytosanitary measures, which will be governed by Annexes 5 and 6 of this Agreement.

This Annex shall not apply to purchase specifications established by government institutions.

ARTICLE 2. The Signatory Countries will use as a basis for the elaboration, adoption and application of their measures related to standardization and metrology, the international guidelines and recommendations in the terms established in the TBT/WTO Agreement, and in addition to the provisions therein, the Signatory Countries will apply the provisions established in this Annex.

ARTICLE 3.  The Signatory Countries will ensure that no measures relating to standardization and metrology are developed, adopted or applied that have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between them.

Each Signatory Country will adopt the necessary measures to guarantee compliance with the provisions of this Annex, both at the national and local levels, as well as the measures that are within its reach with respect to duly recognized non-governmental standardization organizations in its territory.

ARTICLE 4. Technical regulations shall not restrict trade more than is necessary to achieve a legitimate objective, taking into account the risks that failure to achieve them would create. Such legitimate objectives are among others: the imperatives of national security, the prevention of practices that may mislead; the protection of human health or safety, of animal or plant life or health, or of the environment. When evaluating these risks, the relevant elements to take into consideration are, among others: the available scientific and technical information, the related processing technology or the final uses to which the products are destined.

With regard to technical regulations, each Signatory Country will grant to the goods of the other Signatory Country, national treatment and treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar products originating from any other country.

The adopted technical regulations will not be maintained if the circumstances that gave rise to their adoption no longer exist, or if the determined objectives can be met in a less restrictive manner.

ARTICLE 5. In cases where there is no relevant international standard or where the technical content of a proposed technical regulation is not in accordance with the technical content of the relevant international standards, and provided that said technical regulation may have an effect in the trade of the Signatory Countries, each Signatory Country will notify the other Signatory Country in writing of the proposed measure, at least 30 days in advance of the adoption or modification of the measure, which do not have the nature of law, so as to allow to the interested parties during this period to present and formulate observations and queries, so that the notifying party can acquit them and take them into account.

This Article shall not apply when urgent circumstances arise, as established in Article 2.10 of the TBT/WTO Agreement.

When the notified Signatory Country considers that there are still reasons to classify that the adopted measure constitutes a technical obstacle to trade, it may, having the background information and exhausted the coordination between the competent authorities, refer the case to the pertinent instance so that it can be dealt with. according to the provisions of the Annex on Dispute Resolution.

ARTICLE 6.  The Signatory Countries will work to make their respective standardization and metrology measures compatible, to the greatest extent possible, without reducing the level of safety or protection of human, animal or plant life or health, the environment or consumers, without prejudice to the rights conferred by this Annex to any of the Signatory Countries and taking into account international standardization and metrology activities, in order to facilitate trade between the Signatory Countries.

As long as it is certain that the technical regulations adequately fulfill the legitimate objectives, each Signatory Country will accept as equivalent the technical regulations of the other Signatory Country, even when they differ from its own. In order to reach a mutually satisfactory understanding in this regard, the Signatory Countries may carry out prior consultations.

ARTICLE 7.  Recognizing the existence of differences in the accreditation procedures in their respective territories, the Signatory Countries will make them compatible to the greatest possible degree, in accordance with international standards on this matter and with the provisions of this Annex.

Each Signatory Country shall ensure that the accreditation procedures that are developed, adopted or applied do not discriminate against the conformity assessment entities of the other Signatory Country, nor have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade, in accordance with the provisions of Article 5.2 of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.

In these terms, the conformity assessment entities of a Signatory Country may, without the existence of a prior Mutual Recognition Agreement being necessary, apply for accreditation in the territory of the other Signatory Country, submitting for this purpose to the rules that govern this procedure.

In order to advance in trade facilitation, a Signatory Country will favorably consider, at the request of the other Signatory Country, to enter into negotiations aimed at concluding Mutual Recognition Agreements of the results of their respective conformity assessment procedures.

ARTICLE 8. Each Signatory Country will apply the pertinent provisions of the second paragraph of the preceding Article to its approval procedures, with the modifications that may be required.

ARTICLE 9.  The Signatory Countries agree to adopt, for trade purposes, the International System of Units.

ARTICLE 10.  Each Signatory Country will ensure that there is at least one Information Center in its territory capable of responding to all reasonable questions and requests from the other Signatory Country and interested persons, as well as providing the relevant documentation in relation to everything related to this Annex.

ARTICLE 11.  The Signatory Countries establish a Working Group on Measures Related to Standardization and Metrology made up of representatives designated by each of them.

Said working group will be in charge, among other matters, of monitoring and fulfilling the commitments regarding measures related to standardization and metrology agreed upon in this Economic Complementation Agreement. In the same way, actions will be carried out with the purpose of developing and strengthening the standardization, technical regulation, conformity assessment and metrology systems of both Signatory Countries, as well as facilitating the process of mutual recognition agreements.

For the purposes of the provisions of this Annex, within 30 days after the entry into force of this Economic Complementation Agreement, the Signatory Countries will notify each other of the competent authorities designated as representatives before the Working Group on Measures Related to the Standardization and Metrology.

ARTICLE 12.  At the request of a Signatory Country, the other Signatory Country may provide it with information and technical assistance under mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen the measures related to standardization and metrology of that Signatory Country, as well as its activities, processes and systems on the matter. It may also provide that Signatory Country with information on its technical cooperation programs related to measures related to standardization and metrology in areas of particular interest.

Each Signatory Country shall encourage standardization bodies in its territory to cooperate with those of the other Signatory Country in its territory, as appropriate, in measurement activities related to standardization and metrology; for example, through memberships in international standards bodies.

ARTICLE 13. Definitions.

For the purposes of this Annex, the terms contained in Annex 1 of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade shall apply, in addition to the following:

Measures related to Standardization: A standard, a technical regulation or a conformity assessment procedure.

International Standard: Standard adopted by an international standardization body, and made available to the public.

International Standardization Bodies: Standardization Bodies open to the participation of relevant bodies of at least all Members of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) , The Codex Alimentarius Commission, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML), or any other body designated by the Signatory Countries.

Approval Procedures: The registration or any other obligatory administrative procedure for the granting of a permit in order for a product to be produced, marketed or authorized for defined purposes or in accordance with established conditions.

Make compatible: Bring to the same level the measures related to standardization and metrology different, but with the same scope, approved by different bodies of standardization and metrology, so that they are equivalent or have the effect of allowing the products to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose, in order to allow the commercialization of the products between the Signatory Countries.
Economic Complementation Agreement No 38 signed between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Peru

ANNEX 8

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT REGIME

 

Area of ​​application

ARTICLE 1.  Controversies that arise between the Signatory Countries in relation to the interpretation, application, or breach of the provisions contained in the Economic Complementation Agreement between Chile and Peru for the Creation of a Free Trade Zone, hereinafter "the Agreement ", or of any other nature, other than that provided for in Chapter VI of the Agreement, will be submitted to the Dispute Resolution procedure established in this Annex, which forms part of the Agreement.

Reciprocal consultations and direct negotiations

ARTICLE 2.   The Signatory Countries will try to resolve the controversies referred to in Article 1 through reciprocal consultations and direct negotiations in order to reach a mutually satisfactory solution.

ARTICLE 3.  The affected Signatory Country will complain to the competent national body referred to in Article 33 of the Agreement, which will immediately initiate consultations on the case with the competent national body of the other Signatory Country.

ARTICLE 4.  The Signatory Countries will provide the information that allows the analysis of the matter, treating this information confidentially, and they will carry out negotiations among themselves to reach a solution. These negotiations may not continue for more than twenty (20) days from the date of receipt of the formal request to initiate consultations.

Intervention of the Administrative Commission

ARTICLE 5.  If within the period indicated in Article 4 a mutually satisfactory solution is not reached or if the dispute is only partially resolved, any of the Signatory Countries, through their respective competent national body, may request in writing that meet the Administrative Commission to discuss the matter.

ARTICLE 6.  The Signatory Country that requests to convene the Administrative Commission will state in its petition the reasons and will indicate the provisions of the Agreement that it considers applicable. The Administrative Commission will evaluate the situation, giving the Signatory Countries the opportunity to present their positions and requesting, if it considers it necessary, technical information on the case.

The Administrative Commission must meet within fifteen (15) days following the date of receipt of the call request, and the procedure may not exceed a period of fifteen (15) calendar days, counted from the date on which The Administrative Commission met, except by agreement between the Signatory Countries.

Arbitration Procedure

ARTICLE 7.  When the controversy could not have been resolved through the intervention of the Administrative Commission or when the Administrative Commission does not meet within the term indicated in Article 6, any of the Signatory Countries may decide to submit it to this arbitration procedure. For this, the Signatory Country that decides to resort to arbitration must notify the other Signatory Country and the Administrative Commission in writing, for the constitution of an ad-hoc arbitral tribunal.

ARTICLE 8.  The Signatory Countries declare that they recognize as mandatory, ipso facto and without the need for a special agreement, the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal established in each case to hear and resolve the disputes referred to in Article 1 of this Annex.

ARTICLE 9.  The arbitration procedure will be conducted before an ad hoc Tribunal, made up of three (3) arbitrators from the list referred to in Article 10.

The Arbitral Tribunal will be formed as follows:

Within ten (10) days after the communication of the decision of one of the Signatory Countries to resort to arbitration, each of the Signatory Countries shall appoint an arbitrator. The third party, who may not be a national of any of the Signatory Countries, will be designated by mutual agreement by the Signatory Countries within ten (10) days from the date on which the last of the two aforementioned arbitrators was appointed. . The third arbitrator will preside over the Arbitral Tribunal.

If one of the Signatory Countries has not appointed its arbitrator within the ten (10) day period established in subparagraph a) or if there is no agreement between the Signatory Countries to appoint the third arbitrator, these appointments will be made by the Commission, by draw, from the list mentioned in the second paragraph of article 10.

Each Signatory Country will also appoint a substitute arbitrator to replace the regular arbitrator in case of incapacity or excuse of the latter to form the Arbitral Tribunal, either at the time of its integration or during the course of the procedure.

By mutual agreement, the Signatory Countries may designate an arbitrator who is not on the list referred to in article 10.

The remuneration of the arbitrators will be set by the Commission. Said remuneration, travel expenses and travel expenses of each arbitrator will be borne by the Signatory Country that appointed them. The remuneration of the President and the other expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal will be covered in equal amounts by the Signatory Countries.

ARTICLE 10.  The Commission will prepare and keep updated the list of arbitrators. To this end, each Signatory Country will designate up to seven (7) arbitrators to integrate the list, who may be nationals or from third countries. The arbitrators must be persons of recognized competence in matters that may be the subject of controversy and may not be government officials of the Signatory Countries.

Likewise, each Signatory Country will designate up to eight (8) arbitrators from third countries, for the purposes of the draw provided for in paragraph b) of article 9.

ARTICLE 11. The Arbitral Tribunal will consider the controversy raised taking into account the provisions of the Agreement, the additional instruments signed within its framework, the information provided by the Signatory Countries, and the rules and principles of the International Agreements that were applicable in the species, including those of the Montevideo Treaty of 1980, as well as the general principles of International Law.

ARTICLE 12. The Arbitral Tribunal will adopt its own rules of procedure within five (5) days from its constitution, which will guarantee the Signatory Countries the opportunity to be heard and will ensure that the procedure is carried out expeditiously, especially taking into account account the perishable quality of the disputed merchandise.

ARTICLE 13.  The Signatory Countries will inform the Arbitral Tribunal about the instances fulfilled prior to the arbitration procedure and will present the factual and legal grounds of their respective positions.

The Signatory Countries will designate their representatives before the Arbitral Tribunal and may designate legal advisors to defend their rights.

The Arbitral Tribunal will have a period of thirty (30) days from its constitution to issue its award, extendable only once for another thirty (30) days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Signatory Countries may agree to longer terms.

ARTICLE 14.  The Arbitral Tribunal may, at the request of one of the Signatory Countries, recommend provisional precautionary measures to avoid serious and irreparable damage. The Signatory Countries must take these recommendations into account.

ARTICLE 15. The award of the Arbitral Tribunal will be adopted by majority, it will be substantiated and signed by the members of the Tribunal. They may not base dissenting votes and must maintain the confidentiality of the vote.

The awards of the Arbitral Tribunal will be final, but any of the Signatory Countries may file, within a non-extendable period of ten (10) business days from the date of the award, a request for clarification or request information on how to comply with the award. The Arbitral Tribunal will evacuate these clarifications or queries within a period of ten (10) business days from the date of filing the appeal or the request for information.

The awards will be binding for the Signatory Countries from their notification or from the date on which the appeal for clarification has concluded, if it has been filed. The awards will have the force of res judicata with respect to the settled conflict.

When appropriate, the award will contain the specific measures that the defendant Signatory Country must comply with or that the aggrieved Signatory Country may apply, either due to non-compliance, misinterpretation, or due to any action or omission that undermines the rights derived from the execution. of the Agreement.

The specific measures indicated in the previous paragraph may refer to the adaptation of the regulations to the provisions of the Agreement, to the granting of new concessions that equivalently repair the damages caused, to a suspension of concessions equivalent to the damages caused, to a partial or total withdrawal of concessions, or any other measure framed in the application of the provisions of the Agreement.

ARTICLE 16.  If, after the term of thirty (30) business days from the date of notification of the award, a Signatory Country does not comply with the award of the Arbitral Tribunal, the other Signatory Country may adopt temporary compensatory measures, such as the suspension of concessions or other equivalents, in order to achieve compliance with the award, or invoke non-compliance as grounds for denouncement of the Agreement.

ARTICLE 17.  The disputes that arise in relation to the provisions of this Agreement, the Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization (hereinafter "WTO Agreement") and the agreements negotiated in accordance with it, may resolved in one or the other forum, at the choice of the complaining Signatory Country.

Once a dispute settlement procedure has been initiated under this Annex, or one under the WTO Agreement, the selected forum will be exclusive of the other.

For the purposes of this article, dispute settlement procedures shall be considered initiated in accordance with the WTO Agreement when a Signatory Country requests the integration of a panel in accordance with Article 6 of the Understanding Related to the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes that is part of the WTO Agreement.

General disposition

ARTICLE 18.  The terms referred to in this Annex are understood to be expressed in calendar or calendar days, except in those cases where the contrary is expressly established.

ARTICLE 19.  The communications and notifications mentioned in this Annex will be valid as long as they are sent and received by the competent national agencies.

ANNEX 9
ANNEX 10
 

I. Complementary Note to Article 10

A. In the case of Chile, the charges established in:

Article 190 of Law 16464; either
Article 62 of Supreme Decree No. 172 of the Aviation Undersecretary. Official Gazette April 10, 1974, Regulation of Aeronautical Fees and Taxes.

