1
AGREEMENT BETWEEN JAPAN AND THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE
FOR A STRATEGIC ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP
Preamble
 Japan and the Republic of Chile (hereinafter referred
to as “Chile”),
 Conscious of their longstanding friendship and strong
economic and political ties that have developed through
many years of fruitful and mutually beneficial cooperation
between the Parties;
 Recognizing that creating a clearly established and
secured trade and investment framework through mutually
advantageous rules to govern trade and investment between
the Parties would enhance the competitiveness of their
economies, make their markets more efficient, and ensure
predictable commercial environment for further expansion of
trade and investment between them;
 Recognizing that an adequate protection of
intellectual property and the effective enforcement of
competition laws will encourage trade and investment
between the Parties;
 Believing that a strategic economic partnership
between the Parties will bring economic and social
benefits, create new and better opportunities for
employment, improve the living standards of peoples, and
provide a catalyst for the liberalization of trade and
investment in the Asia-Pacific region and broader
cooperation at international fora;
 Convinced that economic development, social
development and environmental protection are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing pillars of sustainable development
and that the strategic economic partnership can play an
important role in promoting sustainable development;
 Recognizing the rights of the Parties to regulate in
order to meet national policy objectives; and
 Determined to establish a legal framework for
promoting and developing the strategic economic partnership
on the basis of the rights and obligations of the Parties
under the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, done at Marrakesh, April 15, 1994 and other
international agreements to which both Parties are parties;
 HAVE AGREED as follows: 
2
Chapter 1
General Provisions
Article 1
Establishment of a Free-Trade Area
 The Parties hereby establish a free-trade area.
Article 2
Objectives
The objectives of this Agreement are to:
 (a) liberalize trade in goods between the Parties, in
conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994;
 (b) liberalize trade in services between the Parties,
in conformity with Article V of the GATS;
 (c) increase investment opportunities and strengthen
protection for investments and investment
activities in the Parties;
 (d) enhance opportunities for suppliers of the
Parties to participate in government procurement
in the Parties;
 (e) provide an adequate protection of intellectual
property and promote cooperation in the field
thereof;
 (f) promote cooperation and coordination for the
effective enforcement of competition laws and
regulations in each Party;
 (g) improve business environment in the Parties; and
 (h) create effective procedures to prevent and
resolve disputes.
Article 3
Relation to Other Agreements
 The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations
under the WTO Agreement or any other agreements to which
both Parties are parties. 
3
Article 4
Publication
1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations and
administrative rulings of general application with respect
to any matter covered by this Agreement are promptly
published or otherwise made publicly available in such a
manner as to enable interested persons and the other Party
to become acquainted with them.
2. Each Party shall, upon the request by the other Party,
within a reasonable period of time, respond to specific
questions from, and provide information to, the other Party
with respect to matters referred to in paragraph 1, through
contact points referred to in Article 10.
Article 5
Notification
 Where a Party considers that any measure that it
proposes to take might materially affect the implementation
and operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially
affect the other Party’s interests under this Agreement,
the former Party shall notify the other Party, to the
extent practicable, of such measure, through contact points
referred to in Article 10.
Article 6
Public Comment
 To the extent practicable, each Party shall, in
accordance with its laws and regulations:
 (a) make public in advance administrative regulations
of general application that it proposes to adopt
and that affect any matter covered by this
Agreement; and
 (b) provide a reasonable opportunity for comments by
the public before adoption of such regulations.
Article 7
Administrative Procedures
 Where administrative decisions which pertain to or
affect the implementation and operation of this Agreement
are taken by the competent authorities of a Party, the
competent authorities shall, in accordance with the laws
and regulations of the Party: 
4
 (a) inform the applicant of the decision within a
reasonable period of time after the submission of
the application considered complete under the
laws and regulations of the Party;
 (b) provide, within a reasonable period of time,
information concerning the status of the
application, at the request of the applicant; and
 (c) afford the applicant a reasonable opportunity to
present facts and arguments in support of its
positions prior to any final administrative
decisions, when time, the nature of the
proceeding, and the public interest permit.
Article 8
Review and Appeal
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain judicial or
administrative tribunals or procedures for the purpose of
the prompt review and, where warranted, correction of
administrative actions regarding matters covered by this
Agreement. Such tribunals or procedures shall be impartial
and independent of the office or authority entrusted with
administrative enforcement of such actions and shall not
have any substantial interest in the outcome of the matter.
2. Each Party shall ensure that, in any such tribunals or
procedures, the parties to the proceedings are provided
with the right to:
 (a) a reasonable opportunity to support or defend
their respective positions; and
 (b) a decision based on the evidence and submissions
of record.
3. Each Party shall ensure, subject to appeal or further
review as provided in its laws and regulations, that such
decision is implemented by the offices or authorities with
respect to the administrative action at issue.
Article 9
Confidential Information
1. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, maintain the confidentiality of information
provided in confidence by the other Party pursuant to this
Agreement. 
5
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall require a Party to
provide confidential information, the disclosure of which
would impede the enforcement of its laws and regulations,
or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or which
would prejudice legitimate commercial interests of
particular enterprises, public or private.
Article 10
Contact Points
 Each Party shall designate a contact point to
facilitate communications between the Parties on any matter
covered by this Agreement.
Chapter 2
General Definitions
Article 11
General Definitions
 For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise
specified:
 (a) the term “Agreement on Customs Valuation” means
the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994
in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
 (b) the term “Area” means:
 (i) with respect to Japan, the territory of
Japan, and all the area beyond its
territorial sea, including the sea-bed and
subsoil thereof, over which Japan exercises
sovereign rights or jurisdiction in
accordance with international law and the
laws and regulations of Japan; and
 (ii) with respect to Chile, the land, maritime
and air space under its sovereignty, and the
exclusive economic zone and the continental
shelf within which it exercises sovereign
rights and jurisdiction in accordance with
international law and its domestic law;
 Note: Nothing in subparagraph (b) shall affect
the rights and obligations of the Parties
under international law, including those
under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. 
6
 (c) the term “Commission” means the Commission
established under Article 189;
 (d) the term “customs authority” means the authority
that, according to the legislation of each Party
or non-Parties, is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of customs laws
and regulations:
 (i) with respect to Japan, the Ministry of
Finance; and
 (ii) with respect to Chile, the National Customs
Service (Servicio Nacional de Aduanas);
 (e) the term “days” means calendar days, including
weekends and holidays;
(f) the term “enterprise” means any corporation,
company, association, partnership, trust, joint
venture, sole-proprietorship or other entity
constituted or organized under applicable law,
whether for profit or otherwise, and whether
privately-owned or controlled or governmentallyowned or controlled;
 (g) the term “enterprise of a Party” means an
enterprise constituted or organized under the law
of a Party;
 (h) the term “existing” means in effect on the date
of entry into force of this Agreement;
 (i) the term “GATS” means the General Agreement on
Trade in Services in Annex 1B to the WTO
Agreement;
 (j) the term “GATT 1994” means the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement,
references to articles in the GATT 1994 include
the interpretative notes;
 (k) the term “Harmonized System” or “HS” means the
Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding
System set out in the Annex to the International
Convention on the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding System, and adopted and
implemented by the Parties in their respective
laws; 
7
 (l) the term “measure” means any measure by a Party,
whether in the form of a law, regulation, rule,
procedure, practice, decision, administrative
action or any other form;
 (m) the term “natural person of a Party” means a
natural person who, under the laws and
regulations of a Party:
 (i) with respect to Japan, is a national of
Japan; and
 (ii) with respect to Chile, is a national of
Chile or a permanent resident in Chile;
 (n) the term “originating good” means a good which
qualifies as an originating good under the
provisions of Chapter 4;
 (o) the term “Parties” means Japan and Chile and the
term ”Party” means either Japan or Chile;
 (p) the term “person” means a natural person or an
enterprise;
(q) the term “SPS Agreement” means the Agreement on
the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
 (r) the term “state enterprise” means an enterprise
owned or controlled by a Party;
 (s) the term “TRIPS Agreement” means the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement; and
 (t) the term “WTO Agreement” means the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, done at Marrakesh, April 15, 1994.
Chapter 3
Trade in Goods
Section 1
General Rules
Article 12
Classification of Goods
 The classification of goods in trade between the
Parties shall be in conformity with the Harmonized System. 
8
Article 13
National Treatment
 Each Party shall accord national treatment to the
goods of the other Party in accordance with Article III of
the GATT 1994, and to this end Article III of the GATT 1994
is incorporated into and made part of this Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.
Article 14
Elimination of Customs Duties
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement,
each Party shall eliminate or reduce its customs duties on
originating goods of the other Party designated for such
purposes in its Schedule in Annex 1, in accordance with the
terms and conditions set out in such Schedule.
2. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement,
neither Party shall increase any customs duty on
originating goods of the other Party from the rate to be
applied in accordance with its Schedule in Annex 1.
3. Upon the request of either Party, the Parties shall
negotiate on issues such as improving market access
conditions on originating goods designated for negotiation
in the Schedule in Annex 1, in accordance with the terms
and conditions set out in such Schedule.
Article 15
Customs Valuation
 For the purposes of determining the customs value of
goods traded between the Parties, provisions of Part I of
the Agreement on Customs Valuation shall apply mutatis
mutandis.
Article 16
Export Duties
 Neither Party shall introduce or maintain any duties,
or fees or other charges of any kind imposed on a good
exported from the Party into the other Party, unless such
duties, or fees or other charges are not in excess of those
imposed on the like good destined for domestic consumption.
Note: The term “fees or other charges of any kind” shall
not include any fees or other charges commensurate
with the cost of services rendered, which are
consistent with the WTO Agreement. 
9
Article 17
Agricultural Export Subsidies
 Taking full account of the objectives of eliminating
export subsidies on any agricultural good within the
framework of the World Trade Organization, neither Party
shall introduce or maintain any export subsidies on any
agricultural good which is listed in Annex 1 to the
Agreement on Agriculture.
Article 18
Import and Export Restrictions
 Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement,
each Party shall not introduce or maintain any prohibition
or restriction other than customs duties on the importation
of any good of the other Party or on the exportation or
sale for export of any good destined to the other Party,
which is inconsistent with its obligations under Article XI
of the GATT 1994 and its relevant provisions under the WTO
Agreement.
Article 19
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
1. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent
a Party from taking any measure for balance-of-payments
purposes. A Party taking such measure shall do so in
accordance with the conditions established under Article
XII of the GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Balanceof-Payments Provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade 1994 in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement.
2. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the use by a
Party of exchange controls or exchange restrictions in
accordance with the Articles of Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund. 
10
Section 2
Bilateral Safeguard Measures
Article 20
Bilateral Safeguard Measures
1. Subject to the provisions of this Section, a Party may
take a bilateral safeguard measure, to the minimum extent
necessary to prevent or remedy the serious injury to a
domestic industry of that Party and to facilitate
adjustment, if an originating good of the other Party, as a
result of the elimination or reduction of a customs duty in
accordance with Article 14, is being imported into the
former Party in such increased quantities, in absolute
terms, and under such conditions that the imports of that
originating good constitute a substantial cause of serious
injury, or threat thereof.
2. A Party may, as a bilateral safeguard measure:
 (a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of
customs duty on the originating good provided for
in Section 1; or
 (b) increase the rate of customs duty on the
originating good to a level not to exceed the
lesser of:
 (i) the most-favored-nation applied rate of
customs duty in effect when the bilateral
safeguard measure is taken; and
 (ii) the most-favored-nation applied rate of
customs duty in effect on the day
immediately preceding the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.
Article 21
Investigation Procedures
1. A Party may take a bilateral safeguard measure only
after an investigation has been carried out by the
competent authorities of that Party in accordance with the
same procedures as those provided for in Article 3 and
subparagraph 2(c) of Article 4 of the Agreement on
Safeguards.
2. The investigation referred to in paragraph 1 shall in
all cases be completed within one year following its date
of initiation. 
11
3. In the investigation referred to in paragraph 1 to
determine whether increased imports of an originating good
have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury to a
domestic industry under the terms of this Section, the
competent authorities of the Party who carry out the
investigation shall evaluate all relevant factors of an
objective and quantifiable nature having a bearing on the
situation of that domestic industry, in particular, the
rate and amount of the increase in imports of the
originating good in absolute terms, the share of the
domestic market taken by the increased imports of the
originating good, and the changes in the level of sales,
production, productivity, capacity utilization, profits and
losses, and employment.
4. The determination that increased imports of an
originating good have caused or are threatening to cause
serious injury to a domestic industry shall not be made
unless the investigation referred to in paragraph 1
demonstrates, on the basis of objective evidence, the
existence of the causal link between increased imports of
the originating good and serious injury or threat thereof.
When factors other than the increased imports of the
originating good are causing injury to the domestic
industry at the same time, such injury shall not be
attributed to the increased imports of the originating
good.
Article 22
Conditions and Limitations
 The following conditions and limitations shall apply
with regard to a bilateral safeguard measure:
 (a) no bilateral safeguard measure shall be
maintained except to the extent and for such time
as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious
injury and to facilitate adjustment, provided
that such time shall not exceed a period of three
years. However, in very exceptional
circumstances, a bilateral safeguard measure may
be extended, provided that the total period of
the bilateral safeguard measure, including such
extensions, shall not exceed four years;
 (b) in order to facilitate adjustment in a situation
where the expected duration of a bilateral
safeguard measure is over one year, the Party
maintaining the bilateral safeguard measure shall
progressively liberalize the bilateral safeguard
measure at regular intervals during the period of
application; 
12
 (c) no bilateral safeguard measure shall be applied
again to the import of a particular originating
good which has been subject to such a bilateral
safeguard measure, for a period of time equal to
the duration of the previous bilateral safeguard
measure or one year, whichever is longer;
 (d) nothing in this Section shall prevent a Party
from applying safeguard measures to an
originating good of the other Party in accordance
with:
 (i) Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the
Agreement on Safeguards; or
 (ii) Article 5 of the Agreement on Agriculture;
 (e) no bilateral safeguard measure shall be applied
to the import of a particular originating good
which has been en route from a Party to the other
Party at the time when the other Party notifies
the former Party of the decision to apply such a
bilateral safeguard measure pursuant to
subparagraph 1(b) of Article 23; and
 (f) upon the termination of a bilateral safeguard
measure, the rate of customs duty shall be the
rate which would have been in effect if the
bilateral safeguard measure had never been
applied.
Article 23
Notification
1. A Party shall immediately deliver a written notice to
the other Party upon:
 (a) taking a decision to initiate an investigation
referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 21 relating
to serious injury or threat thereof, and the
reasons for it; and
 (b) taking a decision to apply, extend or liberalize
a bilateral safeguard measure.
2. The Party making the written notice referred to in
paragraph 1 shall provide the other Party with all
pertinent information, which shall include: 
13
 (a) in the written notice referred to in subparagraph
1(a), the reason for the initiation of the
investigation, a precise description of the
originating good subject to the investigation and
its subheading of the Harmonized System, the
period subject to the investigation and the date
of initiation of the investigation; and
 (b) in the written notice referred to in subparagraph
1(b), evidence of serious injury or threat
thereof caused by the increased imports of the
originating good, a precise description of the
originating good subject to the proposed
bilateral safeguard measure and its subheading of
the Harmonized System, a precise description of
the bilateral safeguard measure, and the proposed
date of its introduction and its expected
duration.
Article 24
Consultations and Compensation
1. A Party proposing to apply or extend a bilateral
safeguard measure shall provide adequate opportunity for
prior consultations with the other Party with a view to
reviewing the information arising from the investigation
referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 21, exchanging views
on the bilateral safeguard measure and reaching an
agreement on compensation set out in this Article.
2. A Party proposing to apply or extend a bilateral
safeguard measure shall provide to the other Party mutually
agreed adequate means of trade compensation in the form of
concessions of customs duties whose levels are
substantially equivalent to the value of the additional
customs duties expected to result from the bilateral
safeguard measure.
3. If the Parties are unable to agree on the compensation
within 30 days after the commencement of the consultation
pursuant to paragraph 1, the Party against whose
originating good the bilateral safeguard measure is taken
shall be free to suspend the application of concessions of
customs duties under this Agreement, which are
substantially equivalent to the bilateral safeguard
measure, after giving written notice of such suspension,
together with the information regarding concessions to be
suspended, to the other Party. The Party exercising the
right of suspension may suspend the application of
concessions of customs duties only for the minimum period
necessary to achieve the substantially equivalent effects
and only while the bilateral safeguard measure is
maintained. 
14
Article 25
Provisional Bilateral Safeguard Measures
1. In critical circumstances, where delay would cause
damage which it would be difficult to repair, a Party may
take a provisional bilateral safeguard measure, which shall
take the form of the measure set out in subparagraph 2(a)
or (b) of Article 20 pursuant to a preliminary
determination that there is clear evidence that increased
imports of an originating good of the other Party have
caused or are threatening to cause serious injury to a
domestic industry.
2. A Party shall deliver a written notice to the other
Party prior to applying a provisional bilateral safeguard
measure. Consultations between the Parties on the
application of the provisional bilateral safeguard measure
shall be initiated immediately after the provisional
bilateral safeguard measure is taken.
3. The duration of a provisional bilateral safeguard
measure shall not exceed 200 days. During that period, the
pertinent requirements of Article 21 shall be met. The
duration of the provisional bilateral safeguard measure
shall be counted as a part of the period referred to in
subparagraph (a) of Article 22.
4. Subparagraph (f) of Article 22 and paragraphs 1 and 2
of Article 26 shall be applied mutatis mutandis to a
provisional bilateral safeguard measure. The customs duty
imposed as a result of a provisional bilateral safeguard
measure shall be refunded if the subsequent investigation
referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 21 does not determine
that increased imports of an originating good of the other
Party have caused or threatened to cause serious injury to
a domestic industry.
Article 26
Miscellaneous
1. Each Party shall ensure the consistent, impartial and
reasonable administration of its laws and regulations
relating to bilateral safeguard measure.
2. Each Party shall adopt or maintain equitable, timely,
transparent and effective procedures relating to bilateral
safeguard measure.
3. The written notice referred to in paragraph 1 of
Article 23, paragraph 3 of Article 24 and paragraph 2 of
Article 25 and any other communication between the Parties
shall be done in the English language. 
15
4. The Parties shall review the provisions of this
Section, if necessary, after 10 years of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement.
Section 3
Other Provisions
Article 27
Committee on Trade in Goods
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter and Chapter 4, the Parties hereby
establish a Committee on Trade in Goods (hereinafter
referred to in this Article as “Committee”).
2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
 (a) reviewing and monitoring:
 (i) the implementation and operation of this
Chapter and Chapter 4;
 (ii) any amendments to Annexes 2 and 4, proposed
by either Party; and
 (iii) the Operational Procedures referred to in
Article 52;
 (b) discussing any issues related to this Chapter and
Chapter 4;
 (c) reporting the findings and the outcome of
discussions of the Committee to the Commission;
and
 (d) carrying out other functions as may be delegated
by the Commission in accordance with Article 190.
3. The Committee shall be composed of government
officials of the Parties.
4. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties.
5. A Working Group on Fish and Fishery Products shall be
established under the Committee. Details of the Working
Group shall be set forth in a separate agreement to be
concluded between the Governments of the Parties for the
implementation of this Agreement (hereinafter referred to
as “the Implementing Agreement”). 
16
 Note: In the case of Chile, the Implementing
Agreement shall be implemented as an Executive
Agreement (Acuerdo de Ejecución) in accordance
with the Political Constitution of the Republic
of Chile (Constitución Política de la República
de Chile).
Article 28
Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter:
 (a) the term “Agreement on Agriculture” means the
Agreement on Agriculture in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;
 (b) the term “Agreement on Safeguards” means the
Agreement on Safeguards in Annex 1A to the WTO
Agreement;
 (c) the term “bilateral safeguard measure” means a
bilateral safeguard measure provided for in
paragraph 2 of Article 20;
 (d) the term “customs duty” means any customs or
import duty and a charge of any kind, including
any form of surtax or surcharge, imposed in
connection with the importation of a good, but
does not include any:
 (i) charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed
consistently with the provisions of
paragraph 2 of Article III of the GATT 1994,
in respect of the like goods or, directly
competitive or substitutable goods of the
Party or in respect of goods from which the
imported goods have been manufactured or
produced in whole or in part;
 (ii) anti-dumping or countervailing duty applied
pursuant to a Party’s law and applied
consistently with the provisions of Article
VI of the GATT 1994, the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, and the
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures in Annex 1A to the WTO Agreement;
or
 (iii) fees or other charges commensurate with the
cost of services rendered; 
17
 (e) the term “customs value of goods” means the value
of goods for the purposes of levying ad valorem
customs duties on imported goods;
 (f) the term “domestic industry” means the producers
as a whole of the like or directly competitive
goods operating in a Party, or those whose
collective output of the like or directly
competitive goods constitutes a major proportion
of the total domestic production of those goods;
 (g) the term “export subsidies” means export
subsidies described in subparagraph (e) of
Article 1 of the Agreement on Agriculture;
 (h) the term “provisional bilateral safeguard
measure” means a provisional bilateral safeguard
measure provided for in paragraph 1 of Article
25;
 (i) the term “serious injury” means a significant
overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry; and
 (j) the term “threat of serious injury” means serious
injury that, on the basis of facts and not merely
on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility,
is clearly imminent.
Chapter 4
Rules of Origin
Section 1
Rules of Origin
Article 29
Originating Goods
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a
good shall qualify as an originating good of a Party where:
 (a) the good is wholly obtained or produced entirely
in the Party, as defined in paragraph 2;
 (b) the good is produced entirely in the Party
exclusively from originating materials of the
Party;
 (c) the good is produced entirely in the Party using
non-originating materials, provided that the good
satisfies the product specific rules set out in
Annex 2, as well as all other applicable
requirements of this Chapter; or 
18
 (d) except for a good provided for in Chapters 61
through 63 of the Harmonized System, the good is
produced entirely in the Party, but one or more
of the non-originating materials that are used in
the production of the good do not undergo an
applicable change in tariff classification
because:
 (i) the good is imported into the Party in an
unassembled or disassembled form but is
classified as an assembled good pursuant to
Rule 2(a) of the General Rules for the
Interpretation of the Harmonized System; or
 (ii) the heading for the good provides for and
specifically describes both the good itself
and its parts and is not further subdivided
into subheadings, or the subheading for the
good provides for and specifically describes
both the good itself and its parts,
provided that the qualifying value content of the good,
determined in accordance with Article 30, is not less than
45 percent when the method referred to in subparagraph 1(a)
of Article 30 is used or 30 percent when the method
referred to in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 30 is used,
unless otherwise provided for in Annex 2, and that the good
satisfies all other applicable requirements of this
Chapter.
2. For the purposes of subparagraph 1(a), the following
goods shall be considered as being wholly obtained or
produced entirely in a Party:
 (a) mineral goods extracted in the Party;
 (b) vegetable goods harvested in the Party;
 (c) live animals born and raised in the Party;
 (d) goods obtained from hunting, trapping or fishing
in the Party;
 (e) goods obtained from live animals in the Party;
 (f) fish, shellfish and other marine species taken
from the sea beyond the territorial seas of the
Parties by vessels:
 (i) which are registered or recorded in the
Party; 
19
 (ii) which sail under the flag of the Party;
 (iii) which are owned to an extent of at least 50
percent by nationals of the Party, or by an
enterprise with its head office in the
Party, of which the representatives,
chairman of the board of directors, and the
majority of the members of such board are
nationals of the Party, and of which at
least 50 percent of the equity interest is
owned by nationals or enterprises of the
Party;
 (iv) of which the master and officers are all
nationals of the Party; and
 (v) of which at least 75 percent of the crew are
nationals of the Party;
 Note 1: Without prejudice to the rights and
obligations of the Parties under
international law, including those under
the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, subparagraph (f) shall not
apply to fish, shellfish and other
marine species taken from the exclusive
economic zone of the other Party by the
vessels referred to in that
subparagraph.
 Note 2: The requirements of subparagraphs
(f)(iii) through (v) shall not apply to
vessels registered or recorded in Chile
prior to June 30, 1991, provided for in
Transitional Article 10 of the
consolidated text of the Law 18.892,
General Law on Fisheries and Aquiculture
(Artículo 10 Transitorio del texto
refundido, coordinado y sistematizado de
la Ley 18.892, Ley General de Pesca y
Acuicultura), and their successor
vessels registered or recorded in
accordance with that Law and other
relevant provisions of Chilean law.
 (g) goods produced from the goods referred to in
subparagraph (f) on board factory ships:
 (i) which are registered or recorded in the
Party; 
20
 (ii) which sail under the flag of the Party;
 (iii) which are owned to an extent of at least 50
percent by nationals of the Party, or by an
enterprise with its head office in the
Party, of which the representatives,
chairman of the board of directors, and the
majority of the members of such board are
nationals of the Party, and of which at
least 50 percent of the equity interest is
owned by nationals or enterprises of the
Party;
 (iv) of which the master and officers are all
nationals of the Party; and
 (v) of which at least 75 percent of the crew are
nationals of the Party;
 Note: The requirements of subparagraphs (g)(iii)
through (v) shall not apply to factory
ships registered or recorded in Chile
prior to June 30, 1991, provided for in
Transitional Article 10 of the
consolidated text of the Law 18.892,
General Law on Fisheries and Aquiculture
(Artículo 10 Transitorio del texto
refundido, coordinado y sistematizado de
la Ley 18.892, Ley General de Pesca y
Acuicultura), and their successor vessels
registered or recorded in accordance with
that Law and other relevant provisions of
Chilean law.
(h) goods taken by the Party or a natural person or
enterprise of the Party from the seabed or
subsoil beneath the seabed outside the
territorial sea of the Party, provided that the
Party has rights to exploit such seabed or
subsoil;
 (i) waste and scrap derived from:
 (i) production in the Party; or
 (ii) used goods collected in the Party, provided
that such goods are fit only for the
recovery of raw materials; and 
21
 (j) goods produced in the Party exclusively from the
goods referred to in subparagraphs (a) through
(i), or from their derivatives, at any stage of
production.
3. For the purposes of subparagraph 1(c), the product
specific rules set out in Annex 2 requiring that the
materials used undergo a change in tariff classification or
a specific manufacturing or processing operation shall
apply only to non-originating materials.
Article 30
Qualifying Value Content
1. For the purposes of subparagraph 1(c) of Article 29,
the qualifying value content of a good shall be calculated
on the basis of one or the other of the following methods:
 (a) Method based on value of non-originating
materials (“Build-down method”)
TV - VNM
QVC = ---------- x 100
TV
 (b) Method based on value of originating materials
(“Build-up method”)
VOM
QVC = ------ x 100
TV
 Where:
 QVC is the qualifying value content of the good,
expressed as a percentage;
 TV is the transaction value of the good adjusted
to F.O.B. basis, except as provided for in
paragraph 2;
 VNM is the value of non-originating materials
used by the producer in the production of the
good determined pursuant to Article 31; and
 VOM is the value of originating materials used by
the producer in the production of the good
determined pursuant to Article 31. 
22
2. In the event that there is no transaction value or the
transaction value of the good is unacceptable under Article
1 of the Agreement on Customs Valuation, the value of the
good shall be determined in accordance with Articles 2
through 7 of the Agreement on Customs Valuation.
Article 31
Value of Materials
1. The value of a material:
 (a) shall be the transaction value of the material;
or
 (b) in the event that there is no transaction value
or the transaction value of the material is
unacceptable under Article 1 of the Agreement on
Customs Valuation, shall be determined in
accordance with Articles 2 through 7 of the
Agreement on Customs Valuation.
2. The value of a material referred to in paragraph 1:
 (a) shall include freight, insurance, packing and all
other costs incurred in transporting the material
to the importation port in the Party where the
producer of the good is located; and
 (b) may include the cost of waste and spoilage
resulting from the use of the material in the
production of the good, less the value of
reusable scrap or by-product.
3. The value of a non-originating material shall not
include, where the producer acquires the material in the
Party where the producer is located, freight, insurance,
packing and all other costs incurred in transporting the
material from the warehouse of the supplier of the material
to the place where the producer is located; as well as any
other known and ascertainable cost incurred in the Party.
Article 32
De Minimis
 Non-originating materials used in the production of a
good that do not undergo an applicable change in tariff
classification shall be disregarded in determining whether
the good qualifies as an originating good of a Party,
provided that the totality of such materials does not
exceed specific percentages in value, weight or volume of
the good as set out in Annex 2. 
23
Article 33
Accumulation
 For the purposes of determining whether a good
qualifies as an originating good of a Party, an originating
good of the other Party which is used as a material in the
production of the good in the former Party may be
considered as an originating material of the former Party.
Article 34
Fungible Goods and Materials
1. For the purposes of determining whether a good
qualifies as an originating good of a Party, where fungible
materials consisting of originating materials of the Party
and non-originating materials that are commingled in an
inventory are used in the production of the good, the
origin of the materials may be determined pursuant to an
inventory management method recognized in the Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles in the Party.
2. Where fungible goods consisting of originating goods
of a Party and non-originating goods are commingled in an
inventory and, prior to exportation do not undergo any
production process or any operation in the Party where they
were commingled other than unloading, reloading and any
other operation to preserve them in good condition, the
origin of the good may be determined pursuant to an
inventory management method recognized in the Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles in the Party.
Article 35
Sets, Kits or Composite Goods
1. Sets, kits and composite goods classified pursuant to
Rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the
Harmonized System shall qualify as originating goods of the
exporting Party, where every good contained in the sets,
kits or composite goods satisfies the applicable rule of
origin for each of them under this Chapter.
2. Paragraph 1 shall prevail over the product specific
rules set out in Annex 2.
Article 36
Indirect Materials
 Indirect materials shall be, without regard to where
they are produced, considered to be originating materials
of the Party where the good is produced. 
24
Article 37
Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools
 Accessories, spare parts or tools delivered with a
good that form part of the good’s standard accessories,
spare parts or tools, shall be disregarded in determining
whether the good qualifies as an originating good of a
Party, provided that:
 (a) the accessories, spare parts or tools are not
invoiced separately from the good, without regard
of whether they are separately described in the
invoice; and
 (b) the quantities and value of the accessories,
spare parts or tools are customary for the good.
Article 38
Packaging Materials and Containers for Retail Sale
 Packaging materials and containers in which a good is
packaged for retail sale shall, if classified with the good
pursuant to Rule 5 of the General Rules for the
Interpretation of the Harmonized System, be disregarded in
determining whether the good qualifies as an originating
good of a Party.
Article 39
Packing Materials and Containers for Shipment
 Packing materials and containers for shipment shall be
disregarded in determining whether the good qualifies as an
originating good of a Party.
Article 40
Non-Qualifying Operations
1. A good shall not be considered to be an originating
good of the exporting Party merely by reason of:
 (a) operations to ensure the preservation of products
in good condition during transport and storage;
 (b) changes of packaging and breaking up and assembly
of packages;
 (c) disassembly;
 (d) placing in bottles, cases, boxes and other simple
packaging operations; 
25
 (e) collection of parts and components classified as
a good pursuant to Rule 2(a) of the General Rules
for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System;
 (f) mere making-up of sets of articles; or
 (g) any combination of operations referred to in
subparagraphs (a) through (f).
2. Paragraph 1 shall prevail over the product specific
rules set out in Annex 2.
Article 41
Consignment Criteria
1. An originating good of a Party shall be deemed to meet
the consignment criteria when it is:
 (a) transported directly from the Party to the other
Party; or
 (b) transported through one or more non-Parties for
the purpose of transit or temporary storage in
warehouses in such non-Parties, provided that it
does not undergo operations other than unloading,
reloading and any other operation to preserve it
in good condition.
2. If an originating good of a Party does not meet the
consignment criteria referred to in paragraph 1, that good
shall not be considered as an originating good of the
Party.
Article 42
Exhibitions
 Notwithstanding Article 41, an originating good of a
Party imported into the other Party after an exhibition in
a non-Party shall continue to qualify as an originating
good of the former Party when it:
 (a) remained under the control of the customs
authority of the non-Party while it was in the
non-Party; and
 (b) was transported:
 (i) directly to and from the non-Party; or 
26
 (ii) through other non-Parties for the purpose of
transit or temporary storage in warehouses
in such other non-Parties, provided that it
did not undergo operations other than
unloading, reloading and any other operation
to preserve it in good condition.
Section 2
Certificate of Origin and Related Procedures
Article 43
Claim for Preferential Tariff Treatment
1. The customs authority of the importing Party shall
require a certificate of origin for an originating good of
the exporting Party from importers who claim the
preferential tariff treatment for the good.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the customs authority of
the importing Party shall not require a certificate of
origin from importers for:
 (a) an importation of originating goods of the
exporting Party whose total customs value does
not exceed 1000 United States of America dollars
or its equivalent amount in the Party’s currency,
or such higher amount as it may establish; or
 (b) an importation of originating goods of the
exporting Party, for which the customs authority
of the importing Party has waived the requirement
for a certificate of origin,
provided that the importation does not form part of one or
more importations that may reasonably be considered to have
been undertaken or arranged for the purpose of avoiding the
certification requirements of this Article and Article 46.
3. In the case where an originating good of the exporting
Party is imported after an exhibition in a non-Party, the
customs authority of the importing Party may require
importers, who claim the preferential tariff treatment for
the good, to submit:
 (a) a certificate or any other information given by
the customs authority of that non-Party or other
relevant entities, which evidences that the good
meets the requirements of subparagraph (a) of
Article 42; and
 (b) (i) a copy of through bill of lading; or 
27
 (ii) if the good was transported through other
non-Parties, a certificate or any other
information given by the customs authorities
of such other non-Parties or other relevant
entities, which evidences that the good has
not undergone operations other than
unloading, reloading and any other operation
to preserve it in good condition in those
other non-Parties.
4. Where an originating good of the exporting Party is
imported through one or more non-Parties except for the
case referred to in paragraph 3, the customs authority of
the importing Party may require importers, who claim the
preferential tariff treatment for the good, to submit:
 (a) a copy of through bill of lading; or
 (b) a certificate or any other information given by
the customs authorities of such non-Parties or
other relevant entities, which evidences that the
good has not undergone operations other than
unloading, reloading and any other operation to
preserve it in good condition in those nonParties.
Article 44
Certificate of Origin
1. A certificate of origin shall be issued by the
competent authority specified in Annex 3(hereinafter
referred to in this Chapter as “competent authority”) of
the exporting Party on request having been made in writing
by the exporter.
2. For the purposes of this Article, the competent
authority of the exporting Party may designate public or
private entities or bodies to be responsible for the
issuance of certificate of origin in accordance with the
applicable laws and regulations of the exporting Party.
3. Where the competent authority of the exporting Party
designates public or private entities or bodies to carry
out the issuance of certificate of origin, the exporting
Party shall notify in writing the other Party of its
designees. 
28
4. For the purposes of this Chapter, upon the entry into
force of this Agreement, a format of certificate of origin
shall be established in the English language in the
Operational Procedures referred to in Article 52. A
certificate of origin shall include minimum data specified
in Annex 4.
5. A certificate of origin shall be completed in the
English language.
6. An issued certificate of origin shall be applicable to
an importation of originating goods of the exporting Party
into the importing Party and be valid for one year from the
date of issuance.
7. Where the exporter of a good is not the producer of
the good in the exporting Party, the exporter may request a
certificate of origin on the basis of:
 (a) a declaration provided by the exporter to the
competent authority of the exporting Party or its
designees based on the information provided by
the producer of the good to that exporter; or
 (b) a declaration voluntarily provided by the
producer of the good directly to the competent
authority of the exporting Party or its designees
by the request of the exporter.
8. A certificate of origin shall be issued only after the
exporter who requests the certificate of origin, or the
producer of a good in the exporting Party referred to in
subparagraph 7(b), proves to the competent authority of the
exporting Party or its designees that the good to be
exported qualifies as an originating good of the exporting
Party. The competent authority of the exporting Party or
its designees may, in accordance with the applicable laws
and regulations of the exporting Party, require such
exporter or producer to provide information relating to the
origin of the good.
9. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall
provide the importing Party with impressions of stamps used
by the competent authority of the exporting Party or its
designees.
10. Each Party shall ensure that the competent authority
of the exporting Party or its designees shall keep a record
of issued certificates of origin for a period of five years
after the date on which the certificate of origin was
issued. Such record will include all antecedents, which
were presented to prove the qualification as an originating
good of the exporting Party. 
29
Article 45
Obligations regarding Exportations
 Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, ensure that the exporter to whom a certificate
of origin has been issued, or the producer of a good in the
exporting Party referred to in subparagraph 7(b) of Article
44:
 (a) shall notify in writing the competent authority
of the exporting Party or its designees without
delay when such exporter or producer knows that
such good does not qualify as an originating good
of the exporting Party; and
 (b) shall keep the records relating to the origin of
the good for five years after the date on which
the certificate of origin was issued.
Article 46
Obligations regarding Importations
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the
customs authority of the importing Party shall require an
importer who claims preferential tariff treatment for a
good imported from the other Party to:
 (a) make a written declaration, based on a valid
certificate of origin, that the good qualifies as
an originating good of the exporting Party;
 (b) have the certificate of origin in its possession
at the time the declaration is made;
 (c) provide the certificate of origin on the request
of the customs authority of the importing Party;
and
 (d) promptly make a corrected declaration and pay any
duties owing where the importer has reason to
believe that the certificate of origin on which a
declaration was based contains information that
is not correct. 
30
2. Each Party shall ensure that, in the case in which the
importer at the time of importation does not have a
certificate of origin in its possession, the importer may,
in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
importing Party, provide the customs authority of the
importing Party with the certificate of origin issued in
accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 44 and, if required,
such other documentation relating to the importation of the
good, within a period not exceeding one year after the time
of importation.
 Note: In the case of importation into Chile, any
excess customs duties shall be refunded to the
importer referred to in paragraph 2.
Article 47
Request for Checking of Certificate of Origin
1. For the purposes of determining whether a good
imported from the exporting Party under preferential tariff
treatment qualifies as an originating good of the exporting
Party, the customs authority of the importing Party may
request information relating to the origin of the good from
the competent authority of the exporting Party on the basis
of a certificate of origin, where it has reasonable doubt
as to the authenticity of the certificate of origin or the
accuracy of the information included in the certificate of
origin.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the competent
authority of the exporting Party shall, in accordance with
the laws and regulations of the exporting Party, provide
the information requested within a period of three months
from the date of receipt of the request. If the customs
authority of the importing Party considers necessary, it
may require additional information relating to the origin
of the good. If additional information is requested by the
customs authority of the importing Party, the competent
authority of the exporting Party shall, in accordance with
the laws and regulations of the exporting Party, provide
the information requested within a period of two months
from the date of receipt of the request.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the competent
authority of the exporting Party may request the exporter
to whom the certificate of origin has been issued, or the
producer of the good in the exporting Party referred to in
subparagraph 7(b) of Article 44, to provide the former with
the information requested. 
31
4. The request of information in accordance with
paragraph 1 shall not preclude the use of the verification
method provided for in Article 48.
Article 48
Verification Visit
1. The customs authority of the importing Party may
request the competent authority of the exporting Party to:
 (a) collect and provide information relating to the
origin of a good and check, for that purpose, the
facilities used in the production of the good,
through a visit by the competent authority of the
exporting Party along with the customs authority
of the importing Party to the premises of the
exporter to whom the certificate of origin has
been issued, or the producer of the good in the
exporting Party referred to in subparagraph 7(b)
of Article 44; and
 (b) provide information relating to the origin of the
good in the possession of the competent authority
of the exporting Party or its designees during
the visit pursuant to subparagraph (a).
2. When requesting the competent authority of the
exporting Party to conduct a visit pursuant to paragraph 1,
the customs authority of the importing Party shall deliver
a written communication with such request to the competent
authority of the exporting Party at least 40 days in
advance of the proposed date of the visit, the receipt of
which is to be confirmed by the competent authority of the
exporting Party. The competent authority of the exporting
Party shall request the written consent of the exporter, or
the producer of the good in the exporting Party whose
premises are to be visited.
3. The communication referred to in paragraph 2 shall
include:
 (a) the identity of the customs authority issuing the
communication;
 (b) the name of the exporter, or the producer of the
good in the exporting Party whose premises are
requested to be visited;
 (c) the proposed date and place of the visit; 
32
 (d) the objective and scope of the proposed visit,
including specific reference to the good subject
of the verification referred to in the
certificate of origin; and
 (e) the names and titles of the officials of the
customs authority of the importing Party to be
present during the visit.
4. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall
respond in writing to the customs authority of the
importing Party, within 30 days of the receipt of the
communication referred to in paragraph 2, if it accepts or
refuses to conduct the visit requested pursuant to
paragraph 1.
5. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall,
in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
exporting Party, provide within 45 days or any other
mutually agreed period from the last day of the visit, to
the customs authority of the importing Party the
information obtained pursuant to paragraph 1.
Article 49
Determination of Origin
and Preferential Tariff Treatment
1. The customs authority of the importing Party may deny
preferential tariff treatment to a good for which an
importer claims preferential tariff treatment where the
good does not qualify as an originating good of the
exporting Party or where the importer fails to comply with
any of the relevant requirements of this Chapter.
2. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall,
when it cancels the decision to issue the certificate of
origin, promptly notify the cancellation to the exporter to
whom the certificate of origin has been issued, and to the
customs authority of the importing Party except where the
certificate of origin has been returned to the competent
authority of the exporting Party. The customs authority of
the importing Party may determine that the good does not
qualify as an originating good of the exporting Party and
may deny preferential tariff treatment when it receives the
notification.
3. The customs authority of the importing Party may
determine that a good does not qualify as an originating
good of the exporting Party and may deny preferential
tariff treatment, and a written determination thereof shall
be sent to the competent authority of the exporting Party: 
33
 (a) where the competent authority of the exporting
Party fails to respond to the request within the
period referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 47
or paragraph 5 of Article 48;
 (b) where the competent authority of the exporting
Party refuses to conduct a visit, or fails to
respond to the communication referred to in
paragraph 2 of Article 48 within the period
referred to in paragraph 4 of Article 48; or
 (c) where the information provided to the customs
authority of the importing Party pursuant to
Article 47 or 48, is not sufficient to prove that
the good qualifies as an originating good of the
exporting Party.
4. After carrying out the procedures outlined in Article
47 or 48 as the case may be, the customs authority of the
importing Party shall provide the competent authority of
the exporting Party with a written determination of whether
or not the good qualifies as an originating good of the
exporting Party, including findings of fact and the legal
basis for the determination, within 45 days from the date
of receipt of the information provided by the competent
authority of the exporting Party pursuant to Article 47 or
48. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall
inform such determination by the customs authority of the
importing Party to the exporter, or the producer of the
good in the exporting Party, whose premises were subject to
the visit referred to in Article 48.
Article 50
Penalties and Measures against False Declaration
1. Each Party shall establish or maintain, in accordance
with its laws and regulations, appropriate penalties or
other sanctions against its exporters to whom a certificate
of origin has been issued and the producers of a good in
the exporting Party referred to in subparagraph 7(b) of
Article 44, for providing false declaration or documents to
the competent authority of the exporting Party or its
designees prior to the issuance of certificate of origin. 
34
2. Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, take measures which it considers appropriate
against its exporters to whom a certificate of origin has
been issued and the producers of a good in the exporting
Party referred to in subparagraph 7(b) of Article 44, for
failing to notify in writing to the competent authority of
the exporting Party or its designees without delay after
having known, after the issuance of certificate of origin,
that such good does not qualify as an originating good of
the exporting Party.
Article 51
Transitional Provision for Goods in Transit or Storage
 An importer may not claim preferential tariff
treatment for a good which, on the date of entry into force
of this Agreement, is in transport from the exporting Party
to the importing Party or in temporary storage in
warehouses, except that:
 (a) the good otherwise satisfies all applicable
requirements of this Chapter; and
 (b) the importer provides, in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the importing Party, the
customs authority of the importing Party with the
certificate of origin issued retrospectively and,
if required, such other documentation relating to
the importation of the good, within a period not
exceeding four months after the entry into force
of this Agreement.
Section 3
Other Provisions
Article 52
Operational Procedures
 Upon the date of entry into force of this Agreement,
the Commission shall adopt the Operational Procedures that
provide detailed regulations pursuant to which the customs
authorities, the competent authorities and other relevant
authorities of the Parties shall implement their functions
under this Chapter and Chapter 3.
Article 53
Miscellaneous
1. Communications between the importing Party and the
exporting Party shall be conducted in the English language. 
35
2. For the application of the relevant product specific
rules set out in Annex 2 and the determination of origin,
the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the
exporting Party shall be applied.
Article 54
Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter:
 (a) the term “exporter” means a person located in an
exporting Party who exports goods from the
exporting Party;
 (b) the term “F.O.B.” means free on board, regardless
of the mode of transportation, at the point of
direct shipment by the seller to the buyer;
 (c) the term “fungible goods” or “fungible materials”
respectively means goods or materials that are
interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose
properties are essentially identical;
 (d) the term “Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles” means the recognized consensus or
substantial authoritative support within a Party
at a particular time as to which economic
resources and obligations should be recorded as
assets and liabilities, which changes in assets
and liabilities should be recorded, how the
assets and liabilities and changes in them should
be measured, what information should be disclosed
and how it should be disclosed, and which
financial statements should be prepared. These
standards may be broad guidelines of general
application as well as detailed practices and
procedures;
 (e) the term “importer” means a person who imports
goods into the importing Party;
 (f) the term “indirect materials” means goods used in
the production, testing or inspection of another
good but not physically incorporated into the
good, or goods used in the maintenance of
buildings or the operation of equipment
associated with the production of another good,
including:
 (i) fuel and energy;
 (ii) tools, dies and moulds; 
36
 (iii) spare parts and goods used in the
maintenance of equipment and buildings;
 (iv) lubricants, greases, compounding materials
and other goods used in production or used
to operate equipment and buildings;
 (v) gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety
equipment and supplies;
 (vi) equipment, devices and supplies used for
testing or inspection;
 (vii) catalysts and solvents; and
 (viii) any other goods that are not incorporated
into another good but whose use in the
production of the good can reasonably be
demonstrated to be a part of that
production;
 (g) the term “material” means a good that is used in
the production of another good;
 (h) the term “originating material of a Party” means
an originating good of a Party which is used in
the production of another good in the Party,
including that which is considered as an
originating material of the Party pursuant to
Article 33;
 (i) the term “packing materials and containers for
shipment” means goods that are used to protect a
good during its transportation, other than
packaging materials and containers for retail
sale referred to in Article 38;
 (j) the term “preferential tariff treatment” means
the rate of customs duties applicable to an
originating good of the exporting Party in
accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 14;
 (k) the term “producer” means a person who engages in
the production of goods or materials;
 (l) the term “production” means methods of obtaining
goods including manufacturing, assembling,
processing, raising, growing, breeding, mining,
extracting, harvesting, fishing, trapping,
gathering, collecting, hunting and capturing; 
37
 (m) the term “transaction value of a good” means the
price actually paid or payable for a good with
respect to a transaction of the producer of the
good, pursuant to the principles of Article 1 of
the Agreement on Customs Valuation, adjusted in
accordance with the principles of paragraphs 1, 3
and 4 of Article 8 of the Agreement on Customs
Valuation, regardless of whether the good is sold
for export. For the purposes of this definition,
the seller referred to in the Agreement on
Customs Valuation shall be the producer of the
good; and
 (n) the term “transaction value of a material” means
the price actually paid or payable for a material
with respect to a transaction of the producer of
the good, pursuant to the principles of Article 1
of the Agreement on Customs Valuation, adjusted
in accordance with the principles of paragraphs
1, 3 and 4 of Article 8 of the Agreement on
Customs Valuation, regardless of whether the
material is sold for export. For the purposes of
this definition, the seller referred to in the
Agreement on Customs Valuation shall be the
supplier of the material, and the buyer referred
to in the Agreement on Customs Valuation shall be
the producer of the good.
Chapter 5
Customs Procedures
Article 55
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to customs procedures
required for the clearance of goods traded between the
Parties.
2. This Chapter shall be implemented by the Parties in
accordance with the laws and regulations of each Party and
within the available resources of their respective customs
authorities.
Article 56
Transparency
1. Each Party shall ensure that all relevant information
of general application pertaining to its customs laws and
administrative procedures is readily available to any
interested person, with maximum use of information and
communications technology. 
38
2. When information that has been made available must be
revised due to changes in its customs laws, each Party
shall, whenever possible, make the revised information
publicly available sufficiently in advance of the entry
into force of the changes.
3. Each Party shall endeavor to provide the other Party
with advance notice of any significant modification of its
policy with regard to customs procedures that is likely to
substantially affect the implementation and operation of
this Agreement.
4. At the request of any interested person of the
Parties, each Party shall endeavor to provide, as quickly
and as accurately as possible, information relating to the
specific customs matters raised by the interested person
and pertaining to its customs laws.
5. Each Party shall designate one or more enquiry points
to answer reasonable enquiries from any interested person
of the Parties concerning customs matters, and shall make
publicly available, including through the Internet, the
names and addresses of such enquiry points.
Article 57
Customs Clearance
1. Both Parties shall apply their respective customs
procedures in a predictable, consistent and transparent
manner.
2. To expedite customs clearance, while ensuring
effective enforcement against illicit trafficking of goods,
each Party shall:
 (a) endeavor to make use of information and
communications technology, taking into account
international standards;
 (b) adopt or maintain accessible information and
communications technology systems, allowing the
authorized or registered person to send
declarations to its customs authority;
 (c) adopt or maintain simplified customs procedures;
 (d) harmonize its customs procedures, as far as
possible, with relevant international standards
and recommended practices such as those made
under the auspices of the Customs Co-operation
Council; and 
39
 (e) promote cooperation, wherever appropriate,
between its customs authority and:
 (i) other national authorities of the Party;
 (ii) the trading communities of the Party; and
 (iii) the customs authorities of non-Parties.
Article 58
Cooperation
1. The Parties shall cooperate with each other in the
field of customs procedures.
2. Such cooperation shall be implemented as provided for
in the Implementing Agreement.
Article 59
Penalties
 Each Party shall adopt or maintain appropriate
sanctions or other measures against violations of its
customs laws.
Article 60
Committee on Customs Procedures
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Customs Procedures (hereinafter referred to in
this Article as “Committee”).
2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
 (a) reviewing the implementation and operation of
this Chapter;
 (b) reporting the findings of the Committee to the
Commission;
 (c) identifying areas, relating to this Chapter, to
be improved for facilitating trade in goods
between the Parties; and
 (d) carrying out other functions as may be delegated
by the Commission in accordance with Article 190.
3. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties. 
40
4. The composition of the Committee shall be specified in
the Implementing Agreement.
Article 61
Definition
 For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “customs
laws” of a Party means the laws and regulations of a Party
relating to the importation, exportation, transit or
storage of goods, and any other related matters, falling
under the competence of the customs authority of the Party.
Chapter 6
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Article 62
Scope
 This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and
phytosanitary (hereinafter referred to in this Chapter as
"SPS") measures of the Parties under the SPS Agreement,
that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade in goods
between the Parties.
Article 63
Reaffirmation of Rights and Obligations
 The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations
relating to SPS measures under the SPS Agreement.
Article 64
Enquiry Points
 Each Party shall designate an enquiry point which is
able to answer all reasonable enquiries from the other
Party regarding SPS measures and, if appropriate, to
provide their relevant information.
Article 65
Working Group on SPS Measures
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a
Working Group on SPS measures (hereinafter referred to in
this Article as “Working Group”).
2. The functions of the Working Group shall be: 
41
 (a) exchange of information on such matters as
occurrences of SPS incidents in the Parties and
non-Parties, and change or introduction of SPSrelated regulations and standards of the Parties,
which may, directly or indirectly, affect trade
in goods between the Parties;
 (b) science-based consultations to identify and
address specific issues that may arise from the
application of SPS measures;
 (c) consulting cooperative efforts between the
Parties in international fora in relation to SPS
measures; and
 (d) discussing technical cooperation between the
Parties on SPS measures.
3. The Working Group shall be composed of government
officials of the Parties with responsibility for SPS
measures.
4. The Working Group shall meet at such venues and times
as may be agreed by the Parties.
Article 66
Non-Application of Chapter 16
 The dispute settlement procedures provided for in
Chapter 16 shall not apply to this Chapter.
Chapter 7
Technical Regulations, Standards and
Conformity Assessment Procedures
Article 67
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment procedures as defined
in the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade in Annex 1A
to the WTO Agreement (hereinafter referred to in this
Chapter as “TBT Agreement”).
2. This Chapter shall not apply to purchasing
specifications prepared by governmental bodies for
production or consumption requirements of governmental
bodies and sanitary and phytosanitary measures as defined
in the SPS Agreement. 
42
Article 68
Reaffirmation of Rights and Obligations
 The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations
relating to technical regulations, standards and conformity
assessment procedures under the TBT Agreement.
Article 69
Cooperation
1. For the purposes of ensuring that technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures
do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade in goods
between the Parties, the Parties shall, where possible,
cooperate in the field of technical regulations, standards
and conformity assessment procedures.
2. The forms of cooperation pursuant to paragraph 1 may
include the following:
 (a) conducting joint studies and holding seminars, in
order to enhance mutual understanding of
technical regulations, standards and conformity
assessment procedures in the Parties;
 (b) exchanging information on technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment procedures;
and
 (c) contributing, where appropriate, jointly to the
activities related to technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment procedures in
international and regional fora.
3. The implementation of this Article shall be subject to
the availability of appropriated funds and the applicable
laws and regulations of each Party.
Article 70
Committee on Technical Regulations, Standards and
Conformity Assessment Procedures
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Technical Regulations, Standards and
Conformity Assessment Procedures (hereinafter referred to
in this Article as “Committee”).
2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
 (a) coordinating cooperation pursuant to Article 69; 
43
 (b) reviewing the implementation and operation of
this Chapter;
 (c) discussing any issues related to this Chapter
with the objective of obtaining mutually
acceptable solutions;
 (d) reporting, where appropriate, the findings of the
Committee to the Commission; and
 (e) carrying out other functions as may be delegated
by the Commission in accordance with Article 190.
3. The Committee shall be composed of government
officials of the Parties.
4. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties.
Article 71
Non-Application of Chapter 16
 The dispute settlement procedures provided for in
Chapter 16 shall not apply to this Chapter.
Chapter 8
Investment
Section 1
Investment
Article 72
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or
maintained by a Party relating to:
 (a) investors of the other Party;
 (b) investments of investors of the other Party in
the Area of the former Party; and
 (c) with respect to Articles 77 and 87, all
investments in the Area of the former Party.
2. In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter
and another Chapter, the other Chapter shall prevail to the
extent of the inconsistency.
3. This Chapter shall not apply to measures adopted or
maintained by a Party to the extent that they are covered
by Chapter 10. 
44
4. This Chapter is subject to Annex 5.
Article 73
National Treatment
 Each Party shall accord to investors of the other
Party and to their investments made in the Area of the
former Party, treatment no less favorable than that it
accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors and to
their investments with respect to investment activities in
its Area.
Article 74
Most-Favored-Nation Treatment
 Each Party shall accord to investors of the other
Party and to their investments made in the Area of the
former Party, treatment no less favorable than that it
accords, in like circumstances, to investors of a non-Party
and to their investments with respect to investment
activities in its Area.
Article 75
General Treatment
 Each Party shall accord to investments made in its
Area by investors of the other Party, treatment in
accordance with customary international law, including fair
and equitable treatment and full protection and security.
Note 1: Article 75 prescribes the customary international
law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the
minimum standard of treatment to be afforded to
investments made in the Area of a Party by
investors of the other Party. The customary
international law minimum standard of treatment of
aliens refers to all customary international law
principles that protect the economic rights and
interests of aliens. The concepts of “fair and
equitable treatment” and “full protection and
security” do not require treatment in addition to
or beyond that which is required by the customary
international law minimum standard of treatment of
aliens.
Note 2: A determination that there has been a breach of
another provision of this Agreement, or of a
separate international agreement, does not
establish that there has been a breach of Article
75. 
45
Note 3: Each Party shall accord to investors of the other
Party, non-discriminatory treatment with regard to
access to the courts of justice and administrative
tribunals and agencies of the former Party in
pursuit and in defense of rights of such
investors.
Article 76
Protection from Strife
1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other
Party that have suffered loss relating to their investments
made in the Area of the former Party due to armed conflict,
revolution, insurrection, civil disturbance or any other
similar event, treatment, as regards restitution,
indemnification, compensation or any other settlement, that
is no less favorable than that it accords to its own
investors or to investors of a non-Party.
2. Any payments as a means of settlement referred to in
paragraph 1 shall be fully realizable, freely transferable
and freely convertible at the market exchange rate into the
currency of the Party of the investors concerned and freely
usable currencies.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to any subsidies
including grants, government supported loans, guarantees
and insurance as provided for in subparagraph 5(b) of
Article 79.
Article 77
Performance Requirements
1. Neither Party may impose or enforce any of the
following requirements, or enforce any commitment or
undertaking, in connection with investment activities of an
investor of a Party or of a non-Party in its Area:
 (a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or
services;
 (b) to achieve a given level or percentage of
domestic content;
 (c) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods
produced or services supplied in its Area, or to
purchase goods or services from persons in its
Area; 
46
 (d) to relate in any way the volume or value of
imports to the volume or value of exports or to
the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated
with investments of the investor;
 (e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its
Area that investments of the investor produce or
supply by relating such sales in any way to the
volume or value of its exports or foreign
exchange earnings;
 (f) to transfer technology, a production process or
other proprietary knowledge to a person in its
Area except when:
 (i) the requirement is imposed or the commitment
or undertaking is enforced by a court of
justice, administrative tribunal or
competition authority to remedy a practice
determined after judicial or administrative
process to be anti-competitive under its
competition laws and regulations; or
 (ii) the requirement concerns the transfer of
intellectual property rights which is
undertaken in a manner not inconsistent with
the TRIPS Agreement; or
 (g) to supply to a specific region or the world
market exclusively from its Area, the goods that
the investor produces or the services that the
investor supplies.
2. Neither Party may condition the receipt or continued
receipt of an advantage, in connection with investment
activities of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in
its Area, on compliance with any of the following
requirements:
 (a) to achieve a given level or percentage of
domestic content;
 (b) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods
produced in its Area, or to purchase goods from
persons in its Area;
 (c) to relate in any way the volume or value of
imports to the volume or value of exports or to
the amount of foreign exchange inflows associated
with investments of the investor; or 
47
 (d) to restrict sales of goods or services in its
Area that investments of the investor produce or
supply by relating such sales in any way to the
volume or value of its exports or foreign
exchange earnings.
3. (a) Nothing in paragraph 2 shall be construed to
prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or
continued receipt of an advantage, in connection
with investment activities of an investor of a
Party or of a non-Party in its Area, on
compliance with a requirement to locate
production, supply a service, train or employ
workers, construct or expand particular
facilities, or carry out research and
development, in its Area.
 (b) Subparagraphs 1(a), 1(b), 1(c), 2(a) and 2(b)
shall not apply to qualification requirements for
goods or services with respect to export
promotion and foreign aid programs.
 (c) Subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c), 1(f), 1(g), 2(a) and
2(b) shall not apply to government procurement.
 (d) Subparagraphs 2(a) and 2(b) shall not apply to
requirements imposed by an importing Party
relating to the content of goods necessary to
qualify for preferential tariffs or preferential
quotas.
4. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to any requirement
other than the requirements set out in those paragraphs.
Article 78
Senior Management and Boards of Directors
1. Neither Party may require that an enterprise of that
Party that is an investment made in its Area by an investor
of the other Party appoint, to senior management positions,
individuals of any particular nationality.
2. A Party may require that a majority of the board of
directors, or any committee thereof, of an enterprise of
that Party that is an investment made in its Area by an
investor of the other Party, be of a particular
nationality, or resident in the former Party, provided that
the requirement does not materially impair the ability of
the investor to exercise control over its investment. 
48
Article 79
Non-Conforming Measures
1. Articles 73, 74, 77 and 78 shall not apply to:
 (a) any existing non-conforming measure that is
maintained by:
 (i) with respect to Chile:
 (A) the national government, as set out in
its Schedule in Annex 6; or
 (B) a local government; and
 Note: “The national government” includes
regional governments.
 (ii) with respect to Japan:
 (A) the central government or a prefecture,
as set out in its Schedule in Annex 6;
or
 (B) a local government other than
prefectures;
 (b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any nonconforming measure referred to in subparagraph
(a); or
 (c) an amendment or a modification to any nonconforming measure referred to in subparagraph
(a), to the extent that the amendment or
modification does not decrease the conformity of
the measure, as it existed immediately before the
amendment or modification, with Articles 73, 74,
77 and 78.
2. Articles 73, 74, 77 and 78 shall not apply to any
measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to
sectors, sub-sectors or activities, as set out in its
Schedule in Annex 7.
3. Neither Party may, under any measure adopted after the
date of entry into force of this Agreement and covered by
its Schedule in Annex 7, require an investor of the other
Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise
dispose of an investment that exists at the time the
measure becomes effective. 
49
4. Articles 73 and 74 shall not apply to any measure that
is an exception to, or derogation from, the obligations
under the TRIPS Agreement.
5. Articles 73, 74 and 78 shall not apply to:
 (a) government procurement; or
 (b) subsidies provided by a Party or a state
enterprise, including grants, governmentsupported loans, guarantees and insurance.
Article 80
Notification
1. In the case where a Party makes an amendment or a
modification to any existing non-conforming measure as set
out in its Schedule in Annex 6, the Party shall notify the
other Party, as soon as possible, of such amendment or
modification.
2. In the case where a Party adopts any measure after the
entry into force of this Agreement, with respect to
sectors, sub-sectors or activities as set out in its
Schedule in Annex 7, the Party shall, to the extent
possible, notify the other Party of such measure.
Article 81
Transfers
1. Each Party shall allow all transfers relating to
investments made in its Area by an investor of the other
Party to be made freely and without delay into and out of
its Area. Such transfers shall include:
 (a) the initial capital and additional amounts to
maintain or increase such investments;
 (b) profits, dividends, interest, capital gains,
royalty payments, management fees, technical
assistance fees and other fees;
 (c) proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or
any part of such investments;
 (d) payments made under a contract, including
payments made pursuant to a loan agreement;
 (e) payments made pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of
Article 76 and Article 82; and
 (f) payments arising under Section 2. 
50
2. Each Party shall allow transfers referred to in
paragraph 1 to be made in a freely usable currency at the
market rate of exchange prevailing on the date of each
transfer.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may delay
or prevent a transfer through the equitable, nondiscriminatory and good-faith application of its laws
relating to:
 (a) bankruptcy, insolvency, or the protection of the
rights of creditors;
 (b) issuing, trading or dealing in securities or
derivatives;
 (c) criminal or penal offenses;
 (d) reports or record keeping of transfers of
currency or other monetary instruments; or
 (e) ensuring compliance with orders or judgments in
judicial or administrative proceedings.
4. This Article is subject to Annex 8.
Article 82
Expropriation and Compensation
1. Neither Party may expropriate or nationalize
investments made in its Area by investors of the other
Party either directly or indirectly through measures
equivalent to expropriation or nationalization (hereinafter
referred to as “expropriation”), except:
 (a) for a public purpose;
 (b) on a non-discriminatory basis;
 (c) on payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2
through 4; and
 (d) in accordance with due process of law and Article
75. 
51
2. The compensation shall be equivalent to the fair
market value of the expropriated investments at the time
when the expropriation was officially announced or when the
expropriation occurred, whichever is the earlier. The fair
market value shall not reflect any change in market value
occurring because the expropriation had become publicly
known prior to such official announcement or occurrence of
the expropriation. The compensation shall be paid without
delay and be fully realizable and freely transferable.
3. If payment is made in a freely usable currency, the
compensation paid shall include interest, at a commercially
reasonable rate for that currency, accrued from the date of
expropriation until the date of payment.
4. If a Party elects to pay in a currency other than a
freely usable currency, the compensation paid, converted
into the currency of payment at the market rate of exchange
prevailing on the date of payment, shall be no less than
the sum of the following:
 (a) the fair market value on the date of
expropriation, converted into a freely usable
currency at the market rate of exchange
prevailing on that date; and
 (b) interest, at a commercially reasonable rate for
that freely usable currency, accrued from the
date of expropriation until the date of payment.
5. This Article shall not apply with respect to the grant
of compulsory licenses concerning intellectual property
rights in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement.
Note: For greater certainty, Article 82 shall be
interpreted in accordance with Annex 9.
Article 83
Subrogation
1. If a Party or its designated agency makes a payment to
any of its investors pursuant to an indemnity, guarantee or
insurance contract, pertaining to an investment made by
that investor within the Area of the other Party, the other
Party shall:
 (a) recognize the assignment, to the former Party or
its designated agency, of any right of the
investor that formed the basis of such payment;
and 
52
 (b) recognize the right of the former Party or its
designated agency to exercise by virtue of
subrogation such right to the same extent as the
original right of the investor.
2. For greater certainty, the investor shall continue to
be entitled to exercise its rights that have not been
subrogated pursuant to paragraph 1.
Article 84
Special Formalities and Information Requirements
1. Nothing in Article 73 shall be construed to prevent a
Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that
prescribes special formalities in connection with
investment activities of investors of the other Party and
their investments made in the Area of the former Party,
such as the compliance with registration requirements, or
requirements that investors be residents of the Party or
that investments be legally constituted under the laws and
regulations of the Party, provided that such formalities do
not materially impair the protections afforded by the Party
to investors of the other Party and their investments
pursuant to this Chapter.
2. Notwithstanding Articles 73 and 74, a Party may
require investors of the other Party, or their investments
made in its Area, to provide information concerning those
investments solely for informational or statistical
purposes. The Party shall protect such information that is
confidential from any disclosure that would prejudice the
competitive position of the investors or their investments.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent a
Party from otherwise obtaining or disclosing information in
connection with the equitable and good-faith application of
its law.
Article 85
Temporary Safeguard Measures
1. A Party may adopt or maintain measures not conforming
with its obligations under Articles 73 and 81, regarding
payments and transfers related to an investment:
 (a) in the event of serious balance-of-payments and
external financial difficulties or threat
thereof; or
 (b) in cases where, in exceptional circumstances,
movements of capital cause or threaten to cause
serious difficulties for macroeconomic
management, in particular, monetary and exchange
rate policies. 
53
2. Measures referred to in paragraph 1:
 (a) shall be consistent with the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;
 (b) shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the
circumstances set out in paragraph 1;
 (c) shall be temporary and eliminated as soon as
conditions permit;
 (d) shall be promptly notified to the other Party;
and
 (e) shall avoid unnecessary damages to the
commercial, economic and financial interests of
the other Party.
3. Nothing in this Article shall be regarded as altering
the rights enjoyed and obligations undertaken by a Party as
a party to the Articles of Agreement of the International
Monetary Fund.
Article 86
Denial of Benefits
1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an
investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of the
other Party and to its investments if the enterprise is
owned or controlled by an investor of a non-Party and the
denying Party:
 (a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the
non-Party; or
 (b) adopts or maintains measures with respect to the
non-Party that prohibit transactions with the
enterprise or that would be violated or
circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were
accorded to the enterprise or to its investments.
2. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an
investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of the
other Party and to its investments if the enterprise is
owned or controlled by an investor of a non-Party or of the
denying Party and the enterprise has no substantial
business activities in the Area of the other Party, subject
to prior notification to and consultation with the other
Party. 
54
Article 87
Environmental Measures
 Each Party recognizes that it is inappropriate to
encourage investments by investors of the other Party by
relaxing its environmental measures. To this effect each
Party should not waive or otherwise derogate from such
environmental measures as an encouragement for
establishment, acquisition or expansion of investments in
its Area.
Section 2
Settlement of Investment Disputes
between a Party and an Investor of the Other Party
Article 88
Consultation and Negotiation
 In the event of an investment dispute between a Party
and an investor of the other Party, they should initially
seek to resolve the dispute through consultation and
negotiation, which may include the use of non-binding,
third-party procedures.
Article 89
Submission of a Claim to Arbitration
1. In the event that an investment dispute cannot be
settled by consultation and negotiation:
 (a) the investor of a Party, on its own behalf, may
submit to arbitration under this Section a claim:
 (i) that the other Party has breached an
obligation under Section 1; and
 (ii) that the investor has incurred loss or
damage by reason of, or arising out of, that
breach; and
 (b) the investor of a Party, on behalf of an
enterprise of the other Party that is a juridical
person that such investor owns or controls
directly or indirectly, may submit to arbitration
under this Section a claim:
 (i) that the other Party has breached an
obligation under Section 1; and
 (ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or
damage by reason of, or arising out of, that
breach. 
55
2. An investment made by an investor of a Party may not
submit a claim to arbitration under this Section.
3. For greater certainty:
 (a) no claim may be submitted to arbitration under
this Section that alleges a violation of any
provision of this Agreement other than an
obligation under Section 1; and
 (b) an investor of a Party may not submit a claim to
arbitration under this Section in relation to any
act or fact that took place or any situation that
ceased to exist before the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.
4. At least 90 days before submitting any claim to
arbitration under this Section, an investor of a Party
shall deliver to the other Party a written notice of its
intention to submit the claim to arbitration (hereinafter
referred to as “notice of intent”). The notice of intent
shall specify:
 (a) the name and address of the investor and, in the
case of subparagraph 1(b), the name, address, and
place of incorporation of the enterprise;
 (b) the provision of Section 1 alleged to have been
breached;
 (c) the legal and factual basis for that claim; and
 (d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of
damages claimed.
5. Provided that six months have elapsed since the events
giving rise to the claim, an investor of a Party may submit
a claim referred to in paragraph 1:
 (a) under the ICSID Convention, provided that both
Parties are parties to the ICSID Convention;
 (b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules,
provided that either Party, but not both, is a
party to the ICSID Convention;
 (c) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; or
 (d) if the disputing parties agree, to any other
arbitration institution or under any other
arbitration rules. 
56
6. A claim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under
this Section when the claimant’s notice of or request for
arbitration (hereinafter referred to in this Section as
“notice of arbitration”):
 (a) referred to in paragraph (1) of Article 36 of the
ICSID Convention is received by the SecretaryGeneral;
 (b) referred to in Article 2 of Schedule C of the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules is received by
the Secretary-General;
 (c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, together with the statement of
claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, is received by the respondent;
or
 (d) under any other arbitration institution or
arbitration rules selected under subparagraph
5(d) is received by the respondent, unless
otherwise specified by such institution or in
such rules.
7. The claimant shall provide with the notice of
arbitration:
 (a) the name of the arbitrator that the claimant
appoints; or
 (b) the claimant’s written consent for the SecretaryGeneral to appoint the claimant’s arbitrator.
8. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 5,
which are in effect on the date the claim is submitted to
arbitration under this Section, shall govern the
arbitration except to the extent modified by this Section.
Article 90
Consent to Arbitration
1. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to
arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in
this Section.
2. The consent under paragraph 1 and the submission of a
claim to arbitration under this Section shall satisfy the
requirements of: 
57
 (a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules for written consent of
the parties; and
 (b) Article II of the New York Convention for an
agreement in writing.
Article 91
Conditions and Limitations on Consent
1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this
Section if more than three years have elapsed from the date
on which the investor in the case of subparagraph 1(a) of
Article 89 or the enterprise in the case of subparagraph
1(b) of Article 89 first acquired, or should have first
acquired, knowledge of the breach alleged under paragraph 1
of Article 89 and knowledge that such investor or
enterprise had incurred loss or damage.
2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this
Section unless:
 (a) in the case of subparagraph 1(a) of Article 89:
 (i) the claimant consents in writing to
arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Section;
 (ii) the claimant waives in writing any right to
initiate before any administrative tribunal
or court under the law of either Party, or
other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceedings with respect to any measure
alleged to constitute a breach referred to
in paragraph 1 of Article 89; and
 (iii) the claimant has not initiated any
proceedings before any administrative
tribunal or court referred to in
subparagraph (ii). For greater certainty,
if the investor elects to initiate such
proceedings, that election shall be
definitive and the investor may not
thereafter submit the claim to arbitration
under this Section; and
 (b) in the case of subparagraph 1(b) of Article 89:
 (i) both the claimant and the enterprise consent
in writing to arbitration in accordance with
the procedures set out in this Section; 
58
 (ii) both the claimant and the enterprise waive
in writing any right to initiate before any
administrative tribunal or court under the
law of either Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceedings with
respect to any measure alleged to constitute
a breach referred to in paragraph 1 of
Article 89; and
 (iii) the claimant or the enterprise referred to
in subparagraph (ii) has not initiated any
proceedings before any administrative
tribunal or court referred to in
subparagraph (ii). For greater certainty,
if the investor or the enterprise elects to
initiate such proceedings, that election
shall be definitive and neither the investor
nor the enterprise may thereafter submit the
claim to arbitration under this Section.
3. Notwithstanding subparagraphs 2(a)(ii), 2(a)(iii),
2(b)(ii) and 2(b)(iii), the claimant or the enterprise
referred to in subparagraphs 2(b)(ii) and 2(b)(iii) may
initiate or continue an action that seeks interim
injunctive relief that does not involve the payment of
monetary damages before an administrative tribunal or court
under the law of the respondent.
Article 92
Establishment of a Tribunal
1. Unless the disputing parties otherwise agree, a
Tribunal shall comprise three arbitrators, one arbitrator
appointed by each of the disputing parties and the third,
who shall be the presiding arbitrator, appointed by
agreement of the disputing parties.
2. If an arbitrator or arbitrators are not appointed
pursuant to paragraph 1 within 75 days from the date on
which the claim was submitted to arbitration, the
Secretary-General may be requested by either disputing
party to appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet
appointed from the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators subject to
the requirements of paragraph 3.
3. Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, the
presiding arbitrator shall not be a national of either
Party, nor have his or her usual place of residence in
either Party, nor be employed by either disputing party,
nor have dealt with the claim in any capacity. 
59
4. The date of establishment of a Tribunal shall be the
date on which all the arbitrators have been appointed and
accepted such appointment.
Article 93
Governing Law
1. Subject to paragraph 2, when a claim is submitted to
arbitration under this Section, a Tribunal shall decide the
issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and
applicable rules of international law.
2. An interpretation of a provision of this Agreement
adopted by the Commission shall be binding on a Tribunal,
and any award must be consistent with that interpretation.
Such interpretation shall be made publicly available
through the means that each Party considers appropriate.
Article 94
Interpretation of Annexes
1. Where a respondent asserts as a defense that the
measure alleged to be a breach is within the scope of a
non-conforming measure set out in Annex 6 or 7, the
Tribunal shall, on request of the respondent, request the
Commission to adopt an interpretation on the issue. The
Commission shall adopt and submit in writing its
interpretation to the Tribunal within 60 days of delivery
of the request.
2. The interpretation adopted and submitted by the
Commission under paragraph 1 shall be binding on the
Tribunal, and any award must be consistent with that
interpretation. If the Commission fails to submit an
interpretation within the aforementioned 60 days period,
the Tribunal shall decide the issue.
Article 95
Participation in Arbitration
1. On written notice to the disputing parties, the Party
other than the respondent may make submissions to the
Tribunal on a question of interpretation of this Agreement.
2. The Party other than the respondent shall be entitled
to receive from the respondent, a copy of:
 (a) the evidence that has been tendered to the
Tribunal; and
 (b) the written argument of the disputing parties. 
60
Article 96
Place of Arbitration
 Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, a
Tribunal shall hold an arbitration in a country that is a
party to the New York Convention.
Article 97
Preliminary Questions
1. (a) A Tribunal shall address and decide as a
preliminary question any objection by the
respondent that, as a matter of law, the Tribunal
may not make an award against the respondent in
accordance with Article 103, provided that the
respondent so requests as soon as possible after
the Tribunal is established, and in no event
later than the date the Tribunal fixes for the
respondent to submit its counter-memorial. In
deciding such objection, the Tribunal shall
assume to be true the factual allegations of the
claimant in support of any claim in the notice of
arbitration. The Tribunal may also consider any
relevant facts not in dispute.
 (b) Subparagraph (a) shall not prejudice the
authority of the Tribunal to address as a
preliminary question any objection other than the
objection referred to in subparagraph (a), such
as an objection that the dispute is not within
the competence of the Tribunal.
 (c) On receipt of the objection referred to in
subparagraph (a), the Tribunal shall suspend any
proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule
for considering the objection consistent with any
schedule it has established for considering any
other preliminary question, and issue a decision
or award on the objection, stating the grounds
therefor.
2. In the event that the respondent so requests within 45
days after the date of establishment of the Tribunal, the
Tribunal shall address and decide on an expedited basis the
objection referred to in subparagraph 1(a) or any objection
that the dispute is not within the competence of the
Tribunal. The Tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on
the merits and issue a decision or award on the objection,
stating the grounds therefor, no later than 150 days, or
180 days if a hearing is held or under extraordinary
circumstances, after the date of the request. 
61
3. When it decides a respondent’s objection pursuant to
paragraph 1 or 2, the Tribunal may, if warranted, award to
the prevailing disputing party reasonable costs including
attorneys’ fees incurred in submitting or opposing the
objection. In determining whether such an award is
warranted, the Tribunal shall consider whether the
claimant’s claim was frivolous or whether the respondent’s
objection was frivolous, and shall provide the disputing
parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.
4. The respondent does not waive its right to make any
objection or argument on the merits merely because the
respondent did or did not make a request pursuant to
paragraph 1 or 2.
Article 98
Insurance or Guarantee Contracts
 In an arbitration under this Section, the respondent
may not assert, as a defense, counterclaim, right of setoff or otherwise, that the claimant has received or will
receive indemnification or other compensation for all or
part of the alleged damages pursuant to an insurance or
guarantee contract.
Article 99
Interim Measures of Protection
 A Tribunal may order an interim measure of protection
to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or to
facilitate the conduct of arbitral proceedings, including
an order to preserve evidence in the possession or control
of a disputing party. A Tribunal may not order attachment
or enjoin the application of the measure alleged to
constitute a breach referred to in paragraph 1 of Article
89.
Article 100
Expert Report
 Without prejudice to the appointment of other kinds of
experts where authorized by the applicable arbitration
rules, a Tribunal, at the request of a disputing party or,
except as the disputing parties agree otherwise, on its own
initiative, may appoint one or more experts in the fields
of environmental, health, safety or other scientific
matters to report to it in writing on any factual issue
concerning matters of their expertise raised by a disputing
party in a proceeding, subject to such terms and conditions
as the disputing parties may agree. 
62
Article 101
Consolidation of Multiple Claims
1. When a disputing party considers that two or more
claims submitted to arbitration under paragraph 1 of
Article 89 have a question of law or fact in common and
arise out of the same events or circumstances, the
disputing party may seek a consolidation order in
accordance with the terms of paragraphs 2 through 10.
2. A disputing party that seeks a consolidation order
under this Article shall deliver, in writing, a request to
the Secretary-General to establish a Tribunal under this
Article. The request shall specify:
 (a) the names and addresses of all the disputing
parties sought to be covered by the order;
 (b) the nature of the order sought; and
 (c) the grounds on which the order is sought.
3. Unless the Secretary-General finds within 60 days
after receiving a request under paragraph 2 that the claims
do not satisfy the requirements set out in paragraph 1, a
Tribunal shall be established under this Article.
4. Unless all the disputing parties sought to be covered
by the order otherwise agree, a Tribunal established under
this Article shall comprise three arbitrators:
 (a) one arbitrator appointed by agreement of the
claimants;
 (b) one arbitrator appointed by the respondent; and
 (c) the presiding arbitrator appointed by the
Secretary-General, provided, however, that the
presiding arbitrator shall not be a national of
either Party, nor have his or her usual place of
residence in either Party, nor be employed by any
disputing party, nor have dealt with the claims
in any capacity. 
63
5. If, within 60 days after the Secretary-General
receives a request under paragraph 2, the respondent fails
or the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator in
accordance with paragraph 4, the Secretary-General may be
requested by any disputing party sought to be covered by
the order, to appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet
appointed. If the respondent fails to appoint an
arbitrator, the arbitrator to be appointed by the
Secretary-General shall be a national of the respondent,
and if the claimants fail to appoint an arbitrator, the
arbitrator to be appointed by the Secretary-General shall
be a national of the Party other than the respondent.
6. Where a claimant that has submitted a claim to
arbitration under paragraph 1 of Article 89 considers that
such a claim raises a question of law or fact in common to,
and arises out of the same events or circumstances as,
claims upon which the consolidation under paragraph 2 has
been requested, but has not been named in such request, the
claimant may make a written request to the Tribunal
established under this Article that the claimant be covered
by any order made under paragraph 7, and shall specify in
the request:
 (a) the name and address of the claimant;
 (b) the nature of the order sought; and
 (c) the grounds on which the order is sought.
7. Where a Tribunal established under this Article is
satisfied that two or more claims that have been submitted
to arbitration under paragraph 1 of Article 89 have a
question of law or fact in common, and arise out of the
same events or circumstances, the Tribunal may, in the
interest of fair and efficient resolution of the claims,
and after hearing the disputing parties, by order:
 (a) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine
together, all or part of the claims; or
 (b) assume jurisdiction over, and hear and determine
one or more of the claims, the determination of
which it believes would assist in the resolution
of the others.
8. A Tribunal established under this Article shall
conduct its proceedings in accordance with the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, except as modified by this Section. 
64
9. A Tribunal established under Article 92 shall not have
jurisdiction to decide a claim, or a part of a claim, over
which a Tribunal established under this Article has assumed
jurisdiction.
10. On application of a disputing party, a Tribunal
established under this Article, pending its decision as to
whether to make an order under paragraph 7, may order the
adjourning of the proceedings of a Tribunal established
under Article 92.
11. For greater certainty, the provisions of this Section
other than this Article shall apply with respect to a
Tribunal established under this Article except to the
extent modified by this Article.
Article 102
Proposed Award
 A Tribunal shall, at the request of a disputing party,
submit to the disputing parties a proposed award, before
making an award, except an award issued pursuant to Article
97. The disputing parties may submit to the Tribunal
written comments on the proposed award within 60 days after
the date of submission of the proposed award. The Tribunal
shall consider such comments and make an award within 105
days of the date of submission of the proposed award.
Article 103
Award
1. Where a Tribunal makes an award against the
respondent, the Tribunal may award, separately or in
combination, only:
 (a) monetary damages and any applicable interest; and
 (b) restitution of property, in which case the award
shall provide that the respondent may pay
monetary damages and any applicable interest in
lieu of restitution.
A Tribunal may also award costs including attorneys’
fees in accordance with this Section and the applicable
arbitration rules.
2. Subject to paragraph 1, in the case of subparagraph
1(b) of Article 89:
 (a) an award of monetary damages and any applicable
interest shall provide that the sum be paid to
the enterprise; and 
65
 (b) an award of restitution of property shall provide
that restitution be made to the enterprise.
3. A Tribunal may not award punitive damages.
4. An award made by a Tribunal shall have no binding
force except between the disputing parties and in respect
of the particular case.
5. Subject to paragraph 7, a disputing party shall abide
by and comply with an award without delay.
6. If the respondent fails to abide by or comply with an
award, the Party other than the respondent may request the
establishment of an arbitral tribunal pursuant to Article
178. The requesting Party may seek in such proceedings:
 (a) a determination that the failure to abide by or
comply with the award is inconsistent with the
obligations of this Agreement; and
 (b) a recommendation that the respondent abide by or
comply with the award.
7. A disputing party may not seek enforcement of an award
until such award becomes final. An award becomes final
when:
 (a) in the case of an award under the ICSID
Convention:
(i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the
award was made and no disputing party has
requested revision or annulment of the
award; or
(ii) revision or annulment proceedings have been
completed; and
 (b) in the case of an award under the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules, the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, or the rules selected pursuant
to subparagraph 5(d) of Article 89:
 (i) 90 days have elapsed from the date the award
was made and no disputing party has
commenced a proceeding to revise or annul
the award; or
 (ii) an application to revise or annul the award
has been dismissed or allowed and there is
no further appeal. 
66
8. Each Party shall provide for the enforcement of an
award in its Area in accordance with its relevant laws and
regulations.
Article 104
Service of Documents
1. Notices and other documents relating to arbitration
under this Section shall be served on a Party by delivery
to:
 (a) with respect to Japan, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; and
 (b) with respect to Chile, the Ministry of Foreign
Affaires, Legal Affaires Directorate (Dirección
de Asuntos Jurídicos del Ministerio de Relaciones
Exteriores de la República de Chile).
2. The Commission shall make publicly available the
addresses of the authorities referred to in paragraph 1.
Section 3
Definitions
Article 105
Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Chapter:
 (a) the term “claimant” means an investor of a Party
that submits a claim to arbitration under Section
2;
 (b) the term “disputing parties” means the claimant
and the respondent;
 (c) the term “disputing party” means either the
claimant or the respondent;
 (d) the term “freely usable currency” means freely
usable currency as defined under the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;
 (e) the term “ICSID” means the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes;
 (f) the term “ICSID Additional Facility Rules” means
the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for
the Administration of Proceedings by the
Secretariat of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes; 
67
 (g) the term “ICSID Convention” means the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965;
 (h) the term “investment” means every kind of asset
that an investor owns or controls, directly or
indirectly, which has the characteristics of an
investment. Forms that an investment may take
include:
 Note 1: The characteristics of an investment
include the commitment of capital or
other resources, the expectation of gain
or profit, or the assumption of risk.
 Note 2: An investment does not include an order
or judgment entered in a judicial or
administrative action.
 (i) an enterprise and a branch of an enterprise;
 (ii) shares, stocks, and other forms of equity
participation in an enterprise;
 (iii) bonds, debentures, loans and other debt
instruments, but do not include a debt
instrument of a Party or of a state
enterprise;
 (iv) futures, options and other derivatives;
 (v) rights under contracts, including turnkey,
construction, management, production or
revenue-sharing contracts;
 (vi) intellectual property rights;
 (vii) rights conferred pursuant to domestic law,
such as concessions, licenses,
authorizations and permits; and
 (viii) other tangible or intangible, movable or
immovable property, and any related property
rights, such as leases, mortgages, liens and
pledges;
 (i) the term “investment activities” means
establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, maintenance, use,
enjoyment and sale or other disposition of
investments; 
68
 (j) the term “investor of a Party” means a natural
person or an enterprise of a Party, or the Party
or state enterprise thereof, that attempts to
make, is making, or has made investments in the
Area of the other Party;
 (k) the term “New York Convention” means the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at
New York, June 10, 1958;
 (l) the term “respondent” means a Party against which
a claim is submitted to arbitration under Section
2;
 (m) the term “Secretary-General” means the SecretaryGeneral of ICSID;
 (n) the term “Tribunal” means an arbitration tribunal
established under Article 92 or 101; and
 (o) the term “UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” means the
arbitration rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, approved
by the United Nations General Assembly on
December 15, 1976.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, an enterprise is:
 (a) “owned” by an investor if more than 50 percent of
the equity interests in it is beneficially owned
by the investor; and
 (b) “controlled” by an investor if the investor has
the power to name a majority of its directors or
otherwise to legally direct its actions in
accordance with the laws and regulations of a
Party.
Chapter 9
Cross-Border Trade in Services
Article 106
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or
maintained by a Party affecting cross-border trade in
services by service suppliers of the other Party. Such
measures include measures affecting:
 (a) the supply of a service; 
69
 Note: The measures affecting the supply of a
service include those affecting the
provision of any financial security as a
condition for the supply of a service.
 (b) the purchase or use of, or payment for, a
service;
 (c) the access to and the use of services offered to
the public generally, including distribution,
transport or telecommunications networks, in
connection with the supply of a service; and
 (d) the presence in its Area of a service supplier of
the other Party.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to:
 (a) cabotage in maritime transport services;
 (b) financial services, as defined in Article 128;
 (c) in respect of air transport services, measures
affecting traffic rights, however granted; or
measures affecting services directly related to
the exercise of traffic rights, other than
measures affecting:
 (i) aircraft repair and maintenance services;
 (ii) the selling and marketing of air transport
services; and
 (iii) computer reservation system services;
 (d) government procurement;
 (e) subsidies provided by a Party or a state
enterprise, including grants, governmentsupported loans, guarantees and insurance;
 (f) measures affecting natural persons of a Party
seeking access to the employment market of the
other Party, or measures regarding nationality or
citizenship, or residence or employment on a
permanent basis; and
 (g) services supplied in the exercise of governmental
authority. 
70
Article 107
National Treatment
 Each Party shall accord to services and service
suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favorable
than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own
services and service suppliers.
Note: For greater certainty, nothing in this Article shall
be construed to require either Party to compensate
for any inherent competitive disadvantages which
result from the foreign character of the relevant
services or service suppliers.
Article 108
Most-Favored-Nation Treatment
 Each Party shall accord to services and service
suppliers of the other Party treatment no less favorable
than that it accords, in like circumstances, to services
and service suppliers of any non-Party.
Article 109
Local Presence
 Neither Party shall require a service supplier of the
other Party to establish or maintain a representative
office or any form of enterprise, or to be resident, in its
Area as a condition for the cross-border supply of a
service.
Note: The term “cross-border supply of a service” has the
same meaning as the term “cross-border trade in
services”.
Article 110
Non-Conforming Measures
1. Articles 107, 108 and 109 shall not apply to:
 (a) any existing non-conforming measure that is
maintained by:
 (i) with respect to Chile:
 (A) the national government, as set out in
its Schedule in Annex 6; or
 (B) a local government; and
 Note: “The national government” includes
regional governments. 
71
(ii) with respect to Japan:
 (A) the central government or a prefecture,
as set out in its Schedule in Annex 6;
or
 (B) a local government other than
prefectures;
 (b) the continuation or prompt renewal of any nonconforming measure referred to in subparagraph
(a); or
 (c) an amendment or a modification to any nonconforming measure referred to in subparagraph
(a), to the extent that the amendment or
modification does not decrease the conformity of
the measure, as it existed immediately before the
amendment or modification, with Articles 107, 108
and 109.
2. Articles 107, 108 and 109 shall not apply to any
measure that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to
sectors, sub-sectors or activities, as set out in its
Schedule in Annex 7.
Article 111
Notification
1. In the case where a Party makes an amendment or a
modification to any existing non-conforming measure as set
out in its Schedule in Annex 6, the Party shall notify the
other Party, as soon as possible, of such amendment or
modification.
2. In the case where a Party adopts any measure after the
entry into force of this Agreement, with respect to
sectors, sub-sectors or activities as set out in its
Schedule in Annex 7, the Party shall, to the extent
possible, notify the other Party of such measure.
Article 112
Authorization, Qualification, Technical Standard and
Licensing
 With a view to ensuring that any measure adopted or
maintained by a Party in any services sector relating to
the authorization, qualification requirements and
procedures, technical standards and licensing requirements
of service suppliers of the other Party does not constitute
an unnecessary barrier to cross-border trade in services,
each Party shall endeavor to ensure that such measure: 
72
 (a) is based on objective and transparent criteria,
such as the competence and ability to supply the
service;
 (b) is not more burdensome than necessary to ensure
the quality of the service; and
 (c) does not constitute a disguised restriction on
the supply of the service.
Article 113
Mutual Recognition
1. A Party may recognize the education or experience
obtained, requirements met, or licenses or certifications
granted in the other Party for the purposes of the
fulfillment, in whole or in part, of its standards or
criteria for the authorization, licensing or certification
of service suppliers of the other Party.
2. Recognition referred to in paragraph 1, which may be
achieved through harmonization or otherwise, may be based
upon an agreement or arrangement between the Parties or may
be accorded unilaterally.
3. Where a Party recognizes, by agreement or arrangement
between the Party and a non-Party or unilaterally, the
education or experience obtained, requirements met, or
licenses or certifications granted in the non-Party:
 (a) nothing in Article 108 shall be construed to
require the Party to accord such recognition to
the education or experience obtained,
requirements met, or licenses or certifications
granted in the other Party; and
 (b) the Party shall accord the other Party an
adequate opportunity to demonstrate that the
education or experience obtained, requirements
met, or licenses or certifications granted in the
other Party should also be recognized.
Article 114
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
1. In the event of serious balance-of-payments and
external financial difficulties or threat thereof, a Party
may adopt or maintain restrictions on cross-border trade in
services, including on payments or transfers for
transactions. 
73
2. The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1:
 (a) shall be applied on the basis of national
treatment and most-favored-nation treatment;
 (b) shall be consistent with the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund;
 (c) shall avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial,
economic and financial interests of the other
Party;
 (d) shall not exceed those necessary to deal with the
circumstances described in paragraph 1; and
 (e) shall be temporary and be phased out
progressively as the situation specified in
paragraph 1 improves.
3. In determining the incidence of such restrictions, a
Party may give priority to the cross-border supply of
services which are more essential to its economic or
development programs. However, such restrictions shall not
be adopted or maintained for the purposes of protecting a
particular service sector.
4. Any restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph
1, or any changes therein, shall be promptly notified to
the other Party.
Article 115
Denial of Benefits
1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a
service supplier of the other Party that is an enterprise
of the other Party, where the former Party establishes that
the enterprise is owned or controlled by persons of a nonParty, and the former Party:
 (a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the
non-Party; or
 (b) adopts or maintains measures with respect to the
non-Party that prohibit transactions with the
enterprise or that would be violated or
circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were
accorded to the enterprise. 
74
2. Subject to prior notification and consultation, a
Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a service
supplier of the other Party that is an enterprise of the
other Party where the former Party establishes that the
enterprise is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party
and has no substantial business activities in the Area of
the other Party.
Article 116
Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Chapter:
 (a) the term “aircraft repair and maintenance
services” means such activities when undertaken
on an aircraft or a part thereof while it is
withdrawn from services and does not include socalled line maintenance;
 (b) the term “computer reservation system services”
means services provided by computerized systems
that contain information about air carriers’
schedules, availability, fares and fare rules,
through which reservations may be made or tickets
may be issued;
 (c) the term “cross-border trade in services” means
the supply of a service:
 (i) from the Area of a Party into the Area of
the other Party;
 (ii) in the Area of a Party by a natural person
or an enterprise of that Party to a natural
person or an enterprise of the other Party;
and
 (iii) by a natural person of a Party in the Area
of the other Party,
 but does not include the supply of services by an
investment of an investor of a Party, as defined
in Article 105, in the Area of the other Party;
 (d) the term “measure adopted or maintained by a
Party” means any measure adopted or maintained
by:
 (i) any level of government or authority of a
Party; and 
75
 (ii) non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
powers delegated by any level of government
or authority of a Party;
 (e) the term “service supplied in the exercise of
governmental authority” means any service which
is supplied neither on a commercial basis nor in
competition with one or more service suppliers;
 (f) the term “service supplier” means a person that
seeks to supply or supplies a service;
 (g) the term “supply of a service” includes the
production, distribution, marketing, sale and
delivery of a service;
 (h) the term “the selling and marketing of air
transport services” means opportunities for the
air carrier concerned to sell and market freely
its air transport services including all aspects
of marketing such as market research, advertising
and distribution. These activities do not
include the pricing of air transport services nor
the applicable conditions; and
 (i) the term “traffic rights” means the rights for
scheduled and non-scheduled services to operate
and/or to carry passengers, cargo and mail for
remuneration or hire from, to, within, or over a
Party, including points to be served, routes to
be operated, types of traffic to be carried,
capacity to be provided, tariffs to be charged
and their conditions, and criteria for
designation of airlines, including such criteria
as number, ownership and control.
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, an enterprise is:
 (a) “owned” by a person if more than 50 percent of
the equity interests in it is beneficially owned
by the person; and
 (b) “controlled” by a person if the person has the
power to name a majority of its directors or
otherwise to legally direct its actions in
accordance with the laws and regulations of a
Party. 
76
Chapter 10
Financial Services
Article 117
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to measures adopted or
maintained by a Party relating to:
 (a) financial institutions of the other Party;
 (b) investors of the other Party, and investments of
such investors, in financial institutions in the
Area of the former Party; and
 (c) cross-border trade in financial services.
2. Articles 81 through 86, 114 and 115 shall apply to
measures described in paragraph 1, mutatis mutandis. For
greater certainty, no other provision of Chapter 8 or 9
shall apply to measures described in paragraph 1.
3. This Chapter is subject to Annex 5.
4. This Chapter shall not apply to:
 (a) measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to:
 (i) activities conducted by the central bank or
monetary authority of the Party or by any
other public entity in pursuit of monetary
or exchange rate policies;
 (ii) activities or services forming part of a
public retirement plan or statutory system
of social security, unless the Party allows
any of such activities or services to be
conducted by its financial institutions in
competition with a public entity or a
financial institution; or
 (iii) activities or services conducted for the
account or with the guarantee or using the
financial resources of the Party, including
its public entities, unless the Party allows
any of such activities or services to be
conducted by its financial institutions in
competition with a public entity or a
financial institution;
 (b) government procurement; 
77
 (c) subsidies provided by a Party or a state
enterprise thereof, including grants, governmentsupported loans, guarantees and insurance; and
 (d) measures affecting natural persons of a Party
seeking access to the employment market of the
other Party, or measures regarding nationality or
citizenship, or residence or employment on a
permanent basis.
Article 118
National Treatment
1. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule in Annex 10,
subject to any conditions and qualifications set out
therein, each Party shall accord to investors of the other
Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords to
its own investors, in like circumstances, with respect to
the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment and sale or
other disposition of financial institutions and investments
in financial institutions in its Area.
2. In the sectors inscribed in its Schedule in Annex 10,
subject to any conditions and qualifications set out
therein, each Party shall accord to financial institutions
of the other Party and to investments of investors of the
other Party in financial institutions treatment no less
favorable than that it accords to its own financial
institutions, and to investments of its own investors in
financial institutions, in like circumstances, with respect
to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment and sale or
other disposition of financial institutions and
investments.
Article 119
Market Access for Financial Institutions
1. With respect to market access for financial
institutions, each Party shall accord to financial
institutions of the other Party and investors of the other
Party who seek to establish financial institutions in the
Area of the former Party treatment no less favorable than
that provided for under the terms, limitations and
conditions specified in its Schedule in Annex 10.
2. In sectors where market-access commitments are
undertaken, the measures which a Party shall not maintain
or adopt either on the basis of a regional subdivision or
on the basis of its entire Area, unless otherwise specified
in its Schedule in Annex 10, are defined as: 
78
 (a) limitations on the number of financial
institutions whether in the form of numerical
quotas, monopolies, exclusive financial
institutions or the requirements of an economic
needs test;
 (b) limitations on the total value of financial
service transactions or assets in the form of
numerical quotas or the requirement of an
economic needs test;
 (c) limitations on the total number of financial
service operations or on the total quantity of
financial service output expressed in terms of
designated numerical units in the form of quotas
or the requirement of an economic needs test;
 Note: Subparagraph (c) does not cover measures
of a Party which limit inputs for the
supply of financial services.
 (d) limitations on the total number of natural
persons that may be employed in a particular
financial service sector or that a financial
institution may employ and who are necessary for,
and directly related to, the supply of a specific
financial service in the form of numerical quotas
or the requirement of an economic needs test; and
 (e) measures which restrict or require specific types
of legal entity or joint venture through which a
financial institution may supply a financial
service.
Article 120
Cross-Border Trade
1. Each Party shall permit, under terms and conditions
that accord national treatment, cross-border financial
service suppliers of the other Party to supply the
financial services specified in its Schedule in Annex 11,
subject to any terms and conditions set out therein. 
79
2. Each Party shall permit persons located in its Area,
and its natural persons in the Area of the other Party, to
purchase the financial services specified in its Schedule
in Annex 12, subject to any terms and conditions set out
therein, from cross-border financial service suppliers of
the other Party located in the Area of the other Party.
This obligation does not require a Party to permit crossborder financial service suppliers of the other Party to do
business or solicit in the Area of the former Party. The
former Party may define “doing business” and “solicitation”
for the purposes of this Article as long as such
definitions are not inconsistent with its obligations under
paragraph 1.
3. A Party may require the registration of cross-border
financial service suppliers of the other Party and of their
financial instruments.
Article 121
New Financial Services
1. Each Party shall permit financial institutions of the
other Party to offer in its Area any new financial service
in sectors or sub-sectors where commitments are undertaken
in its Schedule in Annex 10 and subject to the terms,
limitations, conditions and qualifications set out in that
Schedule and provided that the introduction of this new
financial service does not require the former Party to
adopt a new law or modify an existing law.
2. Each Party may determine the legal form through which
the new financial service may be supplied and may require
authorization for the supply of the new financial service.
Article 122
Treatment of Certain Information
 Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require
a Party to disclose information relating to the affairs and
accounts of individual customers or any confidential or
proprietary information in the possession of public
entities. 
80
Article 123
Exceptions
 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter
and Chapters 8 and 9, a Party shall not be prevented from
adopting or maintaining measures for prudential reasons,
including for the protection of investors, depositors,
policy holders, or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed
by a financial institution or cross-border financial
service supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability
of the financial system. Where such measures do not
conform with the provisions of this Agreement, they shall
not be used as a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments
or obligations under this Agreement.
Article 124
Self-Regulatory Organizations
 Where a Party requires a financial institution of the
other Party to be a member of, participate in, or have
access to, a self-regulatory organization to supply a
financial service in the Area of the former Party, the
former Party shall ensure that such organization accords
national treatment to the financial institution of the
other Party.
Article 125
Payment and Clearing Systems
 Under terms and conditions that accord national
treatment, each Party shall grant to financial institutions
of the other Party established in its Area access to
payment and clearing systems operated by public entities,
and to official funding and refinancing facilities
available in the normal course of ordinary business. This
Article is not intended to confer access to the Party’s
lender of last resort facilities.
Article 126
Committee on Financial Services
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Financial Services (hereinafter referred to in
this Article as “Committee”).
2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
 (a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and
operation of this Chapter; 
81
 (b) discussing any issues related to this Chapter;
 (c) reporting the findings of the Committee to the
Commission; and
 (d) carrying out other functions as may be delegated
by the Commission in accordance with Article 190.
3. The Committee shall be composed of:
 (a) with respect to Japan, officials from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Financial
Services Agency; and
 (b) with respect to Chile, officials from the
Ministry of Finance (Ministerio de Hacienda).
4. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties.
Article 127
Dispute Settlement
1. The consultations under Article 177 on prudential
issues and other financial matters shall be participated in
by:
 (a) with respect to Japan, officials from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Financial
Services Agency; and
 (b) with respect to Chile, officials from the
Ministry of Finance (Ministerio de Hacienda).
2. A Party shall not be required to disclose information
or refrain from taking any action with respect to specific
regulatory, supervisory, administrative or enforcement
matters, solely by reason of the consultations under
Article 177.
3. The arbitral tribunal established under Article 178
for disputes arising under this Chapter shall be composed
entirely of arbitrators who have expertise or experience in
financial services law or practice, which may include the
laws and regulations of financial institutions.
Article 128
Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter: 
82
 (a) the term “cross-border financial service supplier
of a Party” means a person of a Party that is
engaged in the business of supplying financial
services within the Area of the Party and that
seeks to supply or supplies financial services
through the cross-border supply of financial
services;
 Note: The term “cross-border supply of financial
services” has the same meaning as the term
“cross-border trade in financial
services”.
 (b) the term “cross-border trade in financial
services” means the supply of a financial
service:
 (i) from the Area of a Party into the Area of
the other Party;
 (ii) in the Area of a Party by a person of that
Party to a person of the other Party; and
 (iii) by a natural person of a Party in the Area
of the other Party,
 but does not include the supply of a financial
service by an investment of an investor of a
Party, in the Area of the other Party;
 (c) the term “financial institution” means any
enterprise that is authorized to do business and
regulated or supervised as a financial
institution under the law of the Party in which
it is located;
 (d) the term “financial institution of the other
Party” means a financial institution located in a
Party that is owned or controlled by persons of
the other Party;
 (e) the term “financial service” means any service of
a financial nature. Financial services include
all insurance and insurance-related services, and
all banking and other financial services
(excluding insurance). Financial services
include the following activities:
 (i) Insurance and Insurance-Related Services
 (A) direct insurance (including coinsurance): 
83
 (AA) life; and
 (BB) non-life;
 (B) reinsurance and retrocession;
 (C) insurance intermediation, such as
brokerage and agency; and
 (D) services auxiliary to insurance, such
as consultancy, actuarial, risk
assessment and claim settlement
services; and
 (ii) Banking and Other Financial Services
(Excluding Insurance)
 (A) acceptance of deposits and other
repayable funds from the public;
 (B) lending of all types, including
consumer credit, mortgage credit,
factoring and financing of commercial
transactions;
 (C) financial leasing;
 (D) all payment and money transmission
services, including credit, charge and
debit cards, travelers checks and
bankers drafts;
 (E) guarantees and commitments;
 (F) trading for own account or for account
of customers, whether on an exchange,
in an over-the-counter market or
otherwise, the following:
 (AA) money market instruments
(including checks, bills,
certificates of deposits);
 (BB) foreign exchange;
 (CC) derivative products including,
but not limited to, futures and
options;
 (DD) exchange rate and interest rate
instruments, including products
such as swaps, forward rate
agreements; 
84
 (EE) transferable securities; and
 (FF) other negotiable instruments and
financial assets, including
bullion;
 (G) participation in issues of all kinds of
securities, including underwriting and
placement as agent (whether publicly or
privately) and provision of services
related to such issues;
 (H) money broking;
 (I) asset management, such as cash or
portfolio management, all forms of
collective investment management,
pension fund management, custodial,
depository and trust services;
 (J) settlement and clearing services for
financial assets, including securities,
derivative products, and other
negotiable instruments;
 (K) provision and transfer of financial
information, and financial data
processing and related software by
suppliers of other financial services;
and
 (L) advisory, intermediation, and other
auxiliary financial services on all the
activities listed in subparagraphs (A)
through (K), including credit reference
and analysis, investment and portfolio
research and advice, advice on
acquisitions and on corporate
restructuring and strategy;
 (f) the term “investment” means an investment as
defined in subparagraph 1(h) of Article 105,
except that, with respect to loans and debt
instruments referred to in that subparagraph:
 (i) a loan to or debt instrument issued by a
financial institution is an investment only
where it is treated as regulatory capital by
the Party in which the financial institution
is located; and 
85
 (ii) a loan granted by or debt instrument owned
by a financial institution, other than a
loan to or debt instrument of a financial
institution referred to in subparagraph (i),
is not an investment;
 for greater certainty,
 (iii) a loan to, or a debt instrument issued by, a
Party or a state enterprise thereof is not
an investment; and
 (iv) a loan granted by or debt instrument owned
by a cross-border financial service
supplier, other than a loan to or debt
instrument issued by a financial institution
referred to in subparagraph (i), is an
investment under Chapter 8 if such loan or
debt instrument meets the criteria for
investments set out in subparagraph 1(h) of
Article 105;
 (g) the term “investor of a Party” means an investor
of a Party as defined in subparagraph 1(j) of
Article 105;
 (h) the term “new financial service” means a service
of a financial nature, including services related
to existing and new products or the manner in
which a product is delivered, that is not
supplied by any financial service supplier in the
Area of a Party but which is supplied in the Area
of the other Party;
 (i) the term “person of a Party” means a natural
person or an enterprise of a Party and, for
greater certainty, does not include a branch of
an enterprise of a non-Party;
 (j) the term “public entity” means the Government,
the central bank or monetary authority of a
Party, or any entity owned or controlled by a
Party, that is principally engaged in carrying
out governmental functions or activities for
governmental purposes, not including an entity
principally engaged in supplying financial
services on commercial terms or a private entity,
performing functions normally performed by a
central bank or monetary authority, when
exercising those functions; and 
86
 (k) the term “self-regulatory organization” means any
non-governmental body, including any securities
or futures exchange or market, clearing agency,
or any other organization or association, that
exercises its own or delegated regulatory or
supervisory authority over financial
institutions.
Chapter 11
Entry and Temporary Stay of Nationals for Business Purposes
Article 129
General Principles
1. This Chapter reflects the preferential trading
relationship between the Parties, the mutual desire of the
Parties to facilitate entry and temporary stay of nationals
for business purposes on a reciprocal basis and to
establish transparent criteria and procedures for entry and
temporary stay, and the need to ensure border security and
to protect the domestic labor force and permanent
employment in either Party.
2. Each Party shall apply its measures relating to the
provisions of this Chapter in accordance with paragraph 1,
and, in particular, shall apply expeditiously those
measures so as to avoid unduly impairing or delaying trade
in goods or services or conduct of investment activities
under this Agreement.
Article 130
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to measures affecting the
entry and temporary stay of nationals of a Party who enter
the other Party for business purposes.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to measures affecting
nationals of a Party seeking access to the employment
market of the other Party, nor shall it apply to measures
regarding nationality or citizenship, or residence or
employment on a permanent basis.
3. This Chapter shall not prevent a Party from applying
measures to regulate the entry of nationals of the other
Party into, or their temporary stay in, the former Party,
including those measures necessary to protect the integrity
of, and to ensure the orderly movement of natural persons
across, its borders, provided that such measures are not
applied in such a manner as to nullify or impair the
benefits accruing to the other Party under the terms of the
categories set out in Annex 13. 
87
 Note: The sole fact of requiring a visa for natural
persons of a certain nationality and not for
those of others shall not be regarded as
nullifying or impairing benefits under the
terms of a specific category.
Article 131
Grant of Entry and Temporary Stay
 Each Party shall grant entry and temporary stay to
nationals of the other Party in accordance with this
Chapter including the provisions of Annex 13.
Article 132
Provision of Information
 Each Party shall:
 (a) provide to the other Party such materials as will
enable that other Party to become acquainted with
its measures relating to this Chapter;
 (b) make publicly available in the Parties,
explanatory material in a consolidated document
regarding the requirements for entry and
temporary stay under this Chapter, no later than
one year after the date of entry into force of
this Agreement; and
 (c) to the extent possible, upon request by the other
Party, make available to the other Party, in
accordance with its laws and regulations, data
respecting the granting of entry and temporary
stay under this Chapter to nationals of the other
Party.
Article 133
Dispute Settlement
1. The dispute settlement procedures provided for in
Chapter 16 shall not apply to this Chapter unless:
 (a) the matter involves a pattern of practice; and
 (b) the nationals of a Party concerned have exhausted
the administrative remedies, where available,
regarding the particular matter. 
88
2. The remedies referred to in subparagraph 1(b) shall be
deemed to be exhausted if a final determination in the
matter has not been issued by the competent authority of
the other Party within one year after the date of the
institution of the administrative remedy, and the failure
to issue such determination is not attributable to delay
caused by the nationals.
Article 134
Measures pursuant to Immigration Laws and Regulations
 Except for this Chapter and Chapters 1, 2, 16, 17, 18
and 19, nothing in this Agreement shall impose any
obligation on either Party regarding measures pursuant to
immigration laws and regulations.
Article 135
Definitions
 For the purposes of this Chapter:
 (a) the term “entry and temporary stay” means entry
into and stay in a Party by a national of the
other Party without the intent to establish
permanent residence; and
 (b) the term “immigration laws and regulations” means
any laws and regulations affecting the entry and
temporary stay of nationals.
Chapter 12
Government Procurement
Article 136
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to any measures adopted or
maintained by a Party relating to government procurement,
by any contractual means, including through such methods as
purchase or as lease, rental or hire purchase, with or
without an option to buy:
 (a) by entities specified in Part 1 of Annex 14;
 (b) of goods specified in Part 2 of Annex 14,
services specified in Part 3 of Annex 14, or
construction services specified in Part 4 of
Annex 14; and 
89
 (c) where the value of the contracts to be awarded is
estimated to be not less than the thresholds
specified in Part 5 of Annex 14 at the time of
publication of a notice of procurement.
2. Paragraph 1 is subject to the General Notes set out in
Part 6 of Annex 14.
3. Neither Party shall prepare, design or otherwise
structure any government procurement contract in order to
avoid the obligations under this Chapter.
Article 137
National Treatment and Non-Discrimination
1. With respect to any laws, regulations, procedures and
practices regarding government procurement covered by this
Chapter, each Party shall provide immediately and
unconditionally to the goods, services and suppliers of the
other Party, treatment no less favorable than that it
accords to its own goods, services and suppliers.
2. With respect to any laws, regulations, procedures and
practices regarding government procurement covered by this
Chapter, each Party shall ensure:
 (a) that its entities do not treat a locallyestablished supplier less favorably than another
locally-established supplier on the basis of the
degree of affiliation to, or ownership by, a
natural person or an enterprise of the other
Party; and
 (b) that its entities do not discriminate against a
locally-established supplier on the basis that
the goods or services offered by that supplier
for a particular procurement are goods or
services of the other Party.
3. This Article shall not apply to customs duties and
charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with
importation, the method of levying such duties and charges,
other import regulations, including restrictions and
formalities, nor to measures affecting trade in services
other than laws, regulations, procedures and practices
regarding government procurement covered by this Chapter.
Article 138
Valuation of Contracts
 In determining the value of contracts for the purposes
of implementing this Chapter: 
90
 (a) valuation shall take into account all forms of
remuneration, including any premiums, fees,
commissions and interest receivable;
 (b) the selection of the valuation method by an
entity shall not be used, nor shall any
procurement requirement be divided, with the
intention of avoiding the application of this
Chapter; and
 (c) in cases where an intended procurement specifies
the need for option clauses, the basis for
valuation shall be the total value of the maximum
permissible procurement, inclusive of optional
purchases.
Article 139
Prohibition of Offsets
 Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not, in
the qualification and selection of suppliers, goods or
services, or in the evaluation of tenders and award of
contracts, impose, seek or consider offsets. For the
purposes of this Article, offsets means conditions
considered, sought or imposed by an entity prior to or in
the course of its procurement process that encourage local
development or improve its Party’s balance of payments
accounts, by means of requirements of local content,
licensing of technology, investment, counter-trade or
similar requirements.
Article 140
Technical Specifications
1. Technical specifications laying down the
characteristics of the goods or services to be procured,
such as quality, performance, safety and dimensions,
symbols, terminology, packaging, marking and labeling, or
the processes and methods for their production and
requirements relating to conformity assessment procedures
prescribed by procuring entities, shall not be prepared,
adopted or applied with a view to, or with the effect of,
creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.
2. Any technical specifications prescribed by procuring
entities shall, where appropriate:
 (a) be specified in terms of performance rather than
design or descriptive characteristics; and 
91
 (b) be based on international standards, where such
exist; otherwise, on national technical
regulations, recognized national standards, or
building codes.
3. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not
prescribe technical specifications that require or refer to
a particular trademark or trade name, patent, design or
type, specific origin or producer or supplier, unless there
is no sufficiently precise or intelligible way of
describing the procurement requirements and provided that,
in such cases, words such as “or equivalent” are included
in the tender documentation.
4. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not seek
or accept, in a manner which would have the effect of
precluding fair competition, advice which may be used in
the preparation or adoption of any technical specifications
for a specific procurement from a person that may have a
commercial interest in the procurement.
Article 141
Tendering Procedures
1. Each Party shall ensure that the tendering procedures
of its entities are applied in a non-discriminatory manner
and in compliance with this Chapter.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not
provide to any supplier information with regard to a
specific procurement in a manner which would have the
effect of precluding competition.
Article 142
Qualification of Suppliers
1. In the process of qualifying suppliers, each Party
shall ensure that its entities do not discriminate against
suppliers of the other Party. Qualification procedures
shall be consistent with the following:
 (a) any conditions for participation in tendering
procedures shall be published in adequate time to
enable interested suppliers to initiate and, to
the extent that it is compatible with efficient
operation of the procurement process, complete
the qualification procedures;
 (b) any conditions for participation in tendering
procedures shall be limited to those which are
essential to ensure the potential supplier’s
capability to fulfill the contract in question; 
92
 (c) the process of, and the time required for,
qualifying suppliers shall not be used in order
to keep suppliers of the other Party off a
suppliers’ list or from being considered for a
particular intended procurement. Entities shall
recognize as qualified suppliers such suppliers
of the other Party who meet the conditions for
participation in a particular intended
procurement. Suppliers requesting to participate
in a particular intended procurement who may not
yet be qualified shall also be considered,
provided there is sufficient time to complete the
qualification procedure;
 (d) entities may maintain permanent lists of
qualified suppliers. The entities shall ensure:
 (i) that suppliers may apply for qualification
at any time; and
 (ii) that all qualified suppliers so requesting
are included in the lists within a
reasonably short time;
 (e) if, after publication of the notice of
procurement under paragraph 1 of Article 143, a
supplier not yet qualified requests to
participate in an intended procurement, the
entity shall promptly start procedures for
qualification; and
 (f) any supplier having requested to become a
qualified supplier shall be advised by the
entities concerned of the decision in this
regard.
2. Nothing in paragraph 1 shall preclude the exclusion of
any supplier on grounds such as bankruptcy, liquidation or
insolvency, or false declarations relating to a
procurement, provided that such an action is consistent
with the national treatment and non-discrimination
provisions of this Chapter.
Article 143
Notice of Procurement
1. For each case of intended procurement, each Party
shall ensure that its entities make publicly available in
advance in the appropriate publication listed in Part 7 of
Annex 14, a notice of procurement inviting interested
suppliers to participate in that procurement, except as
provided for in Article 147. 
93
2. The information in each notice of procurement shall
include a description of the intended procurement, any
conditions that suppliers must fulfill to participate in
the procurement, the name of the entity, the address where
all documents relating to the procurement may be obtained
and the time-limits for submission of tenders.
3. Each Party shall endeavor to ensure that its entities
make publicly available notices of procurement in a timely
manner through means which offer the widest possible and
non-discriminatory access to interested suppliers. These
means may be accessible free of charge, through a single
electronic point of access.
4. If, after making publicly available a notice of
procurement in any case of intended procurement, but before
the time set for opening or receipt of tenders as specified
in the notice or the tender documentation, it becomes
necessary to amend or re-issue the notice, the amendment or
the re-issued notice shall be made publicly available in
the same manner as the original notice. Any significant
information given to one supplier with respect to a
particular intended procurement shall be given
simultaneously to all other suppliers concerned in adequate
time to permit the suppliers to consider such information
and to respond to it.
Article 144
Time-Limits for Tendering
 Each Party shall ensure that:
 (a) any prescribed time-limit is adequate to allow
suppliers of the other Party as well as domestic
suppliers to prepare and submit tenders before
the closing of the tendering procedures; and
 (b) in determining any such time-limit, its entities,
consistent with their own reasonable needs, take
into account such factors as the complexity of
the intended procurement, the extent of
subcontracting anticipated, the normal time for
transmitting tenders by mail from foreign as well
as domestic points and the delays of making
publicly available notices of procurement.
Article 145
Tender Documentation
1. Tender documentation provided to suppliers shall
contain all information necessary to permit them to submit
responsive tenders. 
94
2. Each Party shall ensure that its entities make tender
documentation accessible, or, upon request, forward the
tender documentation, to any supplier participating in the
tendering procedure, and reply promptly to any reasonable
request for explanations relating thereto.
3. Each Party shall endeavor to ensure that its entities
reply promptly to any reasonable request for relevant
information submitted by a supplier participating in the
tendering procedure, on condition that such information
does not give that supplier an advantage over its
competitors in the procedure for the award of the contract.
The information provided to a supplier may be provided to
any other suppliers that are invited to tender.
Article 146
Awarding of Contracts
1. To be considered for award, a tender must, at the time
of opening, conform to the essential requirements of the
notice of procurement or tender documentation and be from a
supplier which complies with the conditions for
participation. If an entity has received a tender
abnormally lower or otherwise exceptionally more
advantageous than other tenders submitted, it may enquire
with the tenderer to ensure that the tenderer can comply
with the conditions of participation and be capable of
fulfilling the terms of the contract.
2. Unless in the public interest an entity decides not to
issue the contract, the entity shall make the award to the
tenderer who has been determined to be fully capable of
undertaking the contract and whose tender is either the
lowest tender or determined to be the most advantageous in
terms of the specific evaluation criteria set forth in the
notice of procurement or tender documentation.
Article 147
Other Tendering Procedures
1. Articles 141 through 146 need not apply in the
following conditions, provided that the tendering under
this Article is not used by entities of a Party with a view
to avoiding maximum possible competition or in a manner
which would constitute a means of discrimination against
the suppliers of the other Party or protection to domestic
producers or suppliers: 
95
 (a) in the absence of tenders in response to the
tender pursuant to Articles 141 through 146, or
when the tenders submitted have been collusive in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the
former Party, or not in conformity with the
essential requirements in the tender, or from
suppliers who do not comply with the conditions
for participation provided for in accordance with
this Chapter, on condition that the requirements
of the initial tender are not substantially
modified in the contract as awarded;
 (b) when, for works of art or for reasons connected
with the protection of exclusive rights, such as
patents or copyrights, or in the absence of
competition for technical reasons, the goods or
services can be supplied only by a particular
supplier and no reasonable alternative or
substitute exists;
 (c) in so far as is strictly necessary when, for
reasons of extreme urgency brought about by
events unforeseeable by the entity, the goods or
services could not be obtained in time by means
of the tendering procedures pursuant to Articles
141 through 146;
 (d) for additional deliveries by the original
supplier that are intended either as parts
replacement for existing supplies, or
installations, or as the extension of existing
supplies, services, or installations, where a
change of supplier would compel the entity to
procure goods or services not meeting
requirements of interchangeability with existing
equipment, software, services or installations;
 (e) when an entity procures prototypes or a first
good or service which are developed at its
request in the course of, and for, a particular
contract for research, experiment, study or
original development; 
96
 Note: Original development of a first good or
service may include limited production or
supply in order to incorporate the results
of field testing and to demonstrate that
the good or service is suitable for
production or supply in quantity to
acceptable quality standards. It does not
extend to quantity production or supply to
establish commercial viability or to
recover research and development costs.
 (f) when additional construction services which were
not included in the initial contract but which
were within the objectives of the original tender
documentation have, due to unforeseeable
circumstances, become necessary to complete the
construction services described therein, provided
that the total value of contracts awarded for
additional construction services may not exceed
50 percent of the amount of the initial contract;
 (g) for new construction services consisting of the
repetition of similar construction services which
conform to a basic project for which an initial
contract was awarded in accordance with Articles
141 through 146 and for which the entity has
indicated in the notice of procurement concerning
the initial construction service, that the
tendering procedures under this Article might be
used in awarding contracts for such new
construction services;
 (h) for goods purchased on a commodity market;
 (i) for purchases made under exceptionally
advantageous conditions which only arise in the
very short term. This provision is intended to
cover unusual disposals by enterprises which are
not normally suppliers, or disposal of assets of
businesses in liquidation or receivership. It is
not intended to cover routine purchases from
regular suppliers; and
 (j) in the case of contracts awarded to the winner of
design contest provided that the contest has been
organized in a manner which is consistent with
the principles of this Chapter and that the
contest is judged by an independent jury with a
view to design contracts being awarded to the
winners. 
97
2. Each Party shall ensure that, whenever it is necessary
for its entities to resort to the tendering procedures
under paragraph 1, the entities maintain a record or
prepare a written report providing specific justification
for such procedures.
Article 148
Post-Award Information
1. Each Party shall ensure that its entities make
publicly available, in an appropriate publication listed in
Part 7 of Annex 14, after the award of each contract,
information such as:
 (a) the nature and quantity of goods or services in
the contract award;
 (b) the name and address of the entity awarding the
contract;
 (c) the date of award;
 (d) the name and address of the winning tenderer;
 (e) the value of the winning award; and
 (f) the type of procedure used.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its entities, on request
from a supplier of a Party, promptly provide information
including:
 (a) pertinent information concerning the reasons why
the supplier’s application to qualify was
rejected, why its existing qualification was
brought to an end and why it was not selected;
and
 (b) when the supplier is an unsuccessful tenderer,
pertinent information concerning the reasons why
its tender was not selected and on the
characteristics and relative advantages of the
tender selected as well as the name of the
winning tenderer. 
98
3. Where a supplier of a Party is an unsuccessful
tenderer, the Party may seek, without prejudice to the
provisions under Chapter 16, such additional information on
the contract award, as may be necessary to ensure that the
procurement was made fairly and impartially. The other
Party shall provide information on both the characteristics
and relative advantages of the winning tender and the
contract price. Normally this latter information may be
disclosed by the former Party provided it exercises this
right with discretion. In cases where release of this
information would prejudice competition in future tenders,
this information shall be confidential and not be disclosed
except after consultation with and agreement of the other
Party.
Article 149
Challenge Procedures
1. In the event of a complaint by a supplier that there
has been a breach of this Chapter in the context of a
government procurement, the procuring entity shall accord
impartial and timely consideration to any such complaint,
in a manner that is not prejudicial to obtaining corrective
measures under the challenge system.
2. Each Party shall provide non-discriminatory, timely,
transparent and effective procedures enabling suppliers to
challenge alleged breaches of this Chapter arising in the
context of procurements in which they have, or have had, an
interest.
3. Each Party shall provide its challenge procedures in
writing and make them generally available.
4. Each Party shall ensure that documentation relating to
all aspects of the process concerning government
procurement covered by this Chapter shall be retained at
least for three years.
5. The interested supplier may be required to initiate a
challenge procedure and notify the procuring entity within
specified time-limits from the time when the basis of the
complaint is known or reasonably should have been known,
but in no case within a period of less than 10 days.
6. Challenges shall be heard by an impartial and
independent reviewing authority with no interest in the
outcome of the government procurement and the members of
which are secure from external influence during the term of
appointment. A reviewing authority which is not a court
shall either be subject to judicial review or shall have
procedures which provide at least the following: 
99
 (a) participants can be heard before an opinion is
given or a decision is reached;
 (b) participants can be represented and accompanied;
 (c) participants shall have access to all
proceedings;
 (d) proceedings can take place in public;
 (e) opinions or decisions are given in writing with a
statement describing the basis for the opinions
or decisions;
 (f) witnesses can be presented; and
 (g) documents are disclosed to the reviewing
authority.
7. Challenge procedures shall provide for:
 (a) rapid interim measures to correct breaches of
this Chapter and to preserve commercial
opportunities. Such action may result in
suspension of the procurement process. However,
procedures may provide that overriding adverse
consequences for the interests concerned,
including the public interest, may be taken into
account in deciding whether such measures should
be applied;
 (b) an assessment and, where appropriate, a decision
on the justification of the challenge; and
 (c) where appropriate, correction of breaches of this
Chapter or compensation for the loss or damages
suffered, which may be limited to costs for
tender preparation or protest.
8. With a view to the preservation of the commercial and
other interests involved, the challenge procedure shall
normally be completed within a reasonable time.
Article 150
Use of Electronic Communications in Procurement
1. The Parties shall seek to provide opportunities for
government procurement to be undertaken through the
Internet or a comparable computer-based telecommunications
network. 
100
2. In order to facilitate commercial opportunities for
its suppliers under this Chapter, each Party shall endeavor
to adopt or maintain a single electronic portal for access
to comprehensive information on government procurement
supply opportunities in its Area, and information on
measures relating to government procurement shall be
available.
3. The Parties shall encourage, to the extent possible,
the use of electronic means for the provision of tender
documents and the receipt of tenders.
4. The Parties shall endeavor to ensure the adoption of
policies and procedures for the use of electronic means in
government procurement that:
 (a) protect documentation from unauthorized and
undetected alteration; and
 (b) provide appropriate levels of security for data
on, and passing through, the procuring entity’s
network.
Article 151
Exceptions
 Subject to the requirement that such measures are not
applied in a manner that would constitute a means of
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the
Parties where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised
restriction on trade, nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to prevent a Party from imposing, enforcing or
maintaining measures:
 (a) necessary to protect public morals, order or
safety;
 (b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life
or health;
 (c) necessary to protect intellectual property; or
 (d) relating to goods or services of handicapped
persons, of philanthropic institutions, or of
prison labor. 
101
Article 152
Rectifications or Modifications
1. A Party shall notify the other Party of its
rectifications, or in exceptional cases, other
modifications relating to Annex 14 along with the
information as to the likely consequences of the change for
the mutually agreed coverage provided in this Chapter.
2. If the rectifications or other modifications are of a
purely formal or minor nature, notwithstanding Article 197,
they shall become effective provided that no objection from
the other Party has been raised within 30 days. In other
cases, both Parties shall consult the proposal and any
claim for compensatory adjustments with a view to
maintaining a balance of rights and obligations and a
comparable level of mutually agreed coverage provided in
this Chapter prior to such rectification or other
modification.
3. In the event of an agreement between the Parties not
being reached, the Party which has received such
notification may have recourse to the dispute settlement
procedure under Chapter 16.
Note: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter,
a Party may undertake reorganizations of its
entities, including programs through which the
procurement of such entities is decentralized or the
corresponding government functions cease to be
performed by any government entity, whether or not
subject to this Chapter. In cases of
reorganizations, compensation need not be proposed.
Neither Party shall undertake such reorganizations
to avoid the obligations of this Chapter.
Article 153
Privatization of Entities
 When government control at the central or national
government level over an entity specified in Part 1 of
Annex 14 has been effectively eliminated, notwithstanding
that the government may possess holding thereof or appoint
member of the board of directors thereto, this Chapter
shall no longer apply to that entity and compensation need
not be proposed. A Party shall notify the other Party of
the name of such entity before elimination of government
control or as soon thereafter as possible. 
102
Article 154
Denial of Benefits
1. A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an
enterprise of the other Party if the enterprise is owned or
controlled by persons of a non-Party and the former Party:
 (a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the
non-Party; or
 (b) adopts or maintains measures with respect to the
non-Party that prohibit transactions with the
enterprise or that would be violated or
circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were
accorded to the enterprise.
2. Subject to prior notification and consultation, a
Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to a supplier
of the other Party that is an enterprise of the other Party
where the denying Party establishes that the enterprise is
owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party and has no
substantial business activities in the Area of the other
Party.
Article 155
Further Negotiations
 In the event that after the entry into force of this
Agreement a Party offers a non-Party additional advantages
of access to its government procurement market beyond what
the other Party has been provided with under this Chapter,
the former Party shall, upon request of the other Party,
enter into negotiations with the other Party with a view to
extending those advantages to the other Party on a
reciprocal basis.
Article 156
Committee on Government Procurement
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Government Procurement (hereinafter referred
to in this Article as “Committee”).
2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
 (a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and
operation of this Chapter;
 (b) analyzing available information on each Party’s
government procurement market; 
103
 (c) reporting the findings of the Committee to the
Commission; and
 (d) carrying out other functions as may be delegated
by the Commission in accordance with Article 190.
3. The Committee shall be composed of government
officials of the Parties.
4. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties.
Article 157
Definition
 For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “supplier”
means a person that provides or could provide goods or
services to an entity.
Chapter 13
Intellectual Property
Article 158
General Provisions
1. The Parties shall ensure adequate, effective and nondiscriminatory protection of intellectual property, promote
efficiency and transparency in administration of
intellectual property protection system, and provide for
measures for adequate and effective enforcement of
intellectual property rights against infringement,
counterfeiting and piracy, in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter and the international agreements
to which both Parties are parties.
2. The Parties may take appropriate measures to prevent
the abuse of intellectual property rights by right holders
or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain
trade or adversely affect the international transfer of
technology, provided that such measures are consistent with
the provisions of this Agreement and the TRIPS Agreement.
3. The Parties affirm their existing rights and
obligations under the TRIPS Agreement and other
multilateral agreements relating to intellectual property
to which both Parties are parties. Nothing in this Chapter
shall derogate from existing rights and obligations that
the Parties have under the TRIPS Agreement or other
multilateral agreements relating to intellectual property
to which both Parties are parties. 
104
4. For the purposes of this Chapter, intellectual
property refers to all categories of intellectual property:
 (a) that are subject of Articles 161 through 163;
and/or
 (b) that are under the TRIPS Agreement and/or the
relevant international agreements referred to in
the TRIPS Agreement.
Article 159
Streamlining of Procedural Matters
1. For the purposes of providing efficient administration
of intellectual property system, each Party shall take
measures to streamline its administrative procedures
concerning intellectual property.
2. Each Party shall use a classification for patents and
utility models in accordance with the Strasbourg Agreement
Concerning the International Patent Classification, of
March 24, 1971, as amended. Each Party shall use a
classification of goods and services in accordance with the
Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification
of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration
of Marks, of June 15, 1957, as amended.
Article 160
Transparency
 For the purposes of further promoting transparency in
administration of intellectual property system, each Party
shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, take
appropriate measures to make available to the public
information on its efforts to provide effective enforcement
of intellectual property rights and other information with
regard to intellectual property system.
Article 161
Trademarks
 Each Party shall afford an opportunity for interested
parties to oppose to an application for registration of or
a registration of, and to request the cancellation of the
registration of, a trademark, in accordance with its laws
and regulations. 
105
Article 162
New Varieties of Plants
 Each Party shall become a party, if it is not a party,
to the 1991 Act of International Convention for the
Protection of New Varieties of Plants, by January 1, 2009.
Article 163
Geographical Indications
1. The Parties agree that indications for wines and
spirits listed in Annex 15 are geographical indications
referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 22 of the TRIPS
Agreement, and shall abide by the obligations under the
relevant provisions of the TRIPS Agreement with respect to
the protection of geographical indications.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of Article 197,
modifications to Annex 15 proposed by both Parties may be
adopted by the Commission pursuant to subparagraph 1(d)(i)
of Article 190. The adopted modifications shall be
confirmed by an exchange of diplomatic notes.
Article 164
Enforcement
1. Each Party shall provide for procedures concerning the
suspension by its customs authority of the release of the
goods infringing patents, utility models, industrial
designs, trademarks, or copyrights or related rights, which
are destined for importation into, or exportation from, the
Party.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its judicial authorities
have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right
holder damages adequate to compensate for the injury the
right holder has suffered because of an infringement of
that person’s intellectual property right by an infringer
who knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engaged
in infringing activity.
3. Each Party shall provide for criminal procedures and
penalties to be applied in cases of trademark
counterfeiting or copyright piracy, committed willfully and
on a commercial scale. Remedies available shall include
imprisonment and/or monetary fines sufficient to provide a
deterrent, consistently with the level of penalties applied
for crimes of a corresponding gravity. 
106
Article 165
Committee on Intellectual Property
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Intellectual Property (hereinafter referred to
in this Article as “Committee”).
2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
 (a) reviewing and monitoring the implementation and
operation of this Chapter;
 (b) discussing any issues related to intellectual
property, such as:
 (i) areas and forms of cooperation in the field
of intellectual property;
 (ii) enforcement of intellectual property rights;
 (iii) geographical indications; and
 (iv) public awareness concerning protection of
intellectual property;
 (c) reporting the findings of the Committee to the
Commission; and
 (d) carrying out other functions as may be delegated
by the Commission in accordance with Article 190.
3. The Committee shall be composed of government
officials of the Parties.
4. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties.
Chapter 14
Competition
Article 166
General Provision
 Each Party shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations and in a manner consistent with this Chapter,
take measures which it considers appropriate against anticompetitive activities so as to avoid that the benefits of
the liberalization of trade and investment may be
diminished or nullified by such activities. 
107
Article 167
Cooperation on Controlling Anti-competitive Activities
 The Parties shall, in accordance with their respective
laws and regulations, cooperate in the field of controlling
anti-competitive activities subject to their respective
available resources.
Article 168
Non-Discrimination
 Each Party shall apply its competition laws and
regulations in a manner which does not discriminate between
persons in like circumstances on the basis of their
nationality.
Article 169
Procedural Fairness
 Each Party shall implement administrative and judicial
procedures in a fair manner to control anti-competitive
activities, pursuant to its relevant laws and regulations.
Article 170
Transparency
 Each Party shall promote transparency of the
implementation of its competition laws and regulations and
its competition policy.
Article 171
Non-Application of Chapter 16
 The dispute settlement procedures provided for in
Chapter 16 shall not apply to this Chapter.
Chapter 15
Improvement of Business Environment
Article 172
Consultations for the Improvement of Business Environment
 The Parties, confirming their interest in creating a
more favorable business environment with a view to
promoting trade and investment activities by their private
enterprises, shall from time to time have consultations in
order to address issues concerning the improvement of
business environment in the Parties. 
108
Article 173
Committee on Improvement of Business Environment
1. For the purposes of the effective implementation and
operation of this Chapter, the Parties hereby establish a
Committee on Improvement of Business Environment
(hereinafter referred to in this Article as “Committee”).
2. The functions of the Committee shall be:
 (a) discussing ways and means to improve business
environment in the Parties;
 (b) making, as needed, recommendations to the Parties
on appropriate measures to be taken by the
Parties;
 (c) receiving information on the implementation of
such recommendations from the relevant
authorities of the Governments of the Parties;
 (d) making public, as needed, such recommendations in
an appropriate manner;
 (e) reporting the findings of the Committee to the
Commission; and
 (f) carrying out other functions as may be delegated
by the Commission in accordance with Article 190.
3. The Committee shall be composed of government
officials of the Parties.
4. The Committee may, by consensus, invite
representatives of relevant entities other than the
governmental agencies of the Parties with the necessary
expertise related to the issues to be discussed.
5. The Committee shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties.
6. The Committee shall cooperate with other relevant
committees or working groups with a view to avoiding
unnecessary overlap with the works of such committees or
working groups.
Article 174
Non-Application of Chapter 16
 The dispute settlement procedure provided for in
Chapter 16 shall not apply to this Chapter. 
109
Chapter 16
Dispute Settlement
Article 175
Scope
 Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this
Chapter shall apply with respect to the avoidance or
settlement of disputes between the Parties concerning the
implementation, interpretation or operation of this
Agreement.
Article 176
Choice of Dispute Settlement Procedure
1. Where a dispute regarding any matter arises under both
this Agreement and the WTO Agreement, the complaining Party
may select the dispute settlement procedure in which to
settle the dispute.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, once the complaining
Party has requested the establishment of an arbitral
tribunal under this Chapter or a panel under Article 6 of
the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the
Settlement of Disputes in Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement with
respect to a particular dispute, the arbitral tribunal or
panel selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other
procedure for that particular dispute.
Article 177
Consultations
1. Either Party may request in writing consultations with
the other Party concerning any matter on the
implementation, interpretation or operation of this
Agreement, including a matter relating to a measure that
the other Party proposes to take (hereinafter referred to
in this Chapter as “proposed measure”).
2. The requesting Party shall set out the reasons for the
request, including identification of the measure at issue
and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint, and
provide sufficient information to enable a full examination
of the matter.
3. The Parties shall make every effort to arrive at a
mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter through
consultations under this Article.
4. The consultations under this Article shall be
confidential and without prejudice to the rights of either
Party in any further proceedings. 
110
Article 178
Establishment of Arbitral Tribunals
1. The complaining Party that requested consultations
under Article 177 may request in writing the establishment
of an arbitral tribunal, if the Parties fail to resolve the
matter within:
 (a) 45 days after the date of receipt of the request
for consultations; or
 (b) 30 days after the date of receipt of the request
for consultations in cases of urgency, including
those which concern perishable goods,
provided that the complaining Party considers that any
benefits accruing to it directly or indirectly under this
Agreement are being nullified or impaired as a result of
the failure of the Party complained against to carry out
its obligations under this Agreement, or as a result of the
application by the Party complained against of measures
which are in conflict with its obligations under this
Agreement.
2. The request of the establishment of an arbitral
tribunal referred to in paragraph 1 may also be made in
case where the complaining Party considers that any
benefits accruing to it directly or indirectly under
Chapters 3 and 4 are being nullified or impaired as a
result of the application by the Party complained against
of measures which are not in conflict with its obligations
under those Chapters.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, the establishment
of an arbitral tribunal shall not be requested on any
matter relating to a proposed measure.
4. Any request to establish an arbitral tribunal pursuant
to this Article shall identify:
 (a) the specific measure at issue;
 (b) the legal basis of the complaint including the
provisions of this Agreement alleged to have been
breached and any other relevant provisions; and
 (c) the factual basis for the complaint.
5. The date of the establishment of an arbitral tribunal
shall be the date on which the chair is appointed. 
111
Article 179
Terms of Reference of Arbitral Tribunals
 Unless the Parties otherwise agree within 20 days from
the date of receipt of the request for the establishment of
the arbitral tribunal, the terms of reference of the
arbitral tribunal shall be:
 “To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions
of this Agreement, the matter referred to in the request
for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal pursuant to
Article 178, to make findings of law and fact together with
the reasons therefor and to issue an award for the
resolution of the dispute.”
Article 180
Composition of Arbitral Tribunals
1. An arbitral tribunal shall comprise three arbitrators.
2. Each Party shall, within 30 days after the date of
receipt of the request for the establishment of an arbitral
tribunal, appoint one arbitrator who may be its national
and propose up to three candidates to serve as the third
arbitrator who shall be the chair of the arbitral tribunal.
The third arbitrator shall not be a national of either
Party, nor have his or her usual place of residence in
either Party, nor be employed by either Party, nor have
dealt with the dispute in any capacity.
3. The Parties shall agree on and appoint the third
arbitrator within 45 days after the date of receipt of the
request for the establishment of an arbitral tribunal,
taking into account the candidates proposed pursuant to
paragraph 2.
4. If a Party has not appointed an arbitrator pursuant to
paragraph 2 or if the Parties fail to agree on and appoint
the third arbitrator pursuant to paragraph 3, the
arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed shall be chosen
within seven days by lot from the candidates proposed
pursuant to paragraph 2.
5. All arbitrators shall:
 (a) have expertise or experience in law,
international trade or other matters covered by
this Agreement;
 (b) be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity,
reliability and sound judgment; 
112
 (c) be independent of, and not be affiliated with or
receives instructions from, the Government of
either Party; and
 (d) comply with a code of conduct, to be provided in
the Rules of Procedures referred to in Article
187.
6. If an arbitrator appointed under this Article dies,
becomes unable to act or resigns, a successor shall be
appointed within 15 days in accordance with the appointment
procedure provided for in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, which
shall be applied, respectively, mutatis mutandis. The
successor shall have all the powers and duties of the
original arbitrator. The work of the arbitral tribunal
shall be suspended for a period beginning on the date the
original arbitrator dies, becomes unable to act or resigns
and ending on the date the successor is appointed.
Article 181
Functions of Arbitral Tribunals
1. The function of an arbitral tribunal is to make an
objective assessment of the dispute before it, including an
examination of the facts of the case and the applicability
of and conformity with this Agreement, and make such other
findings and rulings necessary for the resolution of the
dispute.
2. The arbitral tribunal should consult with the Parties
as appropriate and provide adequate opportunities for the
development of a mutually satisfactory resolution.
Article 182
Proceedings of Arbitral Tribunals
1. The arbitral tribunal shall meet in closed session.
2. The Parties shall be given the opportunity to attend
any of the presentations, statements or rebuttals in the
proceedings. Any information or written submissions
submitted by a Party to the arbitral tribunal, including
any comments on the draft award and responses to questions
put by the arbitral tribunal, shall be made available to
the other Party.
3. The arbitral tribunal shall make its decisions,
including its award, by consensus but may also make its
decisions, including its award, by majority vote. 
113
4. The arbitral tribunal may seek information from any
relevant source and may consult experts to obtain their
opinion on certain aspects of the matter.
5. The deliberations of the arbitral tribunal and the
documents submitted to it shall be kept confidential.
6. Notwithstanding paragraph 5, either Party may make
public statements as to its views regarding the dispute,
but shall treat as confidential, information and written
submissions submitted by the other Party to the arbitral
tribunal which that other Party has designated as
confidential. Where a Party has provided information or
written submissions designated to be confidential, that
Party shall, upon request of the other Party, provide a
non-confidential summary of the information or written
submissions which may be disclosed publicly.
7. Each Party shall bear the cost of its appointed
arbitrator and its own expenses. The cost of the chair of
an arbitral tribunal and other expenses associated with the
conduct of the proceedings shall be borne by the Parties in
equal shares.
Article 183
Suspension or Termination of Proceedings
1. The Parties may agree that the arbitral tribunal
suspends its work at any time for a period not exceeding 12
months from the date of such agreement. In the event of
such a suspension, the time-frames set out in paragraphs 2,
5 and 7 of Article 184 and paragraph 7 of Article 186 shall
be extended by the amount of time that the work was
suspended. If the work of the arbitral tribunal has been
suspended for more than 12 months, the authority for
establishment of the arbitral tribunal shall lapse unless
the Parties agree otherwise.
2. The Parties may agree to terminate the proceedings of
the arbitral tribunal by jointly so notifying the chair of
the arbitral tribunal at any time before the issuance of
the award to the Parties.
Article 184
Award
1. The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be drafted
without the presence of the Parties, and in the light of
the information provided and the statements made, and the
relevant provisions of this Agreement. 
114
2. The arbitral tribunal shall, within 120 days, or
within 60 days in cases of urgency, including those which
concern perishable goods, after the date of its
establishment, submit to the Parties its draft award.
3. The draft award shall contain both the descriptive
part and the findings, conclusions and decisions of the
arbitral tribunal, for the purposes of enabling the Parties
to review precise aspects of the draft award.
4. When the arbitral tribunal considers that it cannot
submit its draft award within the aforementioned 120 days
or 60 days period, it may extend that period with the
consent of the Parties.
5. A Party may provide written comments to the arbitral
tribunal on its draft award within 15 days after the date
of submission of the draft award.
6. After considering any written comments on the draft
award, the arbitral tribunal may reconsider its draft award
and make any further examination it considers appropriate.
7. The arbitral tribunal shall issue its award, within 30
days after the date of submission of the draft award.
8. The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be available
to the public within 15 days after the date of issuance,
subject to the requirement to protect confidential
information.
9. The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and
binding on the Parties.
Article 185
Implementation of Award
1. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the Party
complained against shall comply with the award of the
arbitral tribunal referred to in Article 184 immediately.
If this is not practicable, the Party complained against
shall comply with the award within a reasonable period of
time.
2. The reasonable period of time referred to in paragraph
1 shall be mutually determined by the Parties. Where the
Parties fail to agree on the reasonable period of time
within 45 days after the date of issuance of the award of
the arbitral tribunal referred to in Article 184, either
Party may refer the matter to an arbitral tribunal, which
shall determine the reasonable period of time. 
115
3. Where there is disagreement between the Parties as to
whether the Party complained against has complied with the
award of the arbitral tribunal referred to in Article 184
within the reasonable period of time as determined pursuant
to paragraph 2, either Party may refer the matter to an
arbitral tribunal.
Article 186
Non-Implementation –
Compensation and Suspension of Concessions
or Other Obligations
1. If the Party complained against notifies the
complaining Party that it is impracticable, or the arbitral
tribunal to which the matter is referred pursuant to
paragraph 3 of Article 185 confirms that the Party
complained against has failed, to comply with the award
within the reasonable period of time as determined pursuant
to paragraph 2 of Article 185, the Party complained against
shall, if so requested, enter into negotiations with the
complaining Party with a view to reaching a mutually
satisfactory compensation.
2. If there is no agreement on satisfactory compensation
within 20 days after the date of receipt of the request
mentioned in paragraph 1, the complaining Party may suspend
the application to the Party complained against of
concessions or other obligations under this Agreement,
after giving notification of such suspension 30 days in
advance.
3. The compensation referred to in paragraph 1 and the
suspension referred to in paragraph 2 shall be temporary
measures. Neither compensation nor suspension is preferred
to full compliance with the award. The suspension shall
only be applied until such time as the award is fully
complied with, or a mutually satisfactory solution is
reached.
4. In considering what concessions or other obligations
to suspend pursuant to paragraph 2:
 (a) the complaining Party should first seek to
suspend concessions or other obligations with
respect to the same sector(s) as that in which
the arbitral tribunal referred to in Article 184
has found a failure to comply with the
obligations under this Agreement, or
nullification or impairment of benefits in the
sense of paragraph 2 of Article 178; and 
116
 (b) if the complaining Party considers that it is not
practicable or effective to suspend concessions
or other obligations with respect to the same
sector(s), it may suspend concessions or other
obligations with respect to other sectors. The
notification of such suspension pursuant to
paragraph 2 shall indicate the reasons on which
it is based.
5. The level of suspension referred to in paragraph 2
shall be equivalent to the level of the nullification or
impairment.
6. If the Party complained against considers that the
requirements for the suspension of concessions or other
obligations by the complaining Party set out in paragraph
2, 3, 4 or 5 have not been met, it may refer the matter to
an arbitral tribunal.
7. The arbitral tribunal that is established for the
purposes of this Article or Article 185 shall, wherever
possible, have, as its arbitrators, the arbitrators of the
original arbitral tribunal. If this is not possible, then
the arbitrators to the arbitral tribunal that is
established for the purposes of this Article or Article 185
shall be appointed pursuant to Article 180. The arbitral
tribunal established under this Article or Article 185
shall issue its award within 60 days after the date when
the matter is referred to it. When the arbitral tribunal
considers that it cannot issue its award within the
aforementioned 60 days period, it may extend that period
for a maximum of 30 days with the consent of the Parties.
The award shall be available to the public within 15 days
after the date of issuance, subject to the requirement to
protect confidential information. The award shall be final
and binding on the Parties.
Article 187
Rules of Procedures
 The Commission shall adopt the Rules of Procedures
which provide for the details of the rules and procedures
of arbitral tribunals established under this Chapter, upon
the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 188
Modification of Rules and Procedures
 Any time period, or other rules and procedures for
arbitral tribunals, provided for in this Chapter, including
the Rules of Procedures referred to in Article 187, may be
modified by mutual consent of the Parties. 
117
Chapter 17
Commission
Article 189
Establishment of the Commission
 The Parties hereby establish a Commission which shall
be co-chaired by Ministers or senior officials of the
Parties.
Article 190
Functions of the Commission
1. The Commission shall:
 (a) review and monitor, and consider any matters
relating to, the implementation, interpretation
and operation of this Agreement;
 (b) consider and recommend to the Parties any
amendments to this Agreement;
 (c) supervise and coordinate the work of all
committees and working groups established under
this Agreement;
 (d) adopt:
 (i) modifications to Annex 15;
 (ii) the Operational Procedures referred to in
Article 52;
 (iii) an interpretation of a provision of this
Agreement referred to in Articles 93 and 94;
 (iv) the Rules of Procedures referred to in
Article 187; and
 (v) any necessary decisions; and
 (e) carry out other functions as the Parties may
agree.
2. The Commission may establish committees and working
groups, refer matters to any committee or working group for
advice, delegate its responsibilities to any committee or
working group, and consider matters raised by any committee
or working group. 
118
Article 191
Rules and Procedures of the Commission
1. The Commission shall establish its rules and
procedures.
2. Decisions of the Commission shall be taken by mutual
agreement.
3. The Commission shall meet at such venues and times as
may be agreed by the Parties.
Chapter 18
Exceptions
Article 192
General Exceptions
1. For the purposes of Chapters 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 other
than Article 76, Article XX of the GATT 1994 is
incorporated into and made part of this Agreement, mutatis
mutandis.
2. For the purposes of Chapters 8 other than Article 76,
9, 10 and 11, Article XIV of the GATS, including its
footnotes, is incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement, mutatis mutandis.
Article 193
Security Exceptions
 Nothing in this Agreement other than Article 76 shall
be construed:
 (a) to require a Party to furnish any information the
disclosure of which it considers contrary to its
essential security interests;
 (b) to prevent a Party from taking any actions which
it considers necessary for the protection of its
essential security interests:
 (i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition
and implements of war and to such traffic in
other goods and materials, or such supply of
services, as is carried on directly or
indirectly for the purpose of supplying or
provisioning a military establishment;
 (ii) taken in time of war or other emergency in
international relations; or 
119
 (iii) relating to fissionable and fusionable
materials or the materials from which they
are derived; or
 (c) to prevent a Party from taking any action in
pursuance of its obligations under the United
Nations Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Article 194
Taxation
1. Except as otherwise provided for in this Article,
nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation measures.
 Note: The term “taxation measures” shall not include:
 (a) a customs duty as defined in subparagraph (d) of
Article 28;
 (b) an anti-dumping or countervailing duty referred
to in subparagraph (d)(ii) of Article 28; and
 (c) fees or charges referred to in subparagraph
(d)(iii) of Article 28.
2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and
obligations of either Party under the provisions relating
to any taxation measures in any other international
agreements to which both Parties are parties.
3. Article 13 shall apply to taxation measures to the
same extent as Article III of the GATT 1994.
4. Articles 107 and 108 shall apply to taxation measures
to the same extent as covered by the GATS.
5. (a) Article 82 shall apply to taxation measures
except that no investor may invoke Article 82 as
the basis for a claim under Article 89, where it
has been determined pursuant to subparagraph (b)
that the measure is not an expropriation. 
120
 (b) The investor shall refer the issue, at the time
that it delivers the notice of intent under
Article 89, to the competent authorities of both
Parties, through the contact points referred to
in Article 10, to determine whether such measure
is not an expropriation. If the competent
authorities of both Parties do not consider the
issue or, having considered it, fail to determine
that the measure is not an expropriation within a
period of 180 days of such referral, the investor
may submit its claim to arbitration under Article
89.
 (c) For the purposes of subparagraph (b), the term
“competent authorities” means:
 (i) with respect to Japan, the Minister of
Finance or his or her authorized
representative, who shall consider the issue
in consultation with the Minister of Foreign
Affairs or his or her authorized
representative; and
 (ii) with respect to Chile, the Director of the
Internal Revenue Service, Ministry of
Finance (Director del Servicio de Impuestos
Internos, Ministerio de Hacienda).
Chapter 19
Final Provisions
Article 195
Annexes and Notes
 The Annexes and Notes to this Agreement shall
constitute an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 196
Headings
 The headings of the Chapters, Sections and Articles of
this Agreement are inserted for convenience of reference
only and shall not affect the interpretation of this
Agreement.
Article 197
Amendments
1. This Agreement may be amended by agreement between the
Parties. 
121
2. Any amendment shall be approved by the Parties in
accordance with their respective legal procedures. Such
amendment shall enter into force on the date to be agreed
upon by the Parties.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, amendments relating only
to Annex 2 or 4 may be made by exchange of diplomatic
notes.
 Note: In the case of Chile, the amendments under
paragraph 3 shall be made as an Executive
Agreement (Acuerdo de Ejecución) in accordance
with the Political Constitution of the Republic
of Chile (Constitución Política de la República
de Chile).
Article 198
Entry into Force
 This Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth
day after the date of exchange of diplomatic notes
informing each other that their respective legal procedures
necessary for entry into force of this Agreement have been
completed. It shall remain in force unless terminated as
provided for in Article 199.
Article 199
Termination
 Either Party may terminate this Agreement by giving
one year’s advance notice in writing to the other Party. 
122
 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly
authorized by their respective Governments, have signed
this Agreement.
 DONE at Tokyo, on this twenty-seventh day of March in
the year 2007 in duplicate in the English language.
For Japan: For the Republic of Chile: 