Economic Complementation Agreement MERCOSUR - Chile
ACE No. 35

The Governments of the Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, States Parties to the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR), and the Government of the Republic of Chile will be called Signatory Parties . The Contracting Parties to this Agreement are MERCOSUR and the Republic of Chile.

WHEREAS :

The need to strengthen the integration process in Latin America, in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, through the conclusion of agreements open to the participation of the other member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), that allow the formation of an expanded economic space;

That the formation of free trade areas in Latin America constitutes a relevant element to approximate the existing integration schemes, in addition to being a fundamental stage for the integration process and the establishment of a hemispheric free trade area;

That regional economic integration constitutes one of the essential instruments for the countries of Latin America to advance in their economic and social development, ensuring a better quality of life for their peoples;

That the validity of democratic institutions constitutes an essential element for the development of the regional integration process;

That the States Parties to MERCOSUR, through the signing of the 1991 Treaty of Asunción, have taken a significant step towards achieving the objectives of Latin American integration;

That the Marrakesh Agreement, which creates the World Trade Organization (WTO), constitutes a framework of rights and obligations to which trade policies and the commitments of this Agreement will be adjusted;

That the integration process between MERCOSUR and Chile has as its objective the free circulation of goods and services, facilitate the full use of productive factors in the expanded economic space, encourage reciprocal investment and promote the development and use of physical infrastructure;

The shared interest of the Contracting Parties in the development of commercial relations and economic cooperation with the countries of the Pacific area and the convenience of combining efforts and actions in the existing cooperation forums in said areas;

That the establishment of clear, predictable, and durable rules is essential for economic operators to be able to make full use of regional integration mechanisms;

That this Agreement constitutes an important factor for the expansion of commercial exchange between MERCOSUR and Chile, and establishes the bases for broad complementarity and reciprocal economic integration;

AGREE :

In entering into this Economic Complementation Agreement, under the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, Resolution No. 2 of the ALADI Council of Ministers and the regulations established below.

TITLE I

OBJECTIVES

Article 1 . This Agreement has the following objectives.

- Establish the legal and institutional framework for cooperation and economic and physical integration that contributes to the creation of an expanded economic space that tends to facilitate the free circulation of goods and services and the full use of productive factors;

- Form a free trade area between the Contracting Parties within a maximum period of 10 years, through the expansion and diversification of commercial exchange and the elimination of tariff and non-tariff restrictions that affect reciprocal trade;

- Promote the development and use of the physical infrastructure, with special emphasis on the establishment of bioceanic interconnections;

- Promote and boost reciprocal investments between the economic agents of the Signatory Parties;

- Promote complementarity and economic, energy, scientific and technological cooperation.
TITLE II

COMMERCIAL RELEASE PROGRAM

Article 2 . The Contracting Parties will form a Free Trade Zone within a period of 10 years through a Trade Liberalization Program that will be applied to products originating in the territories of the Signatory Parties. Said program will consist of progressive and automatic tax relief applicable to the taxes in force for third countries at the time the merchandise is dispatched to the market.

For such purposes, they agree.  

a. Apply in reciprocal trade, as of October 1, 1996, the following preference margins to all products not included in the lists that make up Annexes 1 to 12.

b. The products included in Annex 1 will enjoy the margins of preference indicated in each case, which will evolve according to the following schedule.
c. The products included in Annex 2 will be subject to a special tax reduction rate according to the following schedule that ends in a period of 10 years.
d. The products included in Annex 3 will be subject to a special tax reduction rate according to the following schedule that ends in a period of 10 years.
Before 12.31.99, the Administrative Commission established in Article 46 will agree on the tariff treatment to be granted to the products included in Annex 4, for reciprocal trade between the Republic of Chile and the Republic of Paraguay. Until then, they will have an identical treatment to that established in this subsection.
and. The products in Annex 5 will receive special treatment and will be subject to the reduction rate indicated therein, which ends in a period of 10 years.
F. The products included in Annex 6 will be deducted from the tenth year in a linear and automatic manner, in order to achieve a preference of 100% within a period of 15 years, from the beginning of the Commercial Liberalization Program.
g. The products included in Annex 7 will receive special treatment and will be subject to the reduction rate indicated therein, which ends in a period of fifteen years.
h. The products included in Annex 8 will be deducted from the eleventh year in a linear and automatic manner, in order to achieve a preference of 100% within a period of 16 years, from the beginning of the Commercial Liberalization Program
The Administrative Commission will define, before December 31, 2003, the incorporation into the Trade Liberalization Program of the products included in Annex 9, which as of January 1, 2014 will enjoy a 100% margin of preference.
j. The products included in Annex 10 will have the initial preference margins expressly indicated therein.
k. For products originating in the Republic of Chile exported to the Argentine Republic and included in Annex 11 whose resulting tariff, after applying the corresponding margin of preference, is greater than that established in said Annex, the latter shall apply.
he. Used goods will not benefit from the Commercial Liberation Program of this Agreement.
Article 3 . At any time, the Administrative Commission may accelerate the tariff reduction program provided for in this Title, or improve the access conditions for any product or group of products.
Article 4 . To the products exported by the Republic of Chile, whose relief resulting from the Trade Liberation Program implies the application of a lower tariff than that indicated in the corresponding list of Annex 12 for access to the market in question, the latter will be applied. .
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, those products exported by the Republic of Chile included in the lists of Annexes 5 and 7, and that appear in the lists of Annex 12 by the corresponding MERCOSUR State Party, will be The tariff resulting from the preference agreed in the aforementioned Annexes 5 and 7 will apply, with the scope and under the conditions established therein.
The Administrative Commission may update Annex 12 for the sole purpose of registering reductions in the residual tariffs applicable to Chile resulting from the application of this Article.
Article 5 . "Charges" shall be understood as customs duties and any other tax with equivalent effect, whether fiscal, monetary, exchange rate or of any other nature, that affects imports. Similar rates and surcharges are not included in this concept when they are equivalent to the cost of the services rendered.
The Signatory Parties may not establish other taxes and charges of equivalent effects that are different from customs duties and that are in force on the date of signing the Agreement, nor increase the incidence of said taxes and charges of equivalent effects. These are included in the Complementary Notes of this Agreement.
The encumbrances and charges of equivalent effects identified in the Complementary Notes of this Agreement will not be subject to the Commercial Liberalization Program.
Article 6 . Without prejudice to the provisions of the WTO agreements, the Signatory Parties will not apply new export taxes to reciprocal trade, nor will they increase the incidence of existing ones, in a discriminatory manner, from the entry into force of this Agreement. . The current liens are included in Complementary Notes to this Agreement.
Article 7 . Neither Party will maintain or apply new non-tariff restrictions on the import or export of products from its territory to that of the other Party, whether through quotas, licenses or through other measures, without prejudice to the provisions of the WTO Agreements. .
Notwithstanding the previous paragraph, the existing measures that appear in the Complementary Notes to this Agreement may be maintained.
The Administrative Commission must ensure that they are eliminated in the shortest possible time.
Article 8 . Within the scope of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties undertake not to apply specific duties other than existing ones in reciprocal trade, to increase their incidence, to apply them to new products or to modify their calculation mechanisms, in such a way that it means a deterioration of the conditions of access to the market of the other Party.
Article 9 . Whenever the Administrative Commission considers it justified or necessary, the Complementary Notes to this Agreement may be reviewed, corrected or modified in order to contribute to the liberalization of trade.
Article 10 . The Contracting Parties will exchange, at the time of signing this Agreement, the tariffs in force and will keep each other informed, through the competent bodies, about the subsequent modifications and will send a copy of the same to the ALADI General Secretariat for information. .
Article 11 . The Contracting Parties agree that, from the entry into force of this Agreement, the products covered by the Trade Liberalization Program must be subject to compliance with the trade disciplines established in this Agreement.
Article 12 . The Signatory Parties will apply the tariff in force for third countries that corresponds, to all merchandise manufactured or coming from free zones of any nature located in the territories of the Signatory Parties, in accordance with their respective national legislation. These goods must be duly identified.
The legal provisions in force are safeguarded, for the entry, in the market of the Signatory Parties, of merchandise from free zones located in their own territories.
TITLE III
ORIGIN REGIME
Article 13 . The Parties will apply to imports made under the Trade Liberation Program, the origin regime contained in Annex 13 of this Agreement.
The Administrative Commission of the Agreement established in Article 46 may.
a.- Modify the rules contained in the aforementioned Annex;
b.- Modify the elements or criteria set forth in the aforementioned Annex, in order to qualify the merchandise as originating;
c.- Establish, modify, suspend or eliminate specific requirements.
TITLE IV
TREATMENT REGARDING INTERNAL TAXES
Article 14 . Regarding taxes, rates or other internal taxes, the Signatory Parties refer to the provisions of Article III of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994 (GATT 94).
TITLE V
UNFAIR TRADE PRACTICES
Article 15 . In the application of countervailing or anti-dumping measures, aimed at countering the detrimental effects of unfair competition, the Signatory Parties will adjust their laws and regulations to the commitments of the WTO Agreements.
Article 16 . In the event that one of the Signatory Parties of a Contracting Party applies anti-dumping or countervailing measures on imports from third countries, it will notify the other Contracting Party for the evaluation and monitoring of imports in its market, of the products subject to the measure, through the competent bodies referred to in Article 46.
Article 17 . If one of the Signatory Parties of a Contracting Party considers that the other Contracting Party is making imports from third markets, under conditions of dumping and/or subsidies, it may request that consultations be carried out in order to know the real conditions of entry of those products. The consulted Contracting Party will give adequate consideration and response within a period of no more than 15 business days.
TITLE VI
DEFENSE OF COMPETITION AND THE CONSUMER
Article 18 . The Contracting Parties will promote actions to agree, as soon as possible, on a regulatory scheme based on internationally accepted provisions and practices, which constitutes the appropriate framework to discipline eventual anti-competitive practices.
Article 19 . The Contracting Parties will develop joint actions tending to the establishment of norms and specific commitments, so that the products coming from them enjoy a treatment no less favorable than that granted to similar national products, in aspects related to the defense of consumers.
Article 20 . The competent bodies in these matters in the Signatory Parties will implement a cooperation scheme that will allow a first level of understanding on these issues to be reached in the short term and a methodological scheme for the consideration of specific situations that may arise.
TITLE VII
SAFEGUARDS
Article 21 . The Contracting Parties undertake to put into effect a Regime of Safeguard Measures as of January 1, 1997.
Until the aforementioned Regime enters into force, the concessions negotiated in this Agreement will not be subject to safeguard measures.
TITLE VIII
DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Article 22 . Disputes arising from the interpretation, application or non-compliance of this Agreement and the Protocols entered into within its framework, will be settled in accordance with the Dispute Settlement Regime contained in Annex 14.
The Administrative Commission must initiate, as of the date of its constitution, the necessary negotiations to define and agree on an arbitration procedure, which will enter into force at the beginning of the fourth year of validity of the Agreement.
If the period indicated in the previous paragraph has expired, the pertinent negotiations have not been concluded or there is no agreement on said procedure, the Parties will adopt the arbitration procedure provided for in Chapter IV of the Brasilia Protocol .
TITLE IX
CUSTOMS VALUATION
Article 23 . The WTO Customs Valuation Code will regulate the customs valuation regime applied by the Signatory Parties in their reciprocal trade.
The Signatory Parties agree not to make use, for reciprocal trade, of the options and reservations provided for in Article 20 and paragraphs 1 and 2 of Annex III of the Agreement relating to the application of Article VII of GATT 94. This commitment will be effective upon as of January 1, 1997.
Article 24 . In the use of the Price Band system provided for in its national legislation regarding the importation of merchandise, the Republic of Chile undertakes, within the scope of this Agreement, not to include new products or to modify the mechanisms or apply them in such a way. that means a deterioration of the access conditions for MERCOSUR.
TITLE X
TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS, 
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES, AND OTHER MEASURES
Article 25 . The Signatory Parties will abide by the obligations contracted in the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the WTO.
Article 26 . The regulatory measures that the Signatory Parties have in force at the time this Agreement is signed will be exchanged within a maximum period of six months from its validity.
They will be reviewed by the Administrative Commission, in order to verify that they do not actually constitute an obstacle to reciprocal trade. If this last situation arises, the negotiation procedures will begin immediately for the purposes of its compatibility, within a period to be defined by the Administrative Commission. Once this term has expired and no agreement has been reached, the measure must be incorporated into the Complementary Notes established in Article 7 of this Agreement.
Within the scope of the Administrative Commission, provisions will be developed for the notification of new standards and technical regulations and sanitary and phytosanitary measures and for the harmonization and compatibility of the same.
Article 27 . The Signatory Parties agree on the importance of establishing coordinated guidelines and criteria for the compatibility of standards and technical regulations. They also agree to make efforts to identify the productive areas in which it is possible to harmonize inspection, control and conformity assessment procedures, which allow mutual recognition of the results of these procedures. To this end, the advances made in the matter in the MERCOSUR sphere will be taken into account.
Article 28 . The Contracting Parties express their interest in preventing sanitary and phytosanitary measures from becoming unjustified obstacles to trade.
For this purpose, they undertake to harmonize or make them compatible within the framework of the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement of the WTO.
Article 29 . The Signatory Parties undertake to define in a short period of time the transit regulations to and from third countries or between the Contracting Parties, through one or more of the Signatory Parties, of agricultural and agro-industrial products originating in or coming from their respective territories, before the request of any of them. For this, the minimum risk criterion and scientific foundation of the regulation will be applied, in accordance with the WTO rules.
TITLE XI
APPLICATION AND USE OF 
EXPORT INCENTIVES
Article 30 . The Signatory Parties will abide, in the application and use of export incentives, to the commitments assumed in the sphere of the WTO.
The Administrative Commission will carry out, after no more than 12 months of validity of the Agreement, a survey and examination of the incentives for exports in force in each one of the Signatory Parties.
Article 31 . Products that incorporate temporarily imported inputs in their manufacture, or under a draw-back regime, will not benefit from the Liberation Program established in this Agreement, once the fifth year of its entry into force has been completed.
TITLE XII
PHYSICAL INTEGRATION
The Signatory Parties, recognizing the importance of the physical integration process as an essential instrument for the creation of an expanded economic space, undertake to facilitate the transit of people and the circulation of goods, as well as promote trade between the Parties and towards third markets, through the establishment and full operation of land, river, sea and air links.
To this end, the Signatory Parties sign a Physical Integration Protocol , together with this Agreement, which enshrines their commitment to execute a coordinated investment program in physical infrastructure works.
Article 33 . The States Parties to MERCOSUR, when applicable, and the Republic of Chile, assume the commitment to improve their national infrastructure, in order to develop bi-oceanic transit interconnections. In this regard, they undertake to improve and diversify land communication routes, and encourage works aimed at increasing port capacities, guaranteeing their free use.
For such purposes, the States Parties to MERCOSUR, when appropriate, and the Republic of Chile will promote investments, both public and private, and undertake to allocate the budgetary resources that are approved to contribute to those objectives.
TITLE XIII
SERVICES
Article 34 . The Signatory Parties will promote the liberalization, expansion and progressive diversification of trade in services in their territories, within a period to be defined, and in accordance with the commitments assumed in the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
Article 35 . For the purposes of this Title, "trade in services" is defined as the provision of a service.
a.- From the territory of one of the Signatory Parties to the territory of the other Party;
b.- In the territory of a Signatory Party to a consumer of services of the other Signatory Party;
c.- By a service provider of a Signatory Party through commercial presence in the territory of the other Signatory Party;
d.- By a service provider of a Signatory Party through the presence of natural persons of a Signatory Party in the territory of the other Signatory Party.
Article 36 . In order to achieve the objectives set forth in Article 34 above, the Contracting Parties agree to start the work aimed at advancing in the definition of the aspects of the Liberation Program for the service sectors subject to trade.
TITLE XIV
TRANSPORT
Article 37 . The Signatory Parties will promote the facilitation of transport services and promote their efficient operation on land, river, lake, sea and air, in order to offer adequate conditions for the best circulation of goods and people, meeting the greatest demand. that will result from the expanded economic space.
Article 38 . The Contracting Parties agree that they will be governed by the provisions of the Southern Cone International Terrestrial Transportation Agreement and its subsequent amendments.
The Agreements entered into by MERCOSUR up to the date of signing this Agreement are listed in Annex 15.
The Administrative Commission will identify those Agreements entered into within the framework of MERCOSUR whose application by both Contracting Parties is of common interest.
Article 39 . No restrictions on transit or free circulation in the respective territories may be applied to goods manufactured in the territory of MERCOSUR or of Chile that transit through the territory of the other Party, without prejudice to the provisions established in Title X of this Agreement.
Article 40 . The Signatory Parties may establish, through Additional Protocols to this Agreement, rules and specific commitments in terms of land, river , sea and air transport that fall within the framework indicated in the rules of this Title and set the deadlines for its implementation.
TITLE XV
INVESTMENTS
Article 41 . The bilateral agreements on the promotion and reciprocal protection of investments, signed between Chile and the States Parties to MERCOSUR, will remain in full force.
TITLE XVI
DOUBLE TAXATION
Article 42 . In order to stimulate reciprocal investment, the Signatory Parties will seek to enter into agreements to avoid double taxation. Nothing provided in this Agreement will affect the rights and obligations of any of the Parties derived from any tax agreement signed or signed in the future.
TITLE XVII
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Article 43 . The Signatory Parties will be governed by the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, included in Annex 1 C) of the Agreement establishing the WTO.
TITLE XVIII
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL COOPERATION
Article 44 . The Signatory Parties will stimulate the development of joint actions aimed at the execution of cooperation projects for scientific and technological research. They will also try to carry out programs to disseminate the progress achieved in this field. For these purposes, the Agreements on Sectoral, Scientific and Technological Cooperation in force between the Signatory Parties to this Agreement will be taken into account.
Article 45 . Cooperation may provide for different forms of execution and will include the following modalities.
a.- Exchange of knowledge and research results and experiences;
b.- Exchange of information on technology, patents and licenses;
c.- Exchange of goods, materials, equipment and services necessary to carry out specific projects;
d.- Joint research in the scientific and technological area with a view to the practical use of the results obtained;
e.- Organization of seminars, symposiums and conferences;
f.- Joint research for the development of new products and manufacturing techniques, production administration and technological management;
g.- Other modalities of scientific and technical cooperation whose purpose is to promote the development of the Signatory Parties.
TITLE XIX
ADMINISTRATION AND EVALUATION OF THE AGREEMENT
Article 46 . The administration and evaluation of this Agreement will be the responsibility of an Administrative Commission made up of the MERCOSUR Common Market Group and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chile, through the General Directorate of International Economic Relations.
The Administrative Commission will be constituted within sixty (60) calendar days from the date of signing of this Agreement and at its first meeting it will establish its internal regulations.
The Administrative Commission will adopt its decisions by consensus of the Parties.
Article 47 . The Administrative Commission will have the following attributions.
a. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement and its Additional Protocols and Annexes;
b. Determine in each case the modalities and deadlines in which the negotiations aimed at achieving the objectives of this Agreement will be carried out, being able to establish working groups for this purpose;
c. Periodically evaluate the progress of the release program and the general operation of this Agreement, submitting an annual report to the Signatory Parties in this regard, as well as on the fulfillment of the general objectives set forth in Article 1 of this Agreement;
d. Contribute to the solution of controversies in accordance with the provisions of Annex 14, and carry out the negotiations provided for in Article 22 of this Agreement;
and. Prepare and approve a Safeguards Regime within the period indicated in Article 21 of this Agreement, and monitor it;
F. Monitor the application of the commercial disciplines agreed between the Contracting Parties, such as the origin regime, safeguard clauses, defense of competition and unfair trade practices;
g. Establish, when appropriate, procedures for the application of the commercial disciplines contemplated in this Agreement and propose to the Contracting Parties possible modifications to such disciplines if necessary;
h. Convoke the Signatory Parties to comply with the objectives established in Title X of this Agreement regarding the Harmonization of Standards and Technical Regulations, Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, and other measures;
Yo. Establish mechanisms that ensure the active participation of the representatives of the productive sectors;
j. Review the Trade Liberalization Program in cases where one of the Contracting Parties substantially modifies, selectively and/or generally, its general tariffs;
k. Evaluate and propose a treatment for the automotive sector (finished vehicles) - before the fourth year of validity of this Agreement - in order to improve the conditions of access to their respective markets;
he. Comply with the other tasks that are entrusted to the Administrative Commission by virtue of the provisions of this Agreement, its Additional Protocols and other Instruments signed in its scope, or by the Parties;
TITLE XX
GENERAL DISPOSITION
Article 48 . As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Signatory Parties decide to annul the negotiated tariff preferences and the regulatory aspects related to them, which appear in the Partial Scope Agreements for Economic Complementation No. 16 and 4, of Renegotiation No. 3 and 26 and the Trade Agreements signed within the framework of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty. However, the provisions of said Agreements that are not incompatible with this Agreement or when they refer to matters not included in it will remain in force.
Article 49 . Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Signatory Party from adopting or applying measures in accordance with Article 50 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty or with Articles XX or XXI of the 1994 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, without prejudice of the provisions of the Articles of Title X of this Agreement.
Article 50 . This Agreement replaces for all purposes, the tariff treatments, regime of origin and safeguard clauses in force between the Signatory Parties. The Market Opening List granted by the Republic of Chile in favor of the Republic of Paraguay is excepted.
Article 51 . The Contracting Party that grants advantages, favours, franchises, immunities or privileges to products originating from or destined for any other member or non-member country of ALADI, by decisions or agreements that are not provided for in the 1980 Montevideo Treaty must.
a. Inform the other Party within a period of fifteen (15) days of signing the agreement, accompanying the text of the same and its complementary instruments.
b. Announce on the same occasion the willingness to negotiate, within a period of ninety (90) days, concessions equivalent to those granted and received globally.
c. In the event that a mutually satisfactory solution is not reached in the negotiations provided for in subparagraph b., the Parties will negotiate equivalent compensation, within a period of ninety (90) days.
d. If an agreement is not reached in the negotiations established in literal c., the affected Party may resort to the dispute settlement procedure in force in this Agreement.
TITLE XXI
CONVERGENCE
Article 52 . On the occasion of the Evaluation and Convergence Conference referred to in Article 33 of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, the Contracting Parties will examine the possibility of proceeding with the progressive multilateralization of the treatments provided for in this Agreement.
TITLE XXII
ACCESSION
Article 53 . In compliance with the provisions of the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, this Agreement is open to adhesion, through prior negotiation, by the other ALADI member countries.
Adherence will be formalized once its terms have been negotiated between the Contracting Parties and the adhering country, through the signing of an Additional Protocol to this Agreement that will enter into force 30 days after being deposited with the ALADI General Secretariat.
TITLE XXIII
VALIDITY
Article 54 . This Agreement will enter into force on October 1, 1996 and will have an indefinite duration.
TITLE XXIV
COMPLAINT
Article 55 . The Contracting Party that wishes to withdraw from this Agreement must communicate its decision to the other signatory countries 60 days in advance of depositing the respective instrument of denunciation with the ALADI General Secretariat.
As of the formalization of the complaint, the rights acquired and obligations contracted by virtue of this Agreement will cease for the complaining Contracting Party, maintaining those relating to the Trade Liberation Program, the non-application of non-tariff measures and other aspects that the Parties Contracting Parties, together with the denouncing Party, agree within 60 days after the formalization of the denunciation. These rights and obligations will continue in force for a period of one (1) year from the date of deposit of the respective denunciation instrument, unless the Contracting Parties agree on a different term.
The cessation of obligations with respect to the commitments adopted in terms of investments, infrastructure works, energy integration and others that are agreed, will be governed by the provisions of the Protocols agreed on these matters.
TITLE XXV . AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS
Article 56 . Amendments or additions to this Agreement may only be made by agreement of the Parties. They will be submitted to the approval of the Administrative Commission and formalized through a Protocol.
TITLE XXVI
DEPOSITARY
Article 57 . The ALADI General Secretariat will be the depositary of this Agreement, of which it will send duly authenticated copies to the Signatory Parties.
Done in Potrero de los Funes, Province of San Luis, Argentine Republic, on the twenty-fifth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-six, in seven copies, in Spanish and Portuguese, all of them being equally valid.