 Royal Crest Miscellaneous Series No.2 (2021)       Interim Agreement establishing an Economic Partnership Agreement between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, of the one part and the Republic of Cameroon, of the other part     London, 9 March 2021      [The Agreement is not in force]        Presented to Parliament  by the Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Affairs  by Command of Her Majesty April 2021      CP 418  OGL_Logo© Crown copyright 2021  This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0  except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit   Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.  This publication is available at www.gov.uk/official-documents  Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at Treaty Section, Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, King Charles Street, London, SW1A 2AH  ISBN 978-1-5286-2523-4 CCS0321325874 04/21  Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum  Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s  Stationery Office TABLE OF CONTENTS    PREAMBLE ..................................................................................................................................................  TITLE I OBJECTIVES ....................................................................................................................  TITLE II PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT ..........................................................................  TITLE III TRADE REGIME FOR GOODS  .....................................................................................  CHAPTER 1 Customs duties and non-tariff measures ............................................................................  CHAPTER 2 Trade defence instruments .................................................................................................  CHAPTER 3 Customs and trade facilitation ...........................................................................................  CHAPTER 4 Technical barriers to trade, and sanitary and phytosanitary measures .............................  CHAPTER 5 Forestry governance and trade in timber and forest products ...........................................  TITLE IV ESTABLISHMENT, TRADE IN SERVICES AND E-COMMERCE ...............................  TITLE V TRADE-RELATED RULES .............................................................................................   CHAPTER 1 Current payments and capital movements .........................................................................  CHAPTER 2 Competition ........................................................................................................................  CHAPTER 3 Intellectual property ..........................................................................................................   CHAPTER 4 Public procurement ............................................................................................................  CHAPTER 5 Sustainable development ....................................................................................................  CHAPTER 6 Protection of personal data ...............................................................................................  TITLE VI DISPUTE AVOIDANCE AND SETTLEMENT ..............................................................  CHAPTER 1 Objective and scope ...........................................................................................................  CHAPTER 2 Consultations and mediation .............................................................................................  CHAPTER 3 Procedures for the settlement of disputes ..........................................................................  CHAPTER 4 General provisions .............................................................................................................  TITLE VII GENERAL EXCEPTIONS ................................................................................................  TITLE VIII GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS ......................................................................... .         INTERIM AGREEMENT ESTABLISHING AN ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, OF THE ONE PART, AND THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON, OF THE OTHER PART THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND (the ‘United Kingdom’ or ‘the UK’) of the one part, and THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON (‘Cameroon’), of the other part PREAMBLE NOTING the experience under the Interim Agreement with a view to an Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and the Central Africa Party of the other part (‘EU-Central Africa iEPA’); RECOGNISING THAT this Agreement builds on the experience of the Partnership Agreement between the Members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (‘ACP’) Group of States, of the one part, and the European Community (‘EC’) and its Member States, of the other part, signed on 23 June 2000, revised on 25 June 2005, and further revised on 22 June 2010 (‘the Cotonou Agreement’); HAVING REGARD to the Joint Statement of the Parties relating to the Objectives and Essential and Fundamental Elements of this Agreement; CONVINCED that this Economic Partnership Agreement will create a new and more favourable climate for their relations in the areas of economic governance, trade and investments and create new opportunities for growth and development; WHEREAS the liberalisation of trade, of establishment and of trade in services between the Parties must be based on the regional integration of the Central African States, have the objective of fostering their smooth and gradual integration into the global economy, with due regard for their political choices and their development priorities, and fulfil the conditions laid down in the World Trade Organization (.WTO.) agreements; WHEREAS the Parties shall not encourage foreign direct investment by making their domestic environmental, labour or occupational health and safety legislation and regulations less stringent or by relaxing their domestic labour legislation and regulations or regulations designed to protect and promote cultural diversity. The Parties therefore reaffirm their commitment to comply with these domestic laws or regulations or to propose to do so in order to encourage the establishment, acquisition, expansion or retention in their territory of an investment or of an investor,  HAVE DECIDED AS FOLLOWS:  TITLE I OBJECTIVES   ARTICLE 1  Interim Economic Partnership Agreement  This Agreement establishes an interim Economic Partnership Agreement (.EPA.).  This Agreement comprises actual and enforceable commitments according to the provisions of this Agreement and also sets out further areas for negotiations with a view to incorporating additional elements.   ARTICLE 2  General objectives and scope  The general objectives of this Agreement are to:  (a) contribute to the reduction and eventual eradication of poverty by establishing a trade partnership consistent with the objectives of sustainable development, the Sustainable Development Goals (.SDGs.) and the Objectives and Essential and Fundamental Elements of this Agreement, set out in Annex IV;  (b) promote an economy in Cameroon that is more competitive and diversified, and enjoys stronger growth as the basis for such a regional economy in Central Africa;  (c) foster economic cooperation and good governance in Cameroon, supporting these objectives and regional integration in the Central African region;  (d) promote the gradual integration of Cameroon into the global economy, in accordance with its political choices and its development priorities, contributing to such integration in the Central African region; (e) improve the capacities of Cameroon in terms of trade policy and trade-related issues, as the basis for such improvement in the Central African region;  (f) establish and implement an effective, predictable and transparent regulatory framework for trade and investment in Cameroon, thus supporting the conditions for increasing investment and private-sector initiatives, and enhance capacity for the supply of products and services, competitiveness and economic growth in the Central African region;  (g) strengthen existing relations between the Parties on the basis of solidarity and mutual interest. To this end, in line with the WTO obligations, the Agreement will enhance commercial and economic relations, support a trading dynamic between the Parties by means of the progressive, asymmetrical liberalisation of trade between them and reinforce, broaden and deepen cooperation in all areas relevant to trade;  (h) promote private-sector development and employment growth.   ARTICLE 3  Specific objectives  The specific objectives of this Agreement are to:  (a) help reduce poverty, promote economic cooperation and good governance in Cameroon and increase Cameroon’s production, export and supply capacities, as well as its ability to attract foreign investment and its capacities in terms of trade policy and trade-related issues, and thereby contribute to promoting regional integration;  (b) foster the smooth and gradual integration of Cameroon into the global economy, in accordance with its political choices and its development priorities, supporting such integration for the Central African region;  (c) strengthen existing relations between the Parties on the basis of solidarity and mutual interest;  (d) create an Agreement that is compatible with the rules of the WTO;   (e) establish a basis for negotiating and implementing an effective, predictable and transparent regulatory framework for trade, investment, competition, intellectual property, public procurement and sustainable development in the Central African region, thus supporting the conditions for increasing investment and private-sector initiatives, and enhance capacity for the supply of goods and services, competitiveness and economic growth in the region;  (f) provide a roadmap for negotiations on the areas referred to in paragraph (e) with a view to extending the scope of the Agreement.   TITLE II PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT   ARTICLE 4  Framework for capacity building in Cameroon  The Parties affirm their commitment to promote capacity building and economic modernisation in Cameroon using the various instruments at their disposal, for example, by means of trade policy instruments and development cooperation as set out in Article 7.    ARTICLE 5  Priority areas for capacity building and modernisation  1. Cameroon, in partnership with the UK, shall promote a quantitative and qualitative increase in the goods and services it produces and exports, as the basis for promoting such an increase in the Central African region, particularly in the following areas:  (a) Development of basic infrastructure — Transport — Energy — Telecommunications     (b) Agriculture and food safety — Agricultural production — Agro-industry — Fisheries — Stock farming — Aquaculture and fish stocks      (c) Industry, diversification and competitiveness of economies — Modernisation of businesses — Industry — Standards and certification (sanitary and phytosanitary (.SPS.) measures, quality, zootechnical standards, etc.)     (d) Strengthening of regional trade — Development of the regional common market — Taxation and customs    (e) Improvement of the business environment — Harmonisation of trade policies   2. In implementing this partnership, the Parties shall refer to Annex I to this Agreement.  3. In the implementation of this Agreement, the Parties affirm their commitment to promote the modernisation of the productive sectors in Cameroon affected by this Agreement, by means of development cooperation as set out in Article 7.   ARTICLE 6  Business environment  The Parties consider that the business environment is an essential vehicle for economic development, and that the provisions of this Agreement are therefore geared towards achieving this common objective. Cameroon, which is also a signatory of the OHADA Treaty (Organisation for the Harmonisation of Business Law in Africa)1, undertakes to apply and implement the provisions of this Treaty effectively and without discrimination.  1 In the event of accession, this Article will need to be amended to reflect whether an acceding state or regional organisation is party to the OHADA treaty.      ARTICLE 7  Development finance cooperation  1. UK financing pertaining to development cooperation between Cameroon and the UK supporting the implementation of this Agreement shall be within the framework for development cooperation as set out in Annex IV. In this context, supporting the implementation of this Agreement shall be one of the priorities.  2. The UK undertakes to support, by means of its development policies and instruments — including aid for trade — development activities for economic cooperation and for the implementation of this Agreement, in accordance with the principles of effectiveness and complementarity of aid. The UK may provide this support to the key areas listed in Article 5 and Annex I, or to other areas of assistance.  3. The Parties shall cooperate in order to facilitate the participation of other donors willing to support the efforts of Cameroon to achieve the objectives of this Agreement.   4. The Parties recognise the usefulness of specific financing mechanisms which support the implementation of this Agreement, and will support the efforts in this direction.   ARTICLE 8  Supporting the implementation of trade-related rules  The Parties agree that the implementation of trade-related rules, for which the areas of cooperation are detailed in the individual Chapters of this Agreement, shall help to achieve the objectives of this Agreement. Cooperation in this area shall be in accordance with the arrangements set out in Article 7.    ARTICLE 9  Financing of the partnership  1. The Parties agree to coordinate support which will help to finance effectively the priority measures intended to build productive capacity in Cameroon, as indicated in Article 5, and the measures referred to in Article 10.   2. In accordance with the principles of development effectiveness, the Parties shall cooperate to mobilise resources including from other donors relating specifically to the areas of cooperation in this Agreement and the activities listed in Annex I.    3. The UK will provide funding through mechanisms such as the UK Prosperity Fund to support implementation of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 10  Cooperation on fiscal adjustment  1. The Parties recognise the challenges which the elimination or substantial reduction of the customs duties provided for in this Agreement may pose for Cameroon, and they agree to establish a dialogue and cooperation in this area.  2. In the light of the dismantling schedule set out in Article 21 and approved by the Parties to this Agreement, the Parties agree to establish an in-depth dialogue on the fiscal adjustment measures to be taken which could restore budget balance in the long term.  3. Further to paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the Parties agree to cooperate, within the framework of Article 7, and undertake to implement technical and financial assistance measures which may be provided through multilateral organisations and international financial institutions in the following areas:  (a) contribution to absorbing the net fiscal impact in full complementarity with the fiscal reforms;  (b) support for fiscal reform together with dialogue in this area.  4. The Parties undertake to agree, within the EPA Committee as defined in Article 92, and as soon as possible, on the methodology for estimating net fiscal impact. In this same context the Parties shall subsequently agree on the complementary measures and studies to be undertaken.   ARTICLE 11  Cooperation in international fora  The Parties shall endeavour to cooperate in all international fora where issues of interest to this partnership are discussed.   ARTICLE 12  Review of the partnership for development  The Parties agree to review in greater detail the partnership for development established by this Title, including the details of its implementation.  TITLE III TRADE REGIME FOR GOODS   CHAPTER 1 Customs duties and non-tariff measures   ARTICLE 13  Rules of origin  1. For the purposes of this Chapter, ‘originating’ shall apply to goods that conform with the rules of origin set out in Interim Protocol 2A and Interim Protocol 2B to this Agreement.    2. The EPA Committee, in view of the interim nature of Interim Protocol 2A and Interim Protocol 2B, shall establish a common reciprocal regime governing the rules of origin in due course, which shall be annexed to this Agreement by the EPA Committee. That new ‘Protocol 2’ shall replace the two Interim Protocols and shall enter into force on a date to be agreed by the EPA Committee and to be published in the official journal or website of both Parties.   3. The Parties shall review the provisions in force governing the rules of origin, with a view to simplifying the concepts and methods used for the purpose of determining origin in the light of Central Africa.s development goals. As part of this review, the Parties shall take into account technological development, production processes and all other factors including reforms under way in relation to rules of origin which could require amendments to the negotiated reciprocal regime. Any amendment or replacement shall be effected by decision of the EPA Committee.   ARTICLE 14  Customs duties  ‘Customs duties’ shall mean duties or charges of any kind, including any form of surcharge or supplement, imposed on or in connection with the import or export of goods. These do not include:  (a) charges equivalent to taxes or other internal charges imposed in accordance with Article 23, below, on national treatment;  (b) anti-dumping, countervailing or safeguard measures applied in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 on trade defence instruments;  (c) fees or other charges imposed in accordance with Article 18. ARTICLE 15  Elimination of customs duties on exports  1. No new customs duties on exports shall be introduced in trade between the Parties, nor shall such duties be increased beyond those that applied on entry into force of this Agreement, provided those duties were permitted under the EU-Central Africa iEPA.   2. However, in the event of a serious public finance problem or the need for greater environmental protection, Cameroon may, after consultation with the UK, introduce customs duties on exports for a limited number of additional goods.  3. The EPA Committee shall undertake a regular evaluation in order to examine the impact and relevance of customs duties on exports applied under this Article.   ARTICLE 16  Movement of products  1. This Article applies only in the event of an accession.  2. Products originating in the UK or in the Central African Party shall be assessed duties only once in the territory of the other Party.  3. For products originating in the UK, the customs duty to be paid in accordance with this Agreement shall be levied on behalf of the Central African Contracting State, as defined in Article 95, whose territory constitutes the place of consumption.  4. The Central Africa Party shall take all necessary measures to ensure the effective implementation of the provisions of this Article and to promote the free movement of goods in the territories of the Central African Contracting States as defined in Article 95. The two Parties agree to cooperate in relation to this matter as per Articles 7 and 8. This cooperation shall be adapted according to the type of mechanism ultimately chosen by the Central African Party.  5. The Parties agree to cooperate with a view to facilitating the movement of goods and simplifying customs procedures as provided for under Chapter 3 of Title III.   ARTICLE 17  Classification of products  The classification of products covered by this Agreement shall be that set out in each Party.s respective tariff nomenclature in conformity with the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (‘HS’). ARTICLE 18  Fees and other charges  1. Fees and other charges referred to in Article 14(c) shall be limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered and shall not constitute indirect protection for domestic products or taxation of imports or exports for fiscal purposes. They shall be subject to specific tariffs corresponding to the approximate cost of services rendered and shall not be calculated on an ad valorem basis. The fees and other charges shall not be imposed for consular formalities, such as consular certificates and invoices (an exhaustive list to be drawn up by the EPA Committee).  2. In the event of an accession, the Central Africa Party shall, in order to promote regional integration and ensure clarity for economic operators, maintain standardised provisions relating to the area covered by this Article.   ARTICLE 19  More favourable treatment on the basis of economic integration agreements  1. With regard to the areas covered by this Chapter, the UK shall grant Cameroon any more favourable treatment which could result from the UK becoming party to an economic integration agreement with third parties after this Agreement has been signed.  2. With regard to the areas covered by this Chapter, Cameroon shall grant the UK any more favourable treatment which could result from Cameroon becoming party to an economic integration agreement with a major trading partner after this Agreement has been signed.  3. If Cameroon has received substantially more favourable treatment from a major trading partner than that provided by the UK in an economic integration agreement concluded by Cameroon with that same partner, the Parties shall enter into consultations and decide together on the implementation of paragraph 2.  4. For the purposes of this Article, ‘economic integration agreement’ shall mean an agreement which substantially liberalises trade and abolishes or eliminates discrimination between the parties by eliminating existing discriminatory measures and/or prohibiting new or more discriminatory measures, either upon entry into force of the agreement or on the basis of a reasonable time-frame.   5. For the purposes of this Article, ‘major trading partner’ shall signify any developed country or any country accounting for more than 1 % of world trade in the year before the entry into force of the economic integration agreement referred to in paragraph 2, or any group of countries acting individually, collectively or through an economic integration agreement accounting collectively for more than 1.5 % of world trade in the year before the entry into force of the economic integration agreement referred to in paragraph 22. 2 For this calculation, official WTO data on the world's leading exporters of products (excluding intra-EU trade) shall be used.  6. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be so construed as to oblige the Parties to extend reciprocally any preferential treatment applicable as a result of one of the Parties being party to a regional economic integration agreement with a third party on the date of signature of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 20  Customs duties on products originating in Cameroon  1. Products originating from Cameroon shall be imported into the UK free of customs duties, with the exception of the products indicated, and under the conditions set out in Annex II.  2. No new customs duties shall be introduced in trade between the Parties, nor shall those already applied be increased.   ARTICLE 21  Customs duties on products originating in the UK  1.  For each product, the basic customs duty shall be that specified in Annex III.  2. No new customs duties shall be introduced in trade between the Parties, nor shall those specified in Annex III be increased.  3. Customs duties on imports of products considered as originating in the UK and listed in Annex III under categories ‘1’, ‘2’ and ‘3’ shall be definitively eliminated as per the table in paragraph 5 below, subject to paragraph 4.  4. If, before the EU-Central Africa iEPA ceases to apply to the UK, the parties to that Agreement agree (formally, informally or by conduct) or apply more favourable tariff treatment to imports of EU goods, that more favourable treatment shall apply to imports of UK goods and the EPA Committee shall amend paragraph 5 to reflect this.   5.  The tariff reduction percentages set out in the table below shall be applied to the tariffs laid down in paragraph 1.  Years  Product Groups  1  2  3  5  01/01/2021  100%  60%  10%  0%  04/08/2021  100%  75%  20%  0%  04/08/2022  100%  90%  30%  0%  04/08/2023  100%  100%  40%  0%  04/08/2024  100%  100%  50%  0%  04/08/2025  100%  100%  60%  0%  04/08/2026  100%  100%  70%  0%  04/08/2027  100%  100%  80%  0%  04/08/2028  100%  100%  90%  0%  04/08/2029  100%  100%  100%  0%   6. Imports of products originating in the UK and listed in Annex III under category ‘5’ shall comprise products for which customs duties are determined in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 above; customs duties in this category shall be neither reduced nor eliminated.  7. In the event of serious difficulties in respect of imports of a given product, the schedule for tariff reduction and dismantling may be reviewed by the EPA Committee by common accord with a view to possibly extending the period of reduction or elimination. During a review of this kind, the calendar period for which the review has been requested may not be extended, for the product concerned, beyond the maximum transitional period for the reduction or elimination of tariffs provided for this same product. If the EPA Committee has not made a decision within 30 days of an application to review the timetable, Cameroon may suspend the timetable provisionally for a period which may not exceed one year.   ARTICLE 22  Prohibition of quantitative restrictions  Upon entry into force of this Agreement, all prohibitions or restrictions on imports or exports affecting trade between the two Parties shall be eliminated, apart from the customs duties, taxes, fees and other charges referred to under Article 18 of this Chapter, whether made effective through quotas, import or export licenses or other measures. No new measures may be introduced. The provisions of this Article shall apply without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter 2 of this Agreement on trade defence instruments.     ARTICLE 23  National treatment on internal regulations and taxation  1. Imported products originating in the territory of the other Party shall not be subject, either directly or indirectly, to internal taxes or other internal charges of any kind in excess of those applied, directly or indirectly, to like national products. Moreover, the Parties shall not otherwise apply internal taxes or other internal charges so as to afford protection to national production.  2. Imported products originating in the territory of the other Party shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like national products in respect of all laws, regulations and requirements affecting their internal sale, offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use. The provisions of this paragraph shall not prevent the application of differential internal transportation charges which are based exclusively on the economic operation of the means of transport and not on the origin of the product.   3. Neither Party shall establish or maintain any internal regulation relating to the mixture, processing or use of products in specified amounts or proportions which requires, directly or indirectly, that any specified amount or proportion of any product which is the subject of the regulation must be supplied from national sources. Moreover, neither Party shall otherwise apply internal quantitative regulations so as to afford protection to national production.  4. No internal quantitative regulation relating to the mixture, processing or use of products in specified amounts or proportions shall be applied in such a manner as to allocate any such amount or proportion among external sources of supply.  5. In accordance with Article III.8(b) of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 (.GATT 1994.), the provisions of this Article shall not prevent the payment of subsidies exclusively to national producers, including payments derived from the proceeds of internal taxes or charges applied consistently with the provisions of this Article and subsidies effected through governmental purchases of national products.  6. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to laws, regulations, procedures or practices governing public procurement.  7. The provisions of this Article shall apply without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter 2 of this Agreement on trade defence instruments.   ARTICLE 24  Agricultural export subsidies  1. No Party may introduce new export subsidies or increase any existing subsidy of this nature on agricultural products destined for the territory of the other Party. With regard to existing subsidies, this paragraph shall not prohibit increases due to variations in the world prices of the products in question.  2. For any group of products, as defined in paragraph 3, which receive an export refund under UK legislation for the same basic product for which Cameroon has undertaken to eliminate its tariffs, the UK undertakes to dismantle all existing subsidies (if any) for exports of this group of products — corresponding to the same basic product — to the territory of Cameroon.   3. This Article shall apply to products covered by Annex I of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.  4. This Article shall be without prejudice to the application by Cameroon of Article 9.4 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture and Article 27 of WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.   ARTICLE 25  Food security  Should the implementation of this Agreement lead to problems with the availability of, or access to, the foodstuffs necessary to ensure food security, and where this situation gives rise or is likely to give rise to major difficulties for Cameroon (or, following an accession, another Central African Contracting State), Cameroon or such State may take appropriate measures in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 31.   ARTICLE 26  Special provisions on administrative cooperation  1. The Parties agree that administrative cooperation is essential for the implementation and control of the preferential treatment granted under this Title and underline their commitment to tackle irregularities and fraud in customs and related matters.  2. Where one Party obtains proof, based on objective information, of a failure to provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or fraud, the Party concerned may temporarily suspend the preferential treatment of the product(s) concerned in accordance with this Article.  3. For the purposes of this Article, a failure to provide administrative cooperation shall be defined, inter alia, as:   (a) a recurrent failure to respect the obligation to verify the originating status of the product(s) concerned;  (b) a repeated refusal or undue delay in carrying out and/or communicating the results of subsequent verification of the proof of origin; or  (c) a repeated refusal or undue delay in granting authorisation to conduct a cooperation mission to verify the authenticity of documents or accuracy of information relevant to the granting of the preferential treatment in question.  4. The application of a temporary suspension shall be subject to the following conditions:  (a) The Party which obtains proof, based on objective information, of a failure to provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or fraud shall without undue delay notify the EPA Committee of this proof together with the objective information and enter into consultations within the EPA Committee with a view to reaching a solution acceptable to both Parties, on the basis of all relevant information and objective findings;  (b) Where the Parties have entered into consultations in the EPA Committee as provided for above and have not been able to agree on an acceptable solution within three months of notification, the Party concerned may temporarily suspend the preferential treatment of the product(s) concerned. A temporary suspension shall be notified to the EPA Committee without undue delay; and  (c) Temporary suspensions under this Article shall be limited to that necessary to protect the financial interests of the Party concerned. They shall not exceed a period of six months, which may be renewed. The EPA Committee shall be notified of temporary suspensions immediately after their adoption. Such suspensions shall be the subject of periodic consultations within the EPA Committee, particularly with a view to their termination as soon as the conditions for their application no longer exist.  5. At the same time as the notification of the EPA Committee provided for in paragraph 4(a) of this Article, the Party concerned shall publish a notice to importers in its official journal or website. This notice to importers shall indicate that, for the product concerned, proof has been obtained, based on objective information, of a failure to provide administrative cooperation and/or of irregularities or fraud.     ARTICLE 27  Management of administrative errors  In case of error by the competent authorities in the management of preferential systems for exports, and in particular in the application of rules defining the concept of ‘originating’ products and methods of administrative cooperation, where this error leads to consequences in terms of imports and exports the Party facing such consequences may request the EPA Committee to examine the possibility of adopting all appropriate measures with a view to resolving the situation.   ARTICLE 28  Cooperation  In accordance with the provisions of Article 7, the Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas inter alia:  — supporting the implementation of trade policy commitments arising from this Agreement;  — training/support in the interpretation and application of these rules.   CHAPTER 2 Trade defence instruments3 3 In the event of an accession, references in this Chapter to ‘Cameroon’, ‘Party’ and ‘importing Party’ shall be replaced with references to ‘Central African Contracting State’ or ‘Central African Contracting States’ as the context requires.   ARTICLE 29  Anti-dumping and countervailing measures  1. Subject to the provisions of this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the UK, or Cameroon, from adopting anti-dumping or countervailing measures in accordance with the relevant WTO Agreements. For the purposes of this Article, origin shall be determined in accordance with the Parties’ non-preferential rules of origin.  2. Before imposing definitive anti-dumping or countervailing duties in respect of products from Cameroon, the UK shall consider the possibility of constructive remedies as provided for in the relevant WTO Agreements.  3. The UK shall notify Cameroon of the receipt of a properly documented complaint before initiating any investigation.  4. The provisions of this Article shall be applicable in all investigations initiated after this Agreement enters into force.  5. The provisions of this Article shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions of this Agreement.  6. In the event of an accession, the Parties agree that paragraphs 7 and 8 shall apply.  7. Where an anti-dumping or countervailing measure has been imposed on behalf of two or more Central African Contracting States at least by a regional or sub-regional authority there shall be one single instance of judicial review, including the stage of appeals.  8. Where anti-dumping or countervailing measures may be imposed on a regional or sub-regional basis and on a national basis, these measures shall not be applied simultaneously to the same product by the regional or sub-regional authorities and the national authorities.   ARTICLE 30  Multilateral safeguard measures  1. Subject to the provisions of this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent Cameroon or the UK from adopting measures in accordance with Article XIX of the GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Safeguards and Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. For the purposes of this Article, origin shall be determined in accordance with the Parties’ non-preferential rules of origin.  2. Not later than 180 days after the entry into force of this Agreement, the EPA Committee shall review, in the light of the development needs of Cameroon and without prejudice to paragraph 1, whether to provide for a period during which the UK shall exclude imports from Cameroon from any measures taken pursuant to Article XIX of GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Safeguards and Article 5 of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.  3. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not be subject to the dispute settlement provisions of this Agreement.   ARTICLE 31  Bilateral safeguard measures  1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 30, after having examined alternative solutions, a Party may apply safeguard measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Articles 20 and 21, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in this Article.  2. Safeguard measures as referred to in paragraph 1 may be taken where a product originating in the territory of one Party is being imported into the territory of the other Party in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause:  (a) serious damage to the domestic industry producing like or directly competitive products in the territory of the importing Party;   (b) disruption in a sector of the economy, particularly where this disruption gives rise to major social problems or difficulties which could seriously jeopardise the economic situation of the importing Party; or  (c) disruption in the markets of like or directly competitive agricultural products4 or in the mechanisms regulating those markets. 4 For the purposes of this Article, agricultural products shall be those covered by Annex I of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture.  3. The safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall not exceed what is necessary to remedy or prevent the serious damage or disruption, as defined in paragraphs 2 and 4(b). Those safeguard measures of the importing Party may only consist of one or more of the following:  (a) the suspension of any further reduction of the applicable import duty provided for under this Agreement for the product concerned;  (b) an increase in the customs duty on the product concerned to a level which does not exceed the customs duty applied to other WTO Members; and  (c) the introduction of tariff quotas on the product concerned.  4.   (a)     Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, where a product originating in the UK is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause one of the situations referred to under paragraph 2(a), (b) and (c) above to Cameroon, Cameroon may take surveillance or safeguard measures limited to its territory in accordance with the procedures laid down in paragraphs 5 to 8;   (b)    Cameroon may take safeguard measures where a product originating in the UK, following the reduction of customs duties, is being imported into its territory in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause disruption to an infant industry producing like or directly competitive products. This clause shall be applicable until 3 August 2029. Measures must be taken in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 5 to 8.  5.  (a) The safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall be maintained only for such time as is necessary to prevent or remedy the serious damage or disruption as defined in paragraphs 2 and 4, above;  (b) The safeguard measures referred to in this Article shall be applied for a period not exceeding two years. Where the circumstances warranting the imposition of safeguard measures continue to exist, such measures may be extended for a further period of no more than two years. Where Cameroon applies a safeguard measure, such measures may nevertheless be applied for a period not exceeding four years and, where the circumstances warranting the imposition of safeguard measures continue to exist, be extended for a further maximum period of four years;   (c) The safeguard measures referred to in this Article which exceed one year shall have a clear timetable for being phased out by the end of the set period, at the latest;  (d) No safeguard measure referred to in this Article shall be applied to a product that has previously been subject to such a measure for a period of at least one year since the expiry of the measure.  6. For the implementation of paragraphs 1 to 5, the following provisions shall apply:  (a) Where a Party is of the opinion that one of the circumstances referred to in paragraphs 2 and/or 4 exists, it shall immediately refer the matter to the EPA Committee;  (b) The EPA Committee may make recommendations to remedy the circumstances which have arisen. If the EPA Committee has not made recommendations to remedy the circumstances, or if a satisfactory solution has not been reached within 30 days of the matter being referred, the importing Party may adopt the appropriate measures to remedy the situation in accordance with this Article;  (c) Before taking any measure provided for in this Article or, in the cases to which paragraph 7 applies, the Party concerned shall, as soon as possible, supply the EPA Committee with all information required for a thorough examination of the situation, with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties concerned;  (d) In selecting safeguard measures, priority must be given to those which solve the problem rapidly and effectively and disturb the functioning of this Agreement as little as possible;   (e) All safeguard measures taken in accordance with this Article shall be notified immediately to the EPA Committee and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within that body, particularly with a view to establishing a timetable for their termination as soon as circumstances permit.  7. Where exceptional circumstances require immediate measures, the importing Party concerned may take the measures provided for in paragraphs 3 and/or 4 on a provisional basis without complying with the requirements of paragraph 6. Such action may be taken for a maximum period of 180 days where measures are taken by the UK and 200 days where measures are taken by Cameroon. The duration of any such provisional measure shall be counted as part of the period of duration of the measures and of any extension as referred to in paragraph 5. When taking such provisional measures, the interests of all stakeholders shall be taken into account. The importing Party concerned shall inform the other Party and shall refer the matter to the EPA Committee for examination.  8. If an importing Party subjects imports of a product to an administrative procedure having as its purpose the rapid provision of information on the trend of trade flows liable to give rise to the problems referred to in this Article, it shall inform the EPA Committee without delay.  9. The relevant WTO Agreements shall not be invoked to prevent a Party from adopting safeguard measures in accordance with the provisions of this Article.   CHAPTER 3 Customs and trade facilitation   ARTICLE 32  Objectives  1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of customs and of trade facilitation in the evolving global trading environment. The Parties agree to increase cooperation in this area with a view to ensuring that the relevant legislation and procedures, as well as the administrative capacity of the relevant administrations, fulfil the objectives of effective controls and facilitation of trade, and help promote the development and regional integration of the EPA signatory countries.  2. The Parties agree that legitimate public policy objectives, including those relating to security and the prevention of fraud, shall not be compromised in any way.     ARTICLE 33  Customs and administrative cooperation  1. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Agreement and effectively respond to the objectives laid down in Article 32, the Parties shall:  (a) exchange information concerning customs legislation, regulations and procedures;  (b) develop joint initiatives relating to import, export and transit procedures, and initiatives designed to provide an effective service for the business community;  (c) cooperate on the automation of customs and trade procedures, and adopt, for the purpose of information exchange, the Data Model of the World Customs Organization (.WCO.);   (d) cooperate in the planning and implementation of assistance with a view to facilitating customs reforms and implementing trade facilitation; and encourage consultations and cooperation between all bodies concerned with international trade.  2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the Parties’ customs administrations shall provide mutual administrative assistance in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters, Protocol 1 to this Agreement. The EPA Committee shall make any amendments which it considers necessary to Protocol 1 by consensus.   ARTICLE 34  Terms of cooperation  1. The Parties recognise the importance of cooperation as regards customs and trade facilitation measures for the implementation of this Agreement.  2. In accordance with the provisions of Article 7, the Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas, inter alia:  (a) the application of modern customs techniques, including risk analysis and risk management, binding information, simplified procedures for imports and exports of products, subsequent verifications and company audit methods;  (b) the introduction of procedures which reflect where possible the international instruments and standards applicable in the field of customs and trade, including WTO rules on customs valuation and WCO instruments and standards, inter alia the International Convention on the Simplification and Harmonisation of Customs Procedures, concluded at Kyoto on 18 May 1973 and revised at Brussels on 26 June 1999 (the ‘revised Kyoto Convention’), and the WCO Framework of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade; and  (c) the computerisation of customs and trade procedures.    ARTICLE 35  Customs and trade standards  1. The Parties agree that their legislation, regulations and procedures, in the fields of customs and international trade, shall be based on:  (a) international standards and instruments, including the revised Kyoto Convention, the WCO Framework of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade, the WCO Data Model and the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (‘HS’);  (b) the introduction of a single administrative document, or an electronic equivalent, for the purpose of establishing customs declarations at the import and export stages;  (c) modern customs techniques, including risk analysis and risk management, simplified procedures for imports and exports of products, subsequent verifications and company audit methods. Procedures should be transparent, efficient and simplified, in order to reduce costs and increase predictability for economic operators, including small and medium-sized enterprises;  (d) non-discrimination in terms of requirements and procedures concerning imports, exports and products in transit, although it shall be accepted that consignments may be treated differently in accordance with objective risk management criteria;  (e) regulations and procedures containing binding information, particularly on tariff classification, and origin;  (f) simplified procedures for authorised traders;  (g) the gradual development of information systems to facilitate the electronic exchange of data between traders, customs administrations and other bodies involved;  (h) the facilitation of transit movements; (i) rules ensuring that penalties imposed for minor breaches of customs regulations or the requirements of international trade procedures are proportionate and non-discriminatory and that their application does not result in unwarranted delays;  (j) agreement that their respective customs provisions and procedures shall not require the mandatory use of customs brokers.    2. The Parties shall not require the mandatory use of pre-shipment inspections as defined in the WTO Agreement on Pre-shipment Inspection, in relation to tariff classification and customs valuation.   3. In order to improve working methods, as well as to ensure non-discrimination, transparency, efficiency, integrity and accountability of operations, the Parties shall:  (a) take the necessary measures, based on the relevant international recommendations, to simplify and standardise the data and documentation required by customs and the other institutions involved with international trade; simplify administrative formalities and requirements wherever possible in order to reduce the time needed for clearance, release and removal of products;  (b) implement effective, prompt and non-discriminatory procedures enabling the right of appeal against rulings, decisions and actions by customs and other administrations which affect imports, exports or goods in transit. Procedures for appeal shall be easily accessible and any costs shall be reasonable and not in excess of the costs necessary to process them;  (c) ensure that the highest standards of integrity are maintained by applying measures in line with the principles of the relevant international instruments and conventions.   ARTICLE 36  Transit of products  1. The Parties shall ensure freedom of transit through their territory via the route most convenient for transit. Any restrictions, controls or requirements must be non-discriminatory, proportionate and applied uniformly.  2. Without prejudice to legitimate customs control, the Parties shall accord to products in transit from the territory of one Party treatment not less favourable than that accorded to domestic products, in particular with respect to exports and imports and their movement.  3. The Parties shall operate bonded transport regimes that allow the transit of products without payment of duties or other charges, subject to the provision of an appropriate guarantee.  4. The Parties shall promote and implement regional transit arrangements.  5. The Parties shall use international standards and instruments relevant to transit.  6. The Parties shall ensure cooperation and coordination across all relevant agencies in their territories to facilitate traffic in transit and promote cross-border cooperation.   Article 37  Relations with the business community  1. The Parties agree:  (a) to ensure that all information on legislation, regulations, procedures and required documents, duties and taxes, fees and other charges may be made publicly available, where possible electronically;  (b) on the need for regular consultations with the business community on the drafting of texts related to customs and international trade issues. To this end, appropriate mechanisms for regular consultation shall be put in place by the Parties;  (c) that a sufficient period of time must elapse between the publication and entry into force of any legislation, procedure, duty or charge, whether new or amended.  (d) to foster cooperation between operators and relevant administrations via the use of non-arbitrary and accessible procedures, such as memoranda of understanding based on the protocols promulgated by the WCO;  (e) to ensure that administrations. requirements in terms of international trade continue to meet the needs of the business community, follow best practices, and remain as unrestrictive to trade as possible.  2. The Parties shall make publicly available relevant notices of an administrative nature, including agency requirements, procedures, opening hours and operating procedures for customs offices at entry and/or exit points, and contact or information points;      ARTICLE 38  Customs valuation  1. Article VII of the GATT (1994) and the WTO Agreement on the implementation of Article VII of the GATT (1994) shall govern customs valuation rules applied to reciprocal trade between the Parties.  2. The Parties shall cooperate with a view to achieving a common approach to issues relating to customs valuation, including problems relating to transfer pricing.   ARTICLE 39  Regional integration in Central Africa  In taking forward customs reforms, and in order to facilitate trade, the Parties shall promote regional integration in Central Africa, aiming at developing standardised:  — requirements  — documentation  — data requirements  — procedures  — authorised trader schemes  — border procedures and opening hours  — transit requirements, bonded transport and guarantee schemes.  This should involve close cooperation between all relevant agencies and be based, wherever possible, on the use of relevant international standards.   CHAPTER 4 Technical barriers to trade, and sanitary and phytosanitary measures   ARTICLE 40  Objectives  The objectives of this Chapter are to facilitate trade in products between the Parties while increasing the capacity of the Parties to identify, prevent and eliminate obstacles to trade as a result of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures applied by either Party, and increasing the capacity of the Parties to protect plants, animals and public health.   ARTICLE 41  Multilateral obligations and general background  1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement, and in particular the WTO Agreements on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (.SPS Agreement.) and on Technical Barriers to Trade (.TBT Agreement.). In the event of an accession of a Central African Contracting State that is not a WTO member, the Parties agree that this paragraph should be amended to add:  “Central African Contracting States which are not members of the WTO also confirm their commitment to comply with the obligations set out in the SPS and TBT Agreements with regard to all matters concerning relations between the  Parties.”  2. The Parties reaffirm their commitment to improve public health in the territory of Cameroon, in particular by strengthening its capacity to identify unsafe products, pursuant to Article 47.  3. These commitments, rights and obligations shall inform the activities of the Parties under this Chapter.   ARTICLE 42  Scope and definitions  1. This Chapter shall apply to those measures within the scope of the WTO SPS and TBT Agreements.  2. Unless specified otherwise, for the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions of the WTO SPS and TBT Agreements, CODEX Alimentarius, the International Plant Protection Convention and the World Organisation for Animal Health shall apply, also for all references to ‘products’ in this Chapter.   ARTICLE 43  Competent authorities  With regard to SPS measures, the authorities of the Parties which are responsible for the implementation of the measures referred to in this Chapter are to be notified as follows:  (i)  the Parties will notify each other of a relevant competent authority on the coming into force of this Agreement and on any accession; and  (ii)  the Parties shall inform each other in a timely manner of any significant changes to the competent authorities.   ARTICLE 44  Zoning  When defining import conditions, the Parties may, on a case-by-case basis, propose and identify zones with a defined sanitary or phytosanitary status, taking account of international standards.   ARTICLE 45  Transparency of trade conditions and information exchange  1. The Parties shall inform each other of any changes to their legal and administrative import requirements for products (including products of animals and/or vegetable origin).  2. The Parties reconfirm their obligations under the WTO SPS and TBT Agreements to inform each other of changes to the relevant standards or technical regulations through the mechanisms established under those Agreements.  3. The Parties shall also directly exchange information on other topics agreed by both Parties to be of potential importance for their trade relations, as and when necessary.  4. The Parties agree to collaborate in epidemiological surveillance on animal disease. Also in the domain of plant health, the Parties shall exchange information on the occurrence of pests of known and immediate danger to the other Party.   ARTICLE 46  Regional integration  1. (a) Cameroon undertakes to encourage regional level initiatives to harmonise the standards and other measures within the scope of this Chapter at the regional level;   (b) In the event of an accession, the EPA Committee shall review and amend this paragraph. The amendments will set out steps to be taken in order to progress such harmonisation and a timetable for the steps to be completed.      2. (a) Paragraph (b) applies only in the event of an accession;  (b) With a view to facilitating trade in conformity with Article 40, the Central Africa Party agrees on the need to harmonise import conditions applicable to products originating in the territory of the UK when these products enter a Central African Contracting State. Where national import conditions already exist at the time of this Agreement.s entry into force, and pending the introduction of harmonised import conditions in the Central African region, the existing import conditions shall be implemented by the Central Africa Party on the basis that a product from the UK legally placed on the market of a Central African Contracting State may also be legally placed on the market of all other Central African Contracting States without any further restriction or administrative requirement.   ARTICLE 47  Capacity-building and technical assistance  In accordance with the provisions of Article 7, the Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas inter alia:  (a) For products referred to in Appendix IA, the Parties agree to cooperate with a view to strengthening both regional integration and control capacity in accordance with the objectives of this Agreement, and in such a manner as to facilitate trade between Cameroon and any other Central African Contracting States;  (b) For the products referred to in Appendix IB, the Parties agree to cooperate with a view to improving the competitiveness and quality of their products.     CHAPTER 5 Forestry governance and trade in timber and forest products    ARTICLE 48  Definitions  Unless specified otherwise, for the purposes of this Chapter the description ‘forest products’ shall also include non-timber forest products and their derivatives.   ARTICLE 49  Scope  The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to trade in timber and forest products originating in the Central African region and to the sustainable management of the forests from which these products are extracted.   ARTICLE 50  Trade in timber, non-timber forest products and derivatives  1. The Parties shall work together to facilitate trade between the UK and Cameroon in timber and forest products which come from objectively verifiable legal sources and help to achieve sustainable development. The Parties agree to:  (a) implement measures to increase market confidence regarding the origin of forest products, particularly their legal and/or sustainable origin. These measures may include systems to improve the traceability of timber and forest products sold both within the Central African region and between the Cameroon and the UK;  (b) put in place an audit and surveillance system that is independent of the control chain.  2. The Parties shall explore possible ways of improving commercial opportunities for timber and forest products with a legal or sustainable origin in the Central African region on the market of the UK. These measures may include, inter alia, stronger public procurement policies, measures to raise consumer awareness, measures to promote the processing of forest products in the Central African region, and activities and initiatives in association with private-sector operators.  3. The Parties undertake to develop non-discriminatory policies and/or legislation within the scope of this Chapter; they also undertake to ensure the effective and non-discriminatory implementation of these policies and/or legislation, in accordance with WTO provisions.   ARTICLE 51  Regional integration  1. Cameroon undertakes to encourage work towards building and implementing a regional framework to govern trade in timber and forest products originating in Central Africa, including the appropriate cooperation mechanisms and legislation to ensure that it is applied and implemented effectively.  2. Cameroon shall work towards developing protocols and/or guidelines for cooperation between the competent authorities in Central Africa which are responsible for implementation, to ensure that intra-regional trade in timber and forest products from Central Africa come from objectively verifiable legal sources.  3. In the event of an accession, the EPA Committee shall review and amend this Article. The amendments will set out steps to be taken in order to achieve the regional framework, the protocols and/or guidelines referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2; and a timetable for the steps to be completed.   ARTICLE 52  Capacity-building and technical assistance  In accordance with the provisions of Article 7, the Parties agree to cooperate in the following areas inter alia:  (a) facilitating assistance with a view to strengthening regional integration, for example the implementation of the Treaty on the Conservation and Sustainable Management of Forests in Central Africa (.COMIFAC.) and the Sub-regional Convergence Plan, and with a view to building capacity in order to fulfil the commitments set out in this Chapter;  (b) supporting public and private commercial initiatives, particularly in terms of exports to the UK market, for local processing of timber and forest products originating in Central Africa which come from objectively verifiable legal sources and help to achieve sustainable development.     ARTICLE 53  Other agreements  Without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter, trade in timber and forest products shall be governed in line with the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (.CITES.) and any voluntary partnership agreements to which Cameroon and any other Central African Contracting States might adhere individually or collectively with the UK on forest law enforcement, governance and trade.    TITLE IV  ESTABLISHMENT, TRADE IN SERVICES AND E-COMMERCE    ARTICLE 54  Framework  1. The Parties reaffirm their respective commitments under the General Agreement on Trade in Services.  2. The Parties undertake to extend the scope of this Agreement, by negotiating the necessary provisions for the gradual, asymmetrical and reciprocal liberalisation of establishment and trade in services.   ARTICLE 55  Cooperation  The Parties, recognising that strengthening trade capacity can support the development of economic activities, particularly in the services sectors, and strengthen their regulatory framework, reaffirm their respective obligations as set out in Annex V.        TITLE V  TRADE-RELATED RULES   CHAPTER 1 Current payments and capital movements   ARTICLE 56  Continuation of negotiations on current payments and movement of capital  1. The Parties recognise the need to guarantee that cross-border flows of the funds necessary for the liberalisation of trade in products and services, and for investments by one of the Parties in the region of the other Party, cannot be restricted or prevented by one of the Parties. Any obstacle to these flows would be contrary to the objectives of liberalisation, given that trade or investment, although itself permissible, could not give rise to payment or financing from abroad.  2. To achieve this objective, the Parties undertake to conclude negotiations on a series of issues related to the following:  (a) liberalisation of flows of funds relating to trade in products and services, known as ‘current payments’;  (b) liberalisation of flows of funds relating to ‘investments’, known as ‘movements of capital relating to investments’, including repatriation of investments and profits;  (c) a safeguard clause, granting a short-term derogation from freedom of capital movement, on grounds of serious difficulties as regards monetary situation or balance of payments;  (d) a development clause, providing for the liberalisation of other types of capital movements not related to investment.   CHAPTER 2 Competition   ARTICLE 57  Continuation of negotiations on competition  1. The Parties recognise the importance of free and undistorted competition in their trade relations and the fact that certain anti-competitive practices may restrict trade between the Parties and thus hinder the achievement of the objectives of this Agreement.  2. The Parties therefore agree to take part in negotiations to include a chapter on competition in this Agreement, which will include the following in particular:  (a) anti-competitive practices which are considered incompatible with the proper functioning of this Agreement, insofar as they can affect trade between the Parties;  (b) provisions on the effective implementation of competition rules and policies and of regional policies in Central Africa which govern the anti-competitive practices identified in accordance with paragraph 2(a); and  (c) provisions on technical assistance by independent experts to ensure that the Chapter.s objectives are achieved and that Central Africa.s competition policies are properly implemented at regional level.  3. The negotiations shall be based on a two-step approach, first applying the rules in the context of regional integration in Central Africa and, after a transition period to be determined jointly, applying the rules bilaterally.   CHAPTER 3 Intellectual property   ARTICLE 58  Continuation of negotiations on intellectual property  1. The Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations arising from the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (.TRIPS.), and recognise the need to ensure an adequate and effective level of protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights, and other rights covered by the TRIPS Agreement, in line with international standards and with a view to reducing distortions and impediments to bilateral trade.  2. With due regard for the powers transferred to the African Intellectual Property Organisation (.OAPI.), the Parties undertake to conclude negotiations on a series of commitments regarding intellectual property rights.  3. The Parties also agree to strengthen their cooperation in the area of intellectual property rights. Such cooperation shall be directed at supporting the implementation of each Party.s commitments and shall extend to the following areas inter alia:  (a) reinforcement of regional integration initiatives in Central Africa with a view to improving regional regulatory capacity, regional laws and regulations;  (b) prevention of the abuse of such rights by right-holders  and the infringement of such rights by competitors;  (c) support in the preparation of national laws and regulations in Central Africa for the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights.  4. The negotiations shall be based on a two-step approach, first applying the rules in the context of regional integration in Central Africa and, after a transition period to be determined jointly, applying the rules bilaterally.  5. In conducting the negotiations, the different levels of development in Cameroon and any other Central African Contracting States should be taken into account.   CHAPTER 4 Public procurement   ARTICLE 59  Continuation of negotiations on public procurement  1. The Parties recognise the contribution of transparent and competitive tendering to economic development. They therefore agree to negotiate the gradual and mutual opening of their public procurement markets, while recognising their different levels of development, under the conditions set out in paragraph 3.  2. To achieve this objective, the Parties shall conclude negotiations on a set of potential commitments on procurement, which shall include in particular the following:  (a) transparent and non-discriminatory rules, procedures and principles to be applied;  (b) lists of the products covered and the thresholds applied;  (c) effective challenge procedures;  (d) measures to support capacities to implement these commitments, including making use of opportunities created by information technologies.  3. The negotiations shall be based on a two-step approach, first applying the rules in the context of regional integration in Central Africa and, after a transition period to be determined jointly, applying the rules bilaterally.  4. In conducting the negotiations, the UK shall take into account the development, financial and trade needs of Cameroon and any other Central African Contracting States, which may take the form of the following measures in the interest of special and differential treatment:  (a) appropriate implementation periods, where required, to bring government procurement measures into line with any specific procedural requirements;  (b) adoption or retention of transitional measures such as a price preference programme or offset, in accordance with a phasing-out schedule.   CHAPTER 5 Sustainable development   ARTICLE 60  Continuation of negotiations on sustainable development  1. The Parties recognise that sustainable development is an overall objective of the EPA. They therefore agree to ensure that sustainability considerations are reflected in all titles of the EPA and to draft specific chapters covering environmental and social issues.  2. To achieve this objective, the Parties shall conclude negotiations on a set of potential commitments on sustainable development, which shall include in particular the following:  (a) level of protection and right to regulate;  (b) regional integration in Central Africa, use of international environmental standards and of the International Labour Organization and promotion of decent work;  (c) upholding levels of protection;  (d) consultation and monitoring procedures.  3. In conducting the negotiations, the UK shall take into account the development needs of Cameroon and any other Central African Contracting States, which may take the form of provisions on cooperation in this field.     CHAPTER 6 Protection of personal data  ARTICLE 61  Overall objective  The Parties, recognising:  (a) their common interest in protecting the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, and in particular their right to privacy, with respect to the processing of personal data;  (b) the importance of maintaining effective data protection regimes as a means of protecting the interests of consumers, stimulating investor confidence and facilitating cross-border flows of personal data;  (c) the need to collect and process personal data in a transparent and fair manner, with due respect accorded to the data subject,    agree to establish appropriate legal and regulatory regimes, and the appropriate administrative capacity to implement them, including independent supervisory authorities, in order to ensure an adequate level of protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data, in line with the highest international standards5. 5 Standards to be taken into account include the following international instruments: (i) Guidelines on computerised personal data files, as amended by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 1990. (ii) Recommendation of the OECD Council of 11 July 2013 adopting a revised Recommendation Concerning Guidelines Governing the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data    ARTICLE 62  Definitions  For the purposes of this Chapter:  (a) ‘personal data’ shall mean any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person (data subject);  (b) ‘processing of personal data’ shall mean any operation or set of operations which is performed upon personal data, such as collection, recording, organisation, storage, alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure, combination, blocking, erasure or destruction, as well as transfers of personal data across national borders;  (c) ‘data controller’ shall mean the natural or legal person, authority or any other body which determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data.   ARTICLE 63  Principles and general rules  The Parties agree that the legal and regulatory regimes and administrative capacity to be established shall, at a minimum, include the following content principles and enforcement mechanisms:  (a) Content principles (i) The purpose limitation principle — data should be processed for a specific purpose and subsequently used or further communicated only insofar as this is not incompatible with the purpose of the transfer. The only exemptions to these rights should be those provided for in legislation and necessary in a democratic society for the protection of important public interests; (ii) The data quality and proportionality principle — data should be accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date. The data should be adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are transferred or further processed; (iii) The transparency principle — individuals should be provided with information as to the purpose of the processing and the identity of the data controller in the third country, and other information insofar as this is necessary to ensure fairness. The only exemptions to these rights should be those provided for in legislation and necessary in a democratic society for the protection of important public interests; (iv) The security principle — the data controller should take technical and organisational security measures that are appropriate to the risks presented by the processing. Any person acting under the authority of the data controller, including a processor, must not process data except on instructions from the controller; (v) The rights of access, rectification and opposition — the data subject should have the right to obtain a copy of all data relating to him/her that are processed, and the right to rectify those data where they are shown to be inaccurate. In certain situations, he/she should also be able to object to the processing of the data relating to him/her. The only exemptions to these rights should be those provided for in legislation and necessary in a democratic society for the protection of important public interests; (vi) Restrictions on onward transfers — as a matter of principle, further transfers of the personal data by the recipient of the original data transfer should be permitted only where the second recipient (i.e. the recipient of the onward transfer) is also subject to rules affording an adequate level of protection;  (vii) Sensitive data — where special categories of data are involved, revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs or trade-union membership, data concerning health and sex, and data relating to offences, criminal convictions or security measures, additional safeguards should be in place.         (b) Enforcement mechanisms  Appropriate mechanisms should be in place to ensure that the following objectives are achieved:  (i) to ensure a good level of compliance with the rules, including a high degree of awareness among data controllers of their obligations and among data subjects of their rights and the means of exercising them; the existence of effective and dissuasive sanctions; and systems of verification by authorities, auditors or independent data protection officials;  (ii) to provide support and help to individual data subjects in the exercise of their rights, which they must be able to enforce rapidly and effectively, and without prohibitive cost, including through an appropriate institutional mechanism allowing independent investigation of complaints;  (iii) to provide appropriate redress to the injured party where rules are not complied with, allowing compensation to be paid and sanctions imposed where appropriate.   ARTICLE 64  Consistency with international commitments  1. The Parties shall keep each other informed, via the EPA Committee, of the multilateral commitments and agreements with third countries in which they may participate, or of any obligation by which they may be bound and which could be relevant to the application of this Chapter, and in particular of any agreement providing for the processing of personal data, such as personal data being collected, stored or accessed by third parties or transferred to third parties.  2. The Parties may request consultations to discuss any matter which may arise.   ARTICLE 65  Cooperation  The Parties acknowledge the importance of cooperation in order to facilitate the development of appropriate legislative, judicial and institutional frameworks and to ensure an adequate level of protection of personal data that is consistent with the objectives and principles contained in this Chapter.   TITLE VI  DISPUTE AVOIDANCE AND SETTLEMENT    CHAPTER 1 Objective and scope   Article 66  Objective  The objective of this Title is to avoid and settle any dispute between the Parties with a view to arriving, where possible, at a mutually agreed solution.   ARTICLE 67  Scope  This Title shall apply to any dispute relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement, except where specifically provided otherwise.   CHAPTER 2 Consultations and mediation   Article 68  Consultations  1. The Parties shall endeavour to resolve disputes under this Agreement by entering into good faith consultations with the aim of reaching a mutually acceptable solution.  2. A Party seeking consultations shall do so by means of a written request to the other Party, copied to the EPA Committee, identifying the measure at issue and the provisions of the Agreement with which it considers the measure not to be in conformity.  3. The consultations shall be held within 40 days of the date on which the request is submitted. The consultations shall be deemed concluded within 60 days of the date of submission of the request unless both Parties agree to continue. All information disclosed during the consultations shall remain confidential.  4. Consultations on matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable or seasonal goods, shall be held within 15 days of the date of submission of the request, and shall be deemed concluded within 30 days of the date of submission of the request.  5. If consultations are not held within the time limits laid down in paragraph 3 or paragraph 4 respectively, or if consultations have been concluded and no agreement has been reached on a mutually agreed solution, the complaining Party may request that an arbitration panel be established in accordance with Article 70.   ARTICLE 69  Mediation  1. If consultations fail to produce a mutually agreed solution, the Parties may, by agreement, seek recourse to a mediator. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the terms of reference for the mediation shall be the matter referred to in the request for consultations.  2. Unless the Parties agree on a mediator within 15 days of submission of the mediation request, the EPA Committee shall select by lot a mediator from the pool of individuals who are on the list referred to in Article 85 and are not nationals of either Party. The selection shall be made within 20 days of submission of the mediation request and in the presence of a representative of each Party. The mediator shall convene a meeting with the Parties no later than 30 days after being selected. The mediator shall receive the submissions of each Party no later than 15 days before the meeting and communicate an opinion no later than 45 days after having been selected.  3. The mediator.s opinion may include recommendations on how to resolve the dispute in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement. The mediator.s opinion is non-binding.  4. The Parties may agree to amend the time limits referred to in paragraph 2. The mediator may also decide to amend these time limits at the request of any of the Parties or on his own initiative, based on the particular difficulties experienced by the Party concerned or the complexity of the case.  5. The mediation proceedings, and in particular all information disclosed and positions taken by the Parties during these proceedings, shall remain confidential.   CHAPTER 3 Procedures for the settlement of disputes    Section I Arbitration procedure   ARTICLE 70  Initiation of the arbitration procedure  1. Where the Parties have failed to resolve the dispute by recourse to consultations as provided for in Article 68, or by recourse to mediation as provided for in Article 69, the complaining Party may request that an arbitration panel be established.  2. A request for the establishment of an arbitration panel shall be addressed in writing to the Party which is the subject of the complaint and to the EPA Committee. The complaining Party shall identify in its request the specific measures at issue, and it shall explain how such measures constitute a breach of the provisions referred to in Article 67.   ARTICLE 71  Establishment of an arbitration panel  1. An arbitration panel shall be composed of three arbitrators.  2. Within 10 days of the date on which the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel is submitted, the Parties shall consult each other in order to reach an agreement on the composition of the arbitration panel.  3. In the event that the Parties are unable to agree on the panel.s composition within the time limit laid down in paragraph 2, either Party may request that the chairperson of the EPA Committee, or his or her delegate, select all three members by lot from the list drawn up under Article 85: one from among the individuals proposed by the complaining Party, one from among the individuals proposed by the Party complained against and one from among the individuals selected by both Parties to act as chairperson. Where the Parties agree on one or more of the members of the arbitration panel, any remaining members shall be selected by the same procedure.  4. The chairperson of the EPA Committee, or his or her delegate, shall select the arbitrators within five days of the request referred to in paragraph 3 being submitted by either Party and in the presence of a representative of each Party.  5. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the three arbitrators are selected.   ARTICLE 72  Interim report by the panel  The arbitration panel shall submit to the Parties an interim report containing both the descriptive sections and the panel.s findings and conclusions, as a general rule not later than 120 days from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. Any Party may submit written comments to the arbitration panel on specific aspects of its interim report within 15 days of submission of the report.   ARTICLE 73  Arbitration panel ruling  1. The arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the EPA Committee of its ruling within 150 days from the date on which the arbitration panel is established. Where it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the EPA Committee in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the panel plans to conclude its work. Under no circumstances should the ruling be notified later than 180 days from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel.  2. In urgent cases, including those involving perishable or seasonal goods, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to issue its ruling within 75 days of the date of its establishment. Under no circumstance should it take longer than 90 days from the date of its establishment to issue the ruling. The arbitration panel may give a preliminary ruling within ten days of its establishment on whether it deems the case to be urgent.  3. Either disputing Party may ask an arbitration panel to make recommendations on how the Party complained against could comply.     Section II Compliance   ARTICLE 74  Compliance with the arbitration panel ruling  Each Party or, as appropriate, Central African Contracting States, shall take any measure necessary to implement the arbitration panel ruling, and the Parties shall endeavour to agree on a deadline for compliance with the ruling.   ARTICLE 75  Reasonable period of time for compliance  1. No later than 30 days after the Parties have been notified of the arbitration panel ruling, the Party complained against shall notify the complaining Party and the EPA Committee of the time it will require for compliance (‘reasonable period of time’).  2. In the event of disagreement between the Parties on the reasonable period of time to comply with the arbitration panel ruling, the complaining Party shall, within 20 days of the notification made under paragraph 1 by the Party complained against, request in writing that the arbitration panel determine the length of the reasonable period of time. This request shall be communicated simultaneously to the other Party and to the EPA Committee. The arbitration panel shall notify the Parties and the EPA Committee of its ruling within 30 days of the date of submission of the request.  3. In determining the length of the reasonable period of time, the arbitration panel shall take into consideration the length of time that it should take the Party complained against or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting State, to adopt comparable legislative or administrative measures to those identified by the Party complained against or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting States, as being necessary to ensure compliance. The arbitration panel may also take into consideration demonstrable capacity constraints which may affect the adoption of the necessary measures by the Party complained against.  4. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene, the procedures set out in Article 71 shall apply. The deadline for issuing a ruling shall be 45 days from the date of submission of the request referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.  5. The reasonable period may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.     ARTICLE 76  Review of measures taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling  1. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party and the EPA Committee, before the end of the reasonable period of time, of any measure that it has taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling.  2. In the event of disagreement between the Parties concerning the compatibility of any measure notified under paragraph 1 with the provisions of this Agreement, the complaining Party may request in writing that the arbitration panel rule on the matter. Such request shall identify the specific measure at issue and explain how such measure is incompatible with the provisions of this Agreement. The arbitration panel shall issue its ruling within 90 days of the date of submission of the request. In urgent cases, including those involving perishable or seasonal goods, the arbitration panel shall issue its ruling within 45 days of the date of submission of the request.  3. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene, the procedures set out in Article 71 shall apply. The period for issuing the ruling shall be 105 days from the date of submission of the request referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.   ARTICLE 77  Temporary provisions in case of non-compliance  1. If the Party complained against fails to give notification of any measure taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling before the expiry of the reasonable period of time, or if the arbitration panel rules that the measures notified under Article 76(1) are not compatible with that Party's obligations under the provisions of this Agreement, the Party complained against or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting State concerned shall, if so requested by the complaining Party, present an offer for temporary compensation. This compensation may include or consist of financial compensation. However, nothing in this Agreement shall oblige the Party complained against or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting State concerned, to offer such financial compensation.  2. If no agreement on compensation is reached within 30 days of the end of the reasonable period of time or of the arbitration panel’s ruling under Article 76 that a measure taken to comply is not compatible with the provisions of this Agreement, the complaining Party shall be entitled, after notifying the other Party, to adopt appropriate measures. These measures may be adopted by the complaining Party or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting State concerned.  3. In adopting these measures, the complaining Party or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting State concerned, shall aim to select measures proportionate to the infringement which least affect the achievement of this Agreement’s objectives and take into consideration their impact on the economy of the Party complained against and on the various Central African Contracting States.  4. The UK shall show restraint when asking for compensation or adopting appropriate measures in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article.  5. The compensation or appropriate measures shall be temporary and shall be applied only until any measure found to violate the provisions of this Agreement has been withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with those provisions or until the Parties have agreed to settle the dispute.   ARTICLE 78  Review of measures taken to comply following the adoption of appropriate measures  1. The Party complained against shall notify the other Party and the EPA Committee of any measure it has taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling and, in that notification, request an end to the application of appropriate measures by the complaining Party or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting State concerned.  2. If the Parties do not reach an agreement, within 30 days of the date of submission of the notification, on the compatibility of the notified measures with the provisions of this Agreement, the complaining Party shall request in writing that the arbitration panel rule on the matter. The other Party and the EPA Committee shall be notified of the request. The Parties and the EPA Committee shall be notified of the arbitration panel ruling within 45 days of submission of the request. If the arbitration panel rules that any measure taken to comply is not in conformity with the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the arbitration panel shall determine whether the complaining Party or, as appropriate, the Central African Contracting State concerned may continue to apply appropriate measures. If the arbitration panel rules that any measure taken to comply is in conformity with the provisions of this Agreement, the appropriate measures shall be terminated.  3. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene, the procedures laid down in Article 71 shall apply. The period for issuing the ruling shall be 60 days from the date of submission of the request referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.     Section III Common provisions   ARTICLE 79  Mutually agreed solution  Under this Title the Parties may at any time reach a mutually agreed solution to a dispute. They shall notify the EPA Committee of any such solution. When a mutually agreed solution is adopted, the procedure must be terminated.   ARTICLE 80  Rules of procedure and code of conduct  1. Dispute settlement procedures under Chapter 3 shall be governed by the rules of procedure and code of conduct to be adopted by the EPA Committee.  2. Meetings of the arbitration panel shall be open to the public in accordance with the rules of procedure, which also provide for the protection of confidential business information.   ARTICLE 81  Information and technical advice  At the request of a Party, or upon its own initiative, the arbitration panel may obtain information from any source, including the Parties involved in the dispute, which it deems appropriate for the arbitration procedure. The arbitration panel also has the right to seek the opinion of experts as it deems appropriate. Any information obtained in this manner must be disclosed to each of the Parties and submitted for their comments. Interested parties are authorised to submit amicus curiae briefs to the arbitration panel in accordance with the rules of procedure.   ARTICLE 82  Languages for communications  The written and oral submissions of Cameroon shall be made in French and English, and those of the UK in English.    ARTICLE 83  Rules of interpretation  Any arbitration panel shall interpret the provisions of this Agreement in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public international law, including the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The rulings of the arbitration panel cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations provided for in this Agreement.   ARTICLE 84  Arbitration panel rulings  1. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to reach its decisions by consensus. Where, nevertheless, a decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by majority vote. However, under no circumstances shall the dissenting opinions of arbitrators be published.  2. The ruling shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions of this Agreement and the basic rationale behind any findings and conclusions of the arbitration panel. The EPA Committee shall make the arbitration panel ruling publicly available unless it decides not to do so.   CHAPTER 4 General provisions   ARTICLE 85  List of arbitrators  1. The EPA Committee shall, no later than six months after this Agreement’s entry into force, establish a list of 15 individuals who are willing and able to serve as arbitrators. Each of the Parties shall select five individuals to serve as arbitrators. The two Parties shall also agree on five individuals who are not nationals of either Party and who may be called upon to act as chairperson to the arbitration panel. The EPA Committee shall ensure that a full list is always maintained. In the event of an accession to this Agreement, the size of the list of arbitrators shall remain as 15 individuals.  2. Arbitrators shall have specialised knowledge or experience of law and international trade. They shall be independent, serve in their individual capacities and not take instructions from any organisation or government or be affiliated with the government of any of the Parties, and shall comply with the code of conduct adopted by the EPA Committee.  3. The EPA Committee may draw up an additional list of 15 individuals with sectoral expertise in specific matters covered by the Agreement. Where recourse is made to the selection procedure under Article 71(3), the chairperson of the EPA Committee may use this type of sectoral list with the agreement of both Parties.   ARTICLE 86  Relationship to WTO obligations  1. Arbitration bodies set up under this Agreement shall not adjudicate disputes concerning each Party’s rights and obligations under the Agreement establishing the WTO.  2. Recourse to the dispute settlement provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to any action in the WTO framework, including dispute settlement action. However, where a Party or, as appropriate, relevant Central African Contracting States has/have instituted a dispute settlement proceeding with regard to a particular measure, either under Article 70(1) or under the WTO Agreement, it/they may not institute a dispute settlement proceeding with regard to the same measure in the other forum until the first proceeding has ended. For the purposes of this paragraph, dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO Agreement shall be deemed to be initiated by the request of a Party or, as appropriate, relevant Central African Contracting States for the establishment of a panel under Article 6 of the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes of the WTO.  3. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude a Party or, as appropriate, relevant Central African Contracting States from implementing the suspension of obligations authorised by the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO.   ARTICLE 87  Time limits  1. All time limits laid down in this Title, including the deadlines for the arbitration panels to issue their rulings, shall be counted in calendar days from the day following the act or fact to which they refer.  2. Any time limit provided for in this Title may be extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.     ARTICLE 88 Amendment of Title VI The EPA Committee may decide to amend this Title and its Annexes. TITLE VII GENERAL EXCEPTIONS ARTICLE 89 General exception clause Subject to the requirement that such measures are not to be applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where like conditions must prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in goods, services or establishment, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by the Parties of measures which: (a)are necessary to protect public security or public morality or to maintainpublic order;(b)are necessary to protect the health or life of humans, animals or plants;(c)are necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are notinconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including thoserelating to:(i)prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or ways of dealingwith the effects of a default on contracts;(ii)protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processingand dissemination of personal data and the protection ofconfidentiality of individual records and accounts;(iii)security;(iv)the application of customs regulations and procedures; or(v)protection of intellectual property rights;(d)relate to imports or exports of gold or silver;(e)are necessary to protect national treasures of artistic, historical orarchaeological value;(f)relate to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if suchmeasures involve restrictions on domestic production or consumption ofgoods or the provision or consumption of domestic services, and ondomestic investors;(g)relate to the products of prison labour; or(h)are inconsistent with the articles of this Agreement on national treatment,provided that the difference in treatment is intended to ensure theeffective or equitable imposition or collection of direct taxes in respectof the economic activities of investors or of service providers of the otherParty6.6Measures aimed at ensuring the effective or equitable imposition or collection of direct taxes shall include measures taken by one of the Parties under its tax system which: (i) apply to non-resident investors and service providers in recognition of the fact that the tax obligation ofnon-residents is determined with respect to taxable entities outsourcing from or located in the territory of one of the Parties;(ii) apply to non-residents in order to ensure the imposition or collection of taxes in the territory of one of theParties;(iii) apply to non-residents or residents in order to prevent tax evasion or avoidance, including measures takento comply;(iv)apply to consumers of services supplied in or from the territory of the other Party in order to ensure theimposition or collection of taxes on such consumers derived from sources in the territory of one of the Parties; (v)distinguish investors and service providers subject to taxes on global taxable entities from other investorsand service providers, in recognition of the differences between their tax bases; or(vi)determine, allocate or apportion income, profit, gain, loss, deduction or credit of resident persons orbranches, or between related persons or branches of the same person, in order to safeguard the Parties’ taxbases.ARTICLE 90 Security exceptions 1.Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:(a)to require the Parties to furnish any information the disclosure of whichthey consider contrary to their essential security interests;(b)to prevent the Parties from taking any action which they considernecessary for the protection of their essential security interests:(i)relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materialsfrom which they are derived;(ii)relating to economic activities carried out directly or indirectly forthe purpose of supplying or provisioning a military establishment;(iii)relating to the production of, or trade in, arms, munitions or warmaterials;(iv)relating to government procurement indispensable for nationalsecurity or for national defence purposes; or(v)taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;or(c)to prevent the Parties from taking any action in pursuance of theobligations they accepted in order to maintain international peace andsecurity.2.The EPA Committee shall be informed to the fullest extent possible ofmeasures taken under paragraphs 1(b) and 1(c) and of their termination.ARTICLE 91 Taxation 1.Nothing in this Agreement or in any agreement adopted in implementation ofthis Agreement shall be construed to prevent the Parties from distinguishing, in theapplication of the relevant provisions of their fiscal legislation, between taxpayerswho are not in the same situation, in particular with regard to their place of residenceor with regard to the place where their capital is invested.2.Nothing in this Agreement or in any agreement adopted in implementation ofthis Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement of anymeasure intended to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes pursuant to the taxprovisions of agreements to avoid double taxation or other tax agreements ordomestic fiscal legislation.3.Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Partiesunder any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreementand any such convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of theinconsistency.TITLE VIII GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE 92 EPA Committee 1.To implement this Agreement, an EPA Committee shall hereby be set up.2.The EPA Committee shall be composed of representatives of the Parties. EachParty determines the organisation of its representation.3.The EPA Committee shall determine the rules governing its organisation andoperation.4.Except as otherwise provided for in paragraph 5 of this Article, the EPACommittee shall be responsible for the administration of all areas covered by thisAgreement and for the completion of all tasks referred to in this Agreement.5.The EPA Committee shall not be responsible for dialogue, consultations heldor measures taken (as referred to in Annex IV) relating to the essential andfundamental elements of this Agreement.6.The EPA Committee shall reach its decisions by consensus.7.In order to facilitate communication and ensure the effective implementation ofthis Agreement, each Party shall designate a focal point.8.Any decisions adopted by the EPA Committee established by the EU-CentralAfrica iEPA before that Agreement ceased to apply to the UK shall, to the extentthose decisions relate to the Parties to this Agreement and unless the Parties agreeotherwise, be deemed to have been adopted, mutatis mutandis, by the EPACommittee which the Parties establish under paragraph 1 of this Article.9.In this Article, a reference to decisions adopted by the ‘EPA Committeeestablished by the EU-Central Africa iEPA’ shall be understood as also includingdecisions adopted by any special committees or bodies established by thatCommittee.10.Nothing in paragraph 8 prevents the EPA Committee established by thisAgreement from making decisions which are different to, modify, revoke orsupersede the decisions deemed to have been adopted under that paragraph.ARTICLE 93  Regional organisations  The Commission of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (‘CEMAC’) and the Commission of the Economic Community of Central African States (‘ECCAS’) may be invited to the meetings of the EPA Committee. Where one Party wishes to invite CEMAC and ECCAS to an EPA Committee meeting, the other Party may not unreasonably object.   ARTICLE 94  Continuation of negotiations and implementation of the Agreement  1. The Parties shall continue the negotiations set out in this Agreement within the existing negotiation structures.  2. When the negotiations are concluded, the resulting draft amendments shall be submitted to the relevant national authorities for approval.  3. Pending the first meeting of the EPA Committee and of other institutions and committees of relevance, the Parties shall take the necessary measures for the administration and implementation of this Agreement and carry out the tasks of the EPA Committee each time reference is made to this Committee in this Agreement.   ARTICLE 95  Definition of the Parties and fulfilment of obligations  1. The Parties to this Agreement shall be the Republic of Cameroon (‘Cameroon’), of the one part, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (‘the United Kingdom’ or ‘the UK’), of the other part.  2. The following words and expressions have the following meaning:  ‘accession’ has the meaning given in Article 101(1) and cognate expressions are to be construed accordingly;  ‘Central Africa Party’ means:   (a)  a Central African regional organisation that accedes to this Agreement (if any); and     (b)  Central African Contracting States;   ‘Central African Contracting State’ means Cameroon and any Central African State that accedes to this Agreement; and  ‘Party’ means a contracting party to this Agreement, as provided for in paragraph 1 (including any amendment made to that paragraph under paragraph 3(a)).    3. In the event of an accession:  (a) in paragraph 1, ‘Republic of Cameroon (‘Cameroon’)’ shall be replaced by ‘Central Africa Party’;  (b) elsewhere in this Agreement, ‘Cameroon’ shall be replaced by ‘Central Africa Party’, unless the context requires otherwise7; 7 In particular, the context shall require amendment to reflect the rights or obligations of a Central African Contracting State individually, where it refers to ‘Cameroon, or in the event of an accession, another Central African Contracting State’.  (c) a Central African regional organisation that accedes to this Agreement (if any) and each of the Central African Contracting States agree:   (i)  to be bound by the obligations of the Central Africa Party; and  (ii) to act collectively for the purposes of this Agreement, unless this Agreement expressly provides for rights to be exercised by or obligations to be complied with individually.  4. The Parties, a Central African regional organisation that accedes to this Agreement (if any) and each of the Central African Contracting States, whichever is appropriate, shall adopt any general or specific measures required for them to fulfil their obligations under this Agreement and shall ensure that they comply with the objectives laid down in this Agreement.    ARTICLE 96  Coordinators and exchange of information  1. In order to facilitate communication and ensure the effective implementation of this Agreement, each Party shall designate a coordinator upon this Agreement’s entry into force. The designation of coordinators shall be without prejudice to the specific designation of competent authorities under specific titles or chapters of this Agreement.  2. At the request of either Party, the coordinator of the other Party shall indicate the office or official responsible for any matter pertaining to the implementation of the Agreement and provide the support necessary to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.  3. At the request of either Party, and to the extent legally possible, each Party through its coordinator shall provide information and reply promptly to any question from the other Party relating to an actual or proposed measure or an international agreement that might affect trade between the Parties.  4. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application relating to any trade matter covered by this Agreement are promptly published or made publicly available and brought to the attention of the other Party.  5. Without prejudice to specific transparency provisions in this Agreement, the information referred to under this Article shall be considered to have been provided when the information has been made available by appropriate notification to the WTO or when the information has been made available on the official, public and fee-free website of the Party concerned.   ARTICLE 97  Regional preference  1. Nothing in this Agreement shall oblige a Party to extend to the other Party to this Agreement any more favourable treatment than that applied within each of the Parties as part of its respective regional integration process.  2. In the event of accession, any more favourable treatment or advantage that may be granted under this Agreement by any Central African Contracting State to the UK shall immediately and unconditionally also be enjoyed by each Central African Contracting State.   ARTICLE 98  Entry into force  1. This Agreement shall be signed, ratified or approved in accordance with constitutional or domestic rules and applicable procedures.  2. Each of the Parties shall notify the other in writing, through diplomatic channels, of the completion of their internal procedures for entry into force of this Agreement.  3. Unless the Parties agree to such other date, this Agreement shall enter into force as between the UK and Cameroon on the date of the later of the Parties’ notifications that they have completed their internal procedures.  4. Pending entry into force, the Parties may agree to provisionally apply this Agreement, or certain provisions thereof, in accordance with their respective internal procedures (‘provisional application’). The Parties shall notify each other of the provisions of the Agreement which they intend to apply.   5. Unless the Parties agree to such other date, provisional application of this Agreement under paragraph 4 shall take effect from the date of the later of the Parties’ notifications that they have completed their respective legal requirements and procedure for provisional application.   6. If this Agreement or certain provisions of this Agreement are provisionally applied pending its entry into force, unless this Agreement provides otherwise, all references in this Agreement to the date of entry into force shall be deemed to refer to the date that such provisional application takes effect.  7. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, the Parties may unilaterally take measures to apply the Agreement, before provisional application, to the extent that this is possible.  8. Notifications under this Article shall be submitted by the UK to Cameroon’s Ministry of External Relations, or its successor, and by Cameroon to the UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office or its successor, except that once the Government of Cameroon is assigned as the depositary under Article 101(3), all such notifications shall be sent by any Party, Central African regional organisation, or Central African Contracting State to the Depositary.   ARTICLE 99  Duration  1. This Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period.  2. A Party, a Central African regional organisation that accedes to this Agreement (if any) or a Central African Contracting State, may give written notice of its intention to denounce this Agreement.  3. Denunciation shall take effect six months after the date of such notification, except that where the Agreement, or certain provisions thereof are provisionally applied, denunciation shall take effect on the first day of the first month following the date of such notification.   4. Notifications under this Article shall be submitted by the UK to Cameroon’s Ministry of External Relations, or its successor, and by Cameroon to the UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office or its successor, except that once the Government of Cameroon is assigned as the depositary under Article 101(3), all such notifications shall be sent by any Party, Central African regional organisation, or Central African Contracting State to the Depositary. ARTICLE 100  Territorial application  1. This Agreement shall apply, (i) Gibraltar; (ii) the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man; and   (a)  on the one hand, to the territory of the United Kingdom and the following territories for whose international relations the United Kingdom is responsible, to the extent that and under the conditions which the EU-Central Africa iEPA applied immediately before it ceased to apply to the United Kingdom:    (b) on the other hand, to the territory of Cameroon.  2. References in this Agreement to ‘territory’ shall be understood in the sense set out in paragraph 1, unless explicitly stated otherwise.    ARTICLE 101  Accession of States or of regional organisations in Central Africa  1. This Agreement shall be open to accession by any State or regional organisation in Central Africa. Any reference to ‘accession’ in this Agreement refers to an accession under this Article, unless explicity stated otherwise. A request for accession shall be submitted to the EPA Committee. Any State which submits a request for accession shall attend the meetings of the EPA Committee as an observer.  2.  On receipt of a request for accession:   (a)  the request shall be examined and negotiations begun in order to propose the necessary amendments to this Agreement, subject to sub-paragraph (b);   (b)  where this Agreement makes provision for amendments that will apply in the event of accession (‘accession amendments’), those accession amendments shall be fully applied from the date this Agreement enters into force for the first state or regional organisation acceding to it; and  (c)  the accession protocol shall be submitted to the EPA Committee for approval.   3. Following the EPA Committee’s approval of an application for accession, the acceding State or regional organisation may deposit an instrument of accession or a notification confirming its provisional application of the Agreement with the Government of Cameroon, which shall be thereafter the depositary of this Agreement.   4.  This Agreement shall enter into force or be provisionally applied in relation to the acceding State or regional organisation:  (a)  on the date its instrument of accession or note of provisional application is deposited; or   (b)  on such other date as the existing Parties and the acceding State shall agree.   ARTICLE 102  Dialogue on financial matters  The Parties agree to promote dialogue and transparency and to share best practices on tax policy and administration.   ARTICLE 103  Collaboration in tackling illegal financial activities  The Parties undertake to prevent and tackle fraudulent and corrupt illegal activities, money laundering and the financing of terrorism, and shall take the necessary legislative and administrative measures to comply with international standards, including those set out in the United Nations Convention against Corruption, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, the United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force. The Parties agree to exchange information and to cooperate in these areas.   ARTICLE 104  Relationship to other agreements  1. The Parties agree that nothing in this Agreement requires them to act in a manner inconsistent with their WTO obligations.  2. The Parties agree to examine whether the provisions of this Agreement are consistent with the customs unions to which the signatories to this Agreement belong.   ARTICLE 105  Authentic texts  This Agreement shall be drawn up in duplicate in the English and French languages, each text being equally authentic.   ARTICLE 106  Annexes and Protocols  The Annexes and the Protocols to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof.   In witness whereof the undersigned, duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.  Done in Duplicate at London this ninth day of March 2021 in the English and French languages, both texts being equally authoritative.   For the United Kingdom of     For the Republic of Cameroon: Great Britain and Northern Ireland:    RANIL JAYAWARDENA    ALBERT FOTABONG NJOTEH  APPENDIX I    A. Priority products for regional harmonisation by Cameroon and any other Central African Contracting States — Live animals, in particular small ruminants, and fresh meat and meat products. — Fish, fishery products, aquaculture products, fresh or processed. — Tubers, root crops (including peanuts, manioc, taro, potatoes).       B. Priority products for export from Cameroon to the UK — Coffee, cocoa. — Spices (vanilla, pepper). — Fruit and nuts. — Vegetables. — Fish, fishery products and aquaculture products, fresh or processed. — Timber.       ANNEX I  Capacity building and modernisation under the EPA  A. General framework  As one of the fundamental principles of the EPA is to promote regional integration and to facilitate the economic and social development of the ACP States, both Parties expect this Agreement to make a useful contribution to meeting the objectives of sustainable development, eradication of poverty and the gradual integration of Cameroon into the global economy.  The aim is to build synergies between the mutual commitments set out in the EPA and development cooperation  in order to support a quantitative and qualitative increase in the goods and services produced and exported by Cameroon. In partnership with the UK, operators in Cameroon will promote this objective in the following areas:  1. Development of basic infrastructure . Transport . Energy . Telecommunications   2. Agriculture and food safety at regional level . Agricultural production . Agro-industry . Fisheries . Stock farming . Aquaculture and fish stocks   3. Competitiveness and diversification of economies . Modernisation of businesses . Industry . Standards and certification (SPS, quality, zootechnical standards, etc.)   4. Strengthening of regional trade . Development of the regional common market . Taxation and customs   5. Improvement of the business environment . Harmonisation of trade policies    6. Setting up EPA institutions  7. Financing of the partnership  Needs identified will be passed on to the EPA Committee or other relevant bodies in order to identify support programmes, possible sources of funding and arrangements for implementing the EPA accompanying measures. For this purpose, experts may be used, where appropriate, in order to identify support programmes, assess their feasibility and propose appropriate arrangements for implementation. These analyses will take the form of development programmes, together with a financial evaluation.   B. Areas of assistance 1.1. Support for improving the integrated sub-regional communication network (roads, inland waterways, railways, promotion of ports, dry ports and airports) 1.2. Support for developing hydroelectric infrastructure in the area, interconnec- tion of electricity grids 1.3. Interconnection of telecommunications networks, particularly by improving ICT infrastructure 1.4. Support for evaluating the costs of basic infrastructure 2.1. Support for improving productivity (seed programme, research and dissemination) 2.2. Development of agro-industries 2.3. Improvement in trade in agricultural products 2.4. Support for the implementation of a regional common agricultural policy 3.1. Support for the development of processing industries (timber, cotton, leather, meat, fish, other agricultural products, hydrocarbons, mines, etc.) 3.2. Support for reducing supply-side constraints 3.3. Support for the development of tourism 3.4. Financing of research and development 3.4.1. Evaluation and use of appropriate technologies 3.4.2. Harmonisation of research and innovation policies (universities, public and private research institutes and centres, institutes of technology, vocational schools, etc.) 3.4.3. Support for capacity building in the use of ITC 3.4.4. Support for research institutes 3.4.5. Support for the development of the pharmacopeia and the pharmaceutical industry 3.4.6. Support for technology transfer, particularly by means of partnerships between businesses 3.5. Support for the programme identifying economic potential 3.5.1. Identification and promotion of the region’s products and services (agri-food sectors, tourism, mines, business services: management, accounting, interpreting, banks, informatics, insurance, etc.) 3.5.2. Creation of specialised training centres for new occupations and high added- value occupations (secondary processing of timber, textiles and clothing) 3.5.3. Support for the development of business incubators 3.6. Competitiveness/modernisation programme for businesses with high potential 3.6.1. Support for drafting and implementing national and regional strategies to promote and consolidate competitiveness 3.6.2. Support for improving the regional modernisation programme:programme to support and strengthen business competitiveness (PARCE), support for intangible investment (e.g.: marketing strategies), business diagnostics programme and market analysis (modernisation plans and financing of these plans), technical and technological support, support for obtaining quality certification, support for facilitating CA exports with respect to private standards  3.6.3. Support for carrying out the study on factor cost in the industrial sector in Cameroon 3.6.5. Consolidation of ‘quality’ infrastructures (laboratories) in support of exports — Support for the introduction of a regional accreditation and metrology system — Harmonisation of national standards at regional level. 3.6.6. Improvement of packaging, traceability and storage operations. 3.6.8. Development of a network of auditors to support businesses in the certification process and laboratories in the accreditation process. 3.6.9. Loans for adapting productive infrastructure (ADB, CASDB) 3.7. Support for the protection of intellectual property rights, including (1): — Development of a register of trademarks and products with designation of origin and promotion of these products — Support for development of a marking indicating origin 3.8. Support for the creation of a subcontracting exchange market and a regional economic partnership 3.9. Support for small and medium-sized enterprises Types of measures to be taken:  The key areas of action that the UK may consider for assistance are set out in the table below:   If the UK is to provide support for any activities listed below, measures set out below must be compatible with the objectives of points 3 and 4.    Key areas  Examples of types of activities   1— Development of basic  infrastructure     2— Agriculture and food safety at regional level     3— Industry, diversification and competitiveness of economies in conjunction with regional development    Key areas  Examples of types of activities      3.6.4 Support for the processing of agricultural products and of natural resources with strong export potential 3.6.7 Creation of technical centres for national and regional occupations a. Expertise services — provision of a range of services to help SMEs with marketing, accounting, legal analysis, business plan preparation, access to finance. b. Vocational training c. Facilitating access to credit and improving conditions for SMEs to access credit (2) d. Provision of credit information at regional level (3) e. More flexible lending conditions (4) f. Strengthening the capacity of financial intermediaries in Central Africa (5) g. Analysis of the potential role of the CASDB h. Analysis of the recommendations resulting from the study on financial services in Cameroon. i. Promoting the transition from the informal to the formal economy, in conjunction with the public authorities, for example by means of incentives. 3.10. Promotion of entrepreneurship among women   (1) An expert from the African Intellectual Property Organisation (OAPI) will be consulted to determine the type of support needed. (2) Useful to create mechanisms which are more likely to provide funds for SMEs in the region, for example by means of loan guarantee funds. Examples are: BDEAC, etc. Expertise services will be able to help SMEs to prepare their loan documentation. (3) Facilitating access to information for potential creditors in order to reduce the level of bank risk which currently exists. For example: creation of shared databases on client risk. (4) Exploring ways of relaxing lending conditions in order to facilitate access to loans, taking account of the scale of the informal sector of the economy. (5) Improving risk analysis capacity in institutions which may issue loans. Modernisation of and training for credit institutions. 4.1. Development of the regional market (harmonisation of fiscal/customs instruments, strengthening of tax/customs administrations, identifying border security measures) 4.2. Introduction of  rules (competition, competitiveness, intellectual property, tackling illegal trade, piracy, public procurement, services, investment) 4.3. Strengthening the capacity of tax/customs administrations 4.4. Support for the regional programme for standards and certification 4.5. Support for the Regional Economic Communities (streamlining and harmonisation of programmes) 4.6. Support for the free movement of goods, services, capital and persons 4.7. Support for existing and future regional policies a. Regional preference in the EPA, in favour of regional integration b. Support for the introduction of the common commercial policy c. Reduction of non-tariff barriers at regional level, e.g.: introduction of regional health standards (for programming purposes this is dealt with under point 3 below) d. Impetus for internal reforms: free circulation/double taxation; transit; rules of origin; compliance with regional provisions on trade. 4.8. Tax base and regional financial instrument a. Make provision for the creation of a regional financial instrument. Cohesion fund in support of public finances and as a development tool in the least-favoured areas. b. Supporting fiscal reforms (restructuring of the tax base, harmonisation of domestic tax systems, etc.) and strengthening the capacity of tax administrations. c. Continuing the work begun on statistics, particularly in the context of the PAIRAC programme. 5.1. Support for improving the judicial and legal security of private investments 5.2. Support for improving the Community Investment Charter and sectoral codes 5.3. Support for setting up guarantee fund and venture capital structures 5.4. Institutional support for intermediaries in the region Measures in support of intermediaries in the region — Example: support for chambers of commerce — Example: support for professional or employer organisations — Example: support for export promotion agencies — APEX — Example: support for investment promotion agencies — API — Example: support for structuring the dialogue between the regional private sector and the UK private sector — Example: support for the Regional Economic Communities of Central Africa in areas related to the EPA 5.5. Improvement of the business environment — Support for existing and future regional policies — competition policy — OHADA law — right of establishment of companies — labour standards — public procurement — intellectual property (tackling illegal trade, piracy, geographical indications, etc.) — With substantial support for national and region administrations, to help in the implementation of regional and national reforms: — Example for intellectual property: support for the regional programme for standards, patents and certification. — Example: support for improving the Community Investment Charter and sectoral codes. — Study of mechanisms designed to improve the judicial and legal security of private investments, for example by means of guarantee systems to help promote investments (best practice, current practices in Central Africa, recommendations etc.) and contribute to technology transfer. — It is also advisable to promote the exchange of best practice at regional level with regard to taxation affecting businesses. An initial comparative analysis of national approaches in this area will be undertaken in order to give impetus to this debate.  Key areas  Examples of types of activities  4— Strengthening of regional integration   — Example: Support from customs authorities for computerisation and interconnection — Example: Standards and quality programme for the region, including relevant infrastructure (control laboratories, etc.) — Example: Support to administrations for CEMAC/DRC/STP tariff harmonisation — Example: Strengthening the capacity of tax/customs administrations — Example: Support for the Regional Economic Communities — Example: Support in defining and developing a mechanism to solve the problem of double taxation  5— Improvement of the business environment and support for businesses  Key  Examples of types of activities    6— Facilitation of the establish- ment of EPA institutions  Support for the institutional system necessary both for trade matters and for development matters to ensure the effective implementation of the Agreement and thus the legal credibility of the EPA and of the regional reform process with respect to the national, regional and international private sectors.     C. Timetable  A timetable will be drawn up for implementation of measures selected for capacity building and for modernisation.             ANNEX II  Customs duties on products originating in the territory of Cameroon   1. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2, customs duties on imports to the UK (hereinafter ‘UK customs duties’) shall be completely eliminated, on the date on which this Agreement enters into force, for all products originating in the territory of Cameroon which fall within Chapters 1 to 97 of the Harmonised System, excluding Chapter 93. For products falling within Chapter 93, the UK shall continue to impose the duties applied on the basis of its WTO applied most favoured nation rates (hereinafter ‘MFN’).  2. (a) In application of the provisions of Article 31, disruptions in the markets of products under tariff heading 1701 may be deemed to arise in situations where the United Kingdom average market price of white sugar falls during two consecutive months below 80 % of the United Kingdom average market price for white sugar prevailing during the previous marketing year8 8For the purposes of paragraph 2, ‘marketing year’ shall mean the period from 1 October to 30 September.        (b) Subparagraph 2(a) shall not apply for a period of five (5) years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or if the Agreement is provisionally applied, the date such provisional application takes effect.   (c) The Parties agree to review subparagraph 2(a), with a view to reaching agreement within five (5) years of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or if the Agreement is provisionally applied, the date such provisional application takes effect, on a percentage of the UK average market price for white sugar prevailing during the previous marketing year which if the UK average market price of white sugar falls below during two consecutive months, may be deemed a disruption in the market of products under tariff heading 1701.    ANNEX III Customs duties on products originating in the UK   Code    Dismantlement  010121  Horses; live, pure-bred breeding animals  1  010129  Horses; live, other than pure-bred breeding animals  3  010130  Asses; live  1  010190  Horses, asses, mules and hinnies; live, other than pure-bred breeding animals  3  010221  Cattle; live, pure-bred breeding animals  1  010229  Cattle; live, other than pure-bred breeding animals  3  010231  Buffalo; live, pure-bred breeding animals  1  010239  Buffalo; live, other than pure-bred breeding animals  3  010290  Bovine animals; live, other than pure-bred breeding animals  1  010310  Swine; live, pure-bred breeding animals  1  010391  Swine; live, (other than pure-bred breeding animals), weighing less than 50kg  3  010392  Swine; live, (other than pure-bred breeding animals), weighing 50kg or more  3  010410  Sheep; live  3  010420  Goats; live  3  010511  Poultry; live, fowls of the species gallus domesticus, weighing not more than 185g  1  010512  Poultry; live, weighing not more than 185g, turkeys  1  010513  Poultry; live, ducks, weighing not more than 185g  1  010514  Poultry; live, geese, weighing not more than 185g  1  010515  Poultry; live, guinea fowls, weighing not more than 185g  1  010594  Poultry; live, fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, weighing more than 185g  3  010599  Poultry; live, ducks, geese, turkeys and guinea fowls, weighing more than 185g  3  010611  Mammals; live, primates  1    010612   Mammals; live, whales, dolphins and porpoises ( mammals of the order Cetacea); manatees and dugongs (mammals of the order Sirenia)    1  010613  Mammals; live, camels and other camelids (Camelidae)  1  010614  Mammals; live, rabbits and hares  1     010619   Mammals; live, other than primates, whales, dolphins and porpoises (order Cetacea), manatees and dugongs (order Sirenia)     1  010620  Reptiles; live (including snakes and turtles)  1  010631  Animals; live, birds of prey  3  010632  Animals; live, birds, Psittaciformes  3  010633  Birds; live, ostriches; emus (Dromaius novaehollandiae)  3   010639  Animals; live, birds, other than birds of prey and Psittaciformes   3  010641  Insects; live, bees  3  010649  Insects; live, other than bees  3   010690   Animals; live, n.e.c. in chapter 01, other than mammals, reptiles and birds   3  020110  Meat; of bovine animals, carcasses and half- carcasses, fresh or chilled  5  Code    Dismantlement   020120  Meat; of bovine animals, cuts with bone in (excluding carcasses and half-carcasses), fresh or chilled   5  020130  Meat; of bovine animals, boneless cuts, fresh or chilled  5  020210  Meat; of bovine animals, carcasses and half- carcasses, frozen  5  020220  Meat; of bovine animals, cuts with bone in (excluding carcasses and half-carcasses), frozen  5  020230  Meat; of bovine animals, boneless cuts, frozen  5  020311  Meat; of swine, carcasses and half-carcasses, fresh or chilled  5  020312  Meat; of swine, hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, with bone in, fresh or chilled  5   020319   Meat; of swine, n.e.s. in item no. 0203.1, fresh or chilled   5  020321  Meat; of swine, carcasses and half-carcasses,  5  020322  Meat; of swine, hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, with bone in, frozen  5   020329   Meat; of swine, n.e.s. in item no. 0203.2, frozen   5  020410  Meat; of sheep, lamb carcasses and half-carcasses, fresh or chilled  5   020421  Meat; of sheep, carcasses and half-carcasses (excluding carcasses and half-carcasses of lamb), fresh or chilled   5   020422  Meat; of sheep (including lamb), cuts with bone in (excluding carcasses and half-carcasses), fresh or chilled   5  020423  Meat; of sheep (including lamb), boneless cuts, fresh or chilled  5  020430  Meat; of sheep, lamb carcasses and half-carcasses, frozen  5   020441  Meat; of sheep, carcasses and half-carcasses (excluding carcasses and half-carcasses of lamb), frozen   5  020442  Meat; of sheep (including lamb), cuts with bone in (excluding carcasses and half-carcasses), frozen  5  020443  Meat; of sheep (including lamb), boneless cuts, frozen  5  020450  Meat; of goats, fresh, chilled or frozen  5  020500  Meat; of horses, asses, mules or hinnies, fresh, chilled or frozen  5  020610  Offal, edible; of bovine animals, fresh or chilled  5  020621  Offal, edible; of bovine animals, tongues, frozen  5  020622  Offal, edible; of bovine animals, livers, frozen  5  020629  Offal, edible; of bovine animals, (other than tongues and livers), frozen  5  020630  Offal, edible; of swine, fresh or chilled  5  020641  Offal, edible; of swine, livers, frozen  5  020649  Offal, edible; of swine, (other than livers), frozen  5  020680  Offal, edible; of sheep, goats, horses, asses, mules or hinnies, fresh or chilled  5  020690  Offal, edible; of sheep, goats, horses, asses, mules or hinnies, frozen  5   020711  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of fowls of the species gallus domesticus, (not cut in pieces), fresh or chilled   5   020712  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of fowls of the species gallus domesticus, (not cut in pieces), frozen   5  Code    Dismantlement   020713  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of fowls of the species gallus domesticus, cuts and offal, fresh or chilled   5   020714  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of fowls of the species gallus domesticus, cuts and offal, frozen   5   020724  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of turkeys, (not cut in pieces), fresh or chilled   5  020725  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of turkeys, (not cut in pieces), frozen  5  020726  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of turkeys, cuts and offal, fresh or chilled  5  020727  Meat and edible offal; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, of turkeys, cuts and offal, frozen  5   020741  Meat and edible offal; of fowls of the species gallus domesticus, poultry cuts and offal (excluding livers), frozen   5  020742  Meat and edible offal; of turkeys, poultry cuts and offal (excluding livers), frozen  5   020743  Meat and edible offal; of ducks, geese or guinea fowls, poultry cuts and offal (excluding livers) frozen   3  020744  Meat and edible offal; of ducks, cuts and offal, excluding fatty livers, fresh or chilled  5  020745  Meat and edible offal; of ducks, cuts and offal, excluding fatty livers, frozen  5  020751  Meat and edible offal; of geese, not cut in pieces, fresh or chilled  5  020752  Meat and edible offal; of geese, not cut in pieces, frozen  5  020753  Meat and edible offal; of geese, fatty livers (foie gras), fresh or chilled  3  020754  Meat and edible offal; of geese, cuts and offal, excluding fatty livers, fresh or chilled  5  020755  Meat and edible offal; of geese, cuts and offal, excluding fatty livers, frozen  5  020760  Meat and edible offal; of guinea fowls, fresh, chilled or frozen  5  020810  Meat and edible meat offal; of rabbits or hares, fresh, chilled or frozen  5  020830  Meat and edible meat offal; of primates, fresh, chilled or frozen  3     020840   Meat and edible meat offal; of whales, dolphins and porpoises (mammals of the order Cetacea) and manatees and dugongs (mammals of the order Sirenia), fresh, chilled or frozen     3  020850  Meat and edible meat offal; of reptiles (including snakes and turtles), fresh, chilled or frozen  3  020860  Meat and edible meat offal; of camels and other camelids (Camelidae), fresh, chilled or frozen  3        020890       Meat and edible meat offal; n.e.s. in chapter 2, fresh, chilled or frozen        3  Code    Dismantlement   020910  Fat; pig fat, free of lean meat, not rendered or otherwise extracted, fresh, chilled, frozen, salted, in brine, dried or smoked   5   020990  Fat; poultry fat, not rendered or otherwise extracted, fresh, chilled, frozen, salted, in brine, dried or smoked   5   021011  Meat, preserved; of swine, hams, shoulders and cuts thereof, with bone in, salted, in brine, dried or smoked   5  021012  Meat, preserved; of swine, bellies (streaky) and cuts thereof, salted, in brine, dried or smoked  5   021019   Meat, preserved; of swine, salted, in brine, dried or smoked, n.e.s. in item no. 0210.1   5  021020  Meat, preserved; of bovine animals, salted, in brine, dried or smoked  5   021091  Meat and edible meat offal, preserved; salted, in brine, dried or smoked, and edible flours and meals of meat or meat offal, of primates   3     021092  Meat and edible meat offal, preserved; salted, in brine, dried or smoked, and edible flours and meals of meat or meat offal, of whales, dolphins and porpoises (mammals of the order Cetacea); and of manatees and dugongs (mammals of the order Sirenia)     3   021093  Meat and edible meat offal, preserved; salted, in brine, dried or smoked, and edible flours and meals of meat or meat offal, of reptiles (including snakes and turtles)   3      021099   Meat and edible meat offal, preserved; salted, in brine, dried or smoked, and edible flours and meals of meat or meat offal, other than of primates,whales, dolphins and porpoises, manatees and dugongs, reptiles (including snakes and turtles)      5  030111  Fish; live, ornamental, freshwater  3  030119  Fish; live, ornamental, other than freshwater  3   030191   Fish; live, trout (salmo trutta, salmo gairdneri, salmo clarki, salmo aguabonita, salmo gilae)   3  030192  Fish; live, eels (anguilla spp.)  3    030193    Fish; live, carp    3  030194  Fish; live, bluefin tunas (Thunnus thynnus)  3  030195  Fish; live, southern bluefin tunas (Thunnus maccoyii)  3       030199       Fish; live, n.e.s. in heading no. 0301       3  Code    Dismantlemen  030211  Fish; trout (salmo trutta, salmo gairdneri, salmo clarki, salmo aguabonita, salmo gilae), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   3    030213  Fish; fresh or chilled, Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou, Oncorhynchus rhodurus), not fillets, livers, roes, other fish meat of heading 0304    5   030214  Fish; fresh or chilled, Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and Danube salmon (Hucho hucho), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030219  Fish; salmonidae, fresh or chilled, n.e.s. in item no. 0302.1 (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030221  Fish; halibut (reinhardtius hippoglossoides, hippoglossus hippoglossus, hippoglossus stenolepis), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030222  Fish; plaice (pleuronectes platessa), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030223  Fish; sole (solea spp.), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030224  Fish; fresh or chilled, turbots (Psetta maxima, Scophthalmidae), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5     030229    Fish; flat fish, fresh or chilled, n.e.s. in item no. 0302.2 (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)     5   030231  Fish; albacore or longfinned tunas (thunnus alalunga), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030232  Fish; yellowfin tunas (thunnus albacares), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030233  Fish; skipjack or stripe-bellied bonito, fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030234  Fish; bigeye tunas (Thunnus obesus), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030235  Fish; bluefin tunas (Thunnus thynnus), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030236  Fish; southern bluefin tunas (Thunnus maccoyii), fresh or chilled (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030239  Fish; tuna, fresh or chilled, n.e.s. in item no. 0302.3 (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030241  Fish; fresh or chilled, herrings (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030242  Fish; fresh or chilled, anchovies (Engraulis spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5  Code    Dismantlemen  030243  Fish; fresh or chilled, sardines (Sardina pilchardus, Sardinops spp.), sardinella (Sardinella spp.), brisling or sprats (Sprattus sprattus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading   5   030244  Fish; fresh or chilled, mackerel (Scomber scombrus, Scomber australasicus, Scomber japonicus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030245  Fish; fresh or chilled, jack and horse mackerel (Trachurus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030246  Fish; fresh or chilled, cobia (Rachycentron canadum), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030247  Fish; fresh or chilled, swordfish (Xiphias gladius), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5     030249    Fish; fresh or chilled, n.e.c. in item no. 0302.4, excluding fillets, fish meat of 0304, and edible fish offal of subheadings 0302.91 to 0302.99     5   030251  Fish; fresh or chilled, cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030252  Fish; fresh or chilled, haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030253  Fish; fresh or chilled, coalfish (Pollachius virens), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030254  Fish; fresh or chilled, hake (Merluccius spp., Urophycis spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030255  Fish; fresh or chilled, Alaska pollack (Theragra chalcogramma), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030256  Fish; fresh or chilled, blue whitings (Micromesistius poutassou, Micromesistius australis), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5    030259   Fish; fresh or chilled, n.e.c. in item no. 0302.5, excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304    5   030271  Fish; fresh or chilled, tilapias (Oreochromis spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030272  Fish; fresh or chilled, catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading   5    030273  Fish; fresh or chilled, carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304    5   030274  Fish; fresh or chilled, eels (Anguilla spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030279  Fish; fresh or chilled, Nile perch (Lates niloticus) and snakeheads (Channa spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5  Code    Dismantlemen  030281  Fish; fresh or chilled, dogfish and other sharks, excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030282  Fish; fresh or chilled, rays and skates (Rajidae), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030283  Fish; fresh or chilled, toothfish (Dissostichus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030284  Fish; fresh or chilled, seabass (Dicentrarchus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030285  Fish; fresh or chilled, seabream (Sparidae), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030289  Fish; fresh or chilled, n.e.c. in heading 0302, excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5  030291  Fish; fresh or chilled, livers, roes and milt  3  030292  Fish; fresh or chilled, shark fins  5   030299   Fish; fresh or chilled, fish fins (other than shark fins), heads, tails, maws and other edible fish offal   5   030311  Fish; Pacific salmon, sockeye salmon, (red salmon), (Oncorhynchus nerka,) frozen, (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5    030312  Fish; frozen, Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha/keta/tschawytscha/ kisutch/masou/rhodurus) other than sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304    5   030313  Fish; frozen, Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and Danube salmon (Hucho hucho), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5     030314  Fish; frozen, trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304     5    030319  Fish; Pacific salmon, other than sockeye salmon, (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha/keta/tschawytscha/kisutch/masou/rho durus), frozen, (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)    5   030323  Fish; frozen, tilapias (Oreochromis spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030324  Fish; frozen, catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5    030325  Fish; frozen, carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304    5  030326  Fish; frozen, eels (Anguilla spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304  5   030329  Fish; salmonidae, frozen, n.e.s. in item no. 0302.1 and 0302.2 (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030331  Fish; halibut (reinhardtius hippoglossoides, hippoglossus hippoglossus, hippoglossus stenolepis), frozen (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5  Code    Dismantlemen  030332  Fish; plaice (pleuronectes platessa), frozen (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030333  Fish; sole (solea spp.), frozen (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030334  Fish; frozen, turbots (Psetta maxima, Scophthalmidae), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030339  Fish; flat fish, frozen, n.e.s. in item no. 0303.3 (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030341  Fish; albacore or longfinned tunas (thunnus alalunga), frozen (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030342  Fish; yellowfin tunas (thunnus albacares), frozen (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030343  Fish; skipjack or stripe-bellied bonito, frozen (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030344  Fish; bigeye tunas (Thunnus obesus), frozen, (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030345  Fish; bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus), frozen, (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030346  Fish; southern bluefin tunas (Thunnus maccoyii), frozen, n.e.c. in item no. 0303.4 (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030349  Fish; tuna, frozen, n.e.s. in item no. 0303.4 (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030351  Fish; herrings (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii), frozen (excluding fillets, livers, roes and other fish meat of heading no. 0304)   5   030353  Fish; frozen, sardines (Sardina pilchardus, Sardinops spp.), sardinella (Sardinella spp.), brisling or sprats (Sprattus sprattus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading   3   030354  Fish; frozen, mackerel (Scomber scombrus, Scomber australasicus, Scomber japonicus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of   3   030355  Fish; frozen, jack and horse mackerel (Trachurus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030356  Fish; frozen, cobia (Rachycentron canadum), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030357  Fish; frozen, swordfish (Xiphias gladius), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5     030359    Fish; frozen, n.e.c. in item no. 0303.5, excluding fillets, fish meat of 0304, and edible fish offal of subheadings 0303.91 to 0303.99     5   030363  Fish; frozen, cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5  Code    Dismantlement   030364  Fish; frozen, haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030365  Fish; frozen, coalfish (Pollachius virens), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030366  Fish; frozen, hake (Merluccius spp., Urophycis spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   3   030367  Fish; frozen, Alaska pollack (Theraga chalcogramma), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030368  Fish; frozen, blue whitings (Micromesistius poutassou, Micromesistius australis), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5    030369  Fish; frozen, of Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae, Muraenolepididae, other than cod, haddock, coalfish, hake, Alaska pollack, blue whitings, excluding fillets, livers, roes, other fish meat of 0304    5   030381  Fish; frozen, dogfish and other sharks, excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030382  Fish; frozen, rays and skates (Rajidae), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030383  Fish; frozen, toothfish (Dissostichus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030384  Fish; frozen, seabass (Dicentrarchus spp.), excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5   030389  Fish; frozen, n.e.c. in heading 0303, excluding fillets, livers, roes, and other fish meat of heading 0304   5  030391  Fish; frozen, livers, roes and milt  3  030392  Fish; frozen, shark fins  5   030399  Fish; frozen, fish fins (other than shark fins), heads, tails, maws and other edible fish offal   5  030431  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, tilapias (Oreochromis spp.)  5  030432  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.)  5  030433  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, Nile perch (Lates niloticus)  5     030439  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), eels (Anguilla spp.), and snakeheads (Channa spp.)     5     030441  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, salmon, Pacific (Oncorhynchus nerka, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou and Oncorhynchus rhodurus), Atlantic (Salmo salar), Danube (Hucho hucho)     5    030442  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)    5  Code    Dismantlement   030443  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, flat fish (Pleuronectidae, Bothidae, Cynoglossidae, Soleidae, Scophthalmidae and Citharidae)   5   030444  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae, and Muraenolepididae   5  030445  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  5  030446  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  5  030447  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, dogfish and other sharks  5  030448  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, rays and skates (Rajidae)  5  030449  Fish fillets; fresh or chilled, other than fish of heading 0304.4  5       030451      Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads       5  030452  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, salmonidae  5    030453  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae, and Muraenolepididae    5  030454  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, swordfish (Xiphias  5  030455  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, toothfish (Dissostichus  5  030456  Fish meat; excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, dogfish and other sharks  5  030457  Fish meat; excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, rays and skates (Rajidae)  5     030459    Fish meat; excluding fillets, whether or not minced; fresh or chilled, of fish n.e.c. in item no. 0304.5     5  030461  Fish fillets; frozen, tilapias (Oreochromis spp.)  5  030462  Fish fillets; frozen, catfish (Pangasius spp., Silurus spp., Clarias spp., Ictalurus spp.)  5  030463  Fish fillets; frozen, Nile Perch (Lates niloticus)  5     030469  Fish fillets; frozen, carp (Cyprinus carpio, Carassius carassius, Ctenopharyngodon idellus, Hypophthalmichthys spp., Cirrhinus spp., Mylopharyngodon piceus), eels (Anguilla spp.), and snakeheads (Channa spp.)     5  030471  Fish fillets; frozen, cod (Gadus morhua, Gadus ogac, Gadus macrocephalus)  5  030472  Fish fillets; frozen, haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus)  5  030473  Fish fillets; frozen, coalfish (Pollachius virens)  5  030474  Fish fillets; frozen, hake (Merluccius spp., Urophycis spp.)  5  Code    Dismantlement  030475  Fish fillets; frozen, Alaska pollack (Theraga chalcogramma)  5    030479  Fish fillets; frozen, of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae and Muraenolepididae other than cod, haddock, coalfish, hake, and Alaska pollack    5    030481  Fish fillets; frozen, salmon, Pacific (Oncorhynchus nerka, Oncorhynchus gorbuscha, Oncorhynchus keta, Oncorhynchus tschawytscha, Oncorhynchus kisutch, Oncorhynchus masou, Oncorhynchus rhodurus), Atlantic (Salmo salar), and Danube (Hucho hucho)    5    030482  Fish fillets; frozen, trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss, Oncorhynchus clarki, Oncorhynchus aguabonita, Oncorhynchus gilae, Oncorhynchus apache and Oncorhynchus chrysogaster)    5   030483  Fish fillets; frozen, flat fish (Pleuronectidae, Bothidae, Cynoglossidae, Soleidae, Scophthalmidae and Citharidae)   5  030484  Fish fillets; frozen, swordfish (Xiphias gladius)  5  030485  Fish fillets; frozen, toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)  5  030486  Fish fillets; frozen, herrings (Clupea harengus, Clupea pallasii)  5   030487  Fish fillets; frozen, tunas (of the genus Thunnus), skipjack or stripe-bellied bonito (Euthynnus (Katsuwonus) pelamis)   5  030488  Fish fillets; frozen, dogfish, other sharks, rays and skates (Rajidae)  5  030489  Fish fillets; frozen, of fish n.e.c. in heading 0304.8  5  030491  Fish; swordfish (Xiphias gladius), frozen, other than fillets  5  030492  Fish; toothfish (Dissostichus spp.), frozen, other than fillets  5       030493      Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; frozen, tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads       5  030494  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; frozen, Alaska Pollack (Theraga  5     030495  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; frozen, of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae and Muraenolepididae, other than Alaska Pollack (Theraga chalcogramma)     5  030496  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; frozen, dogfish and other sharks  5  030497  Fish meat, excluding fillets, whether or not minced; frozen, rays and skates (Rajidae)  5   030499  Fish; fish meat (whether or not minced) other than fillets, frozen, excluding swordfish (Xiphias gladius) and toothfish (Dissostichus spp.)   5  030510  Fish meal; fit for human consumption  5   030520  Fish; livers and roes, dried, smoked (whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process), salted or in brine   5  Code    Dismantlemen     030531     Fish fillets; dried, salted or in brine, but not smoked, tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads      5    030532  Fish fillets; dried, salted or in brine, but not smoked, of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae and Muraenolepididae    5    030539    Fish fillets; dried, salted or in brine, but not smoked, n.e.c. in item no. 0305.3    5     030541   Fish; Pacific salmon (oncorhynchus spp.), Atlantic salmon (salmo salar) and Danube salmon (hucho hucho), including fillets, smoked (whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process)     3   030542  Fish; herrings (clupea harengus, clupea pallasii), including fillets; smoked (whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process)   5   030543  Fish; smoked, whether or not cooked before or during smoking, trout (Salmo trutta, Oncorhynchus mykiss/clarki/aguabonita/gilae/apache/chrysogast er), includes fillets, but excludes edible fish offal   5      030544    Fish; smoked, whether or not cooked before or during smoking, tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads, includes fillets, but excludes edible fish offal      5   030549  Fish; smoked (whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process), n.e.s. in item no. 0305.4 (including fillets)   5   030551  Fish; cod (gadus morhua, gadus ogac, gadus macrocephalus), dried (whether or not salted but not smoked)   3       030552      Fish; dried, whether or not salted but not smoked, tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads       3    030553  Fish; dried, whether or not salted but not smoked, fish of the families Bregmacerotidae, Euclichthyidae, Gadidae, Macrouridae, Melanonidae, Merlucciidae, Moridae and Muraenolepididae, other than cod    3  Code    Dismantlemen         030554        Dried herrings, anchovies, sardines, sardinella, brisling or sprats, mackerel (incl Indian, jack, or horse), seerfishes, jacks, crevalles, cobia, silver pomfrets, Pacific saury, scads, capelin, swordfish, Kawakawa, bonitos, marlins, sailfishes, spearfish          3  030559  Fish; dried (whether or not salted but not smoked), n.e.s. in item no. 0305.51  3  030561  Fish; herrings (clupea harengas, clupea pallasii), salted or in brine but not dried or smoked  5   030562  Fish; cod (gadus morhua, gadus ogac, gadus macrocephalus), salted or in brine but not dried or smoked   5  030563  Fish; anchovies (engraulis spp.), salted or in brine but not dried or smoked  5       030564      Fish; salted or in brine, not dried or smoked, other than edible fish offal, tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads       5   030569   Fish; salted or in brine, but not dried or smoked, n.e.s. in item no. 0305.6   5  030571  Fish; edible offal, shark fins  5  030572  Fish; edible offal, fish heads, tails and maws  5   030579   Fish; edible offal, other than shark fins, fish heads, tails and maws   5   030611  Crustaceans; rock lobsters and other sea crawfish (palinurus spp., panulirus spp., jasus spp.), frozen (whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked by steaming or by boiling in water)   5   030612  Crustaceans; lobsters (homarus spp.), frozen (whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked by steaming or by boiling in water)   5   030614  Crustaceans; crabs, frozen (whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked by steaming or by boiling in water)   5   030615  Crustaceans; frozen, Norway lobsters (Nephrops norvegicus), in shell or not, smoked, cooked or not before or during smoking; in shell, cooked by steaming or by boiling in water   5    030616  Crustaceans; frozen, cold-water shrimps and prawns (Pandalus spp., Crangon crangon), in shell or not, smoked, cooked or not before or during smoking; in shell, cooked by steaming or by boiling in water    5  Code    Dismantlement   030617  Crustaceans; frozen, shrimps and prawns, excluding cold-water varieties, in shell or not, smoked, cooked or not before or during smoking; in shell, cooked by steaming or by boiling in water   5      030619    Crustaceans; frozen, n.e.s. in item no. 0306.1 (whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked by steaming or by boiling in water)      5   030631  Crustaceans; live, fresh or chilled, rock lobsters and other sea crawfish (Palinurus spp., Panulirus spp., Jasus spp.), in shell or not   3  030632  Crustaceans; live, fresh or chilled, lobsters (Homarus spp.), whether in shell or not  3  030633  Crustaceans; live, fresh or chilled, crabs, whether in shell or not  3  030634  Crustaceans; live, fresh or chilled, Norway lobsters (Nephrops norvegicus), in shell or not  3   030635  Crustaceans; live, fresh or chilled, cold-water shrimps and prawns (Pandalus spp., Crangon crangon), in shell or not   5   030636  Crustaceans; live, fresh or chilled, shrimps and prawns excluding cold-water varieties, in shell or not   5    030639   Crustaceans; live, fresh or chilled, n.e.c. in item no. 0306.3, in shell or not, including edible flours, meals, and pellets of crustaceans    5   030691  Crustaceans; rock lobsters and other sea crawfish (Palinurus spp., Panulirus spp., Jasus spp.), smoked, cooked or not, whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked before or during smoking   3   030692  Crustaceans; lobsters (Homarus spp.), smoked, cooked or not, whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked before or during smoking   3   030693  Crustaceans; crabs, smoked, cooked or not, whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked before or during smoking   3   030694  Crustaceans; Norway lobsters (Nephrops norvegicus), smoked, cooked or not, whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked before or during smoking   3   030695  Crustaceans; shrimps and prawns, smoked, cooked or not, whether in shell or not, whether or not cooked before or during smoking   5     030699    Crustaceans; smoked, whole, cooked or not, n.e.c. in item no. 0306.9, in shell or not, including edible flours, meals, and pellets of crustaceans     5  030711  Molluscs; oysters, whether in shell or not, live, fresh or chilled  3  030712  Molluscs; oysters, whether in shell or not, frozen  3   030719  Molluscs; oysters, whether in shell or not, frozen, dried, salted or in brine, smoked, cooked or not before or during the smoking process   3   030721  Molluscs; scallops (including queen scallops of the genera pecten, chlamys or placopecten), live, fresh or chilled (whether in shell or not)   3  Code    Dismantlement   030722  Molluscs; scallops, whether in shell or not, including queen scallops of the genera Pecten, Chlamys or Placopecten, frozen   3   030729  Molluscs; scallops (including queen scallops of the genera pecten, chlamys or placopecten), frozen, dried, salted or in brine (whether in shell or not)   3  030731  Molluscs; mussels (mytilus spp., perna spp.), live, fresh or chilled (whether in shell or not)  3  030732  Molluscs; mussels (Mytilus spp., Perna spp.), whether in shell or not, frozen  3   030739  Molluscs; mussels (mytilus spp., perna spp.), frozen, dried, salted or in brine (whether in shell or not)   3  030742  Molluscs; cuttle fish and squid, whether in shell or not, live, fresh or chilled  3   030743  Molluscs; cuttle fish and squid, whether in shell or not, includes flours, meals, and pellets of molluscs, fit for human consumption, frozen   3  030749  Molluscs; cuttle fish and squid, frozen, dried, salted or in brine (whether in shell or not)  3  030751  Molluscs; octopus (octopus spp.), live, fresh or chilled  3  030752  Molluscs; octopus (Octopus spp.), frozen  3  030759  Molluscs; octopus (octopus spp.), frozen, dried, salted or in brine  3   030760  Molluscs; snails (other than sea snails), live, fresh, chilled, frozen, dried, salted or in brine (whether in shell or not)   3     030771  Molluscs; clams, cockles and ark shells (families Arcidae, Arcticidae, Cardiidae, Donacidae, Hiatellidae, Mactridae, Mesodesmatidae, Myidae, Semelidae, Solecurtidae, Solenidae, Tridacnidae and Veneridae), whether in shell or not, live, fresh or chilled     3    030772  Molluscs; clams, cockles, ark shells (Arcidae, Arcticidae, Cardiidae, Donacidae, Hiatellidae, Mactridae, Mesodesmatidae, Myidae, Semelidae, Solecurtidae, Solenidae, Tridacnidae and Veneridae), whether in shell or not, frozen    3    030779  Molluscs; clams, cockles, ark shells (Arcidae, Arcticidae, Cardiidae, Donacidae, Hiatellidae, Mactridae, Mesodesmatidae, Myidae, Semelidae, Solecurtidae, Solenidae, Tridacnidae and Veneridae), whether in shell or not, other than live, fresh or chilled    3  030781  Molluscs; abalone (Haliotis spp.), whether in shell or not, live, fresh or chilled  3  030782  Molluscs; stromboid conchs (Strombus spp.), whether in shell or not, live, fresh or chilled  3  030783  Molluscs; abalone (Haliotis spp.), whether in shell or not, frozen  3  030784  Molluscs; stromboid conchs (Strombus spp.), whether in shell or not, frozen  3   030787  Molluscs; abalone (Haliotis spp.), whether in shell or not, dried, salted, in brine, or smoked, cooked or not before or during the smoking process   3    030788  Molluscs; stromboid conchs (Strombus spp.), whether in shell or not, includes flours, meals, and pellets of molluscs, fit for human consumption, dried, salted, in brine, or smoked, cooked or not before or during the smoking process    3  Code    Dismantlemen      030791      Molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates; live, fresh or chilled (whether in shell or not), n.e.s. in heading no. 0307       3       030792      Molluscs; n.e.c. in heading 0307, whether in shell or not, includes flours, meals, and pellets of molluscs, fit for human consumption, frozen       3       030799      Molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates; frozen, dried, salted or in brine (whether in shell or not), n.e.s. in heading no. 0307       3  030811  Aquatic invertebrates; sea cucumbers (Stichopus japonicus, Holothurioidea), live, fresh or chilled  3  030812  Aquatic invertebrates; sea cucumbers (Stichopus japonicus, Holothuroidea), frozen  3   030819  Aquatic invertebrates; sea cucumbers (Stichopus japonicus, Holothurioidea), frozen, dried, salted or in brine, smoked, whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process   3   030821  Aquatic invertebrates; sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp., Paracentrotus lividus, Loxechinus albus, Echichinus esculentus), live, fresh or chilled   3   030822  Aquatic invertebrates; sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp., Paracentrotus lividus, Loxechinus albus, Echinus esculentus), frozen   5    030829  Aquatic invertebrates; sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp., Paracentrotus lividus, Loxechinus albus, Echichinus esculentus), frozen, dried, salted or in brine, smoked, whether or not cooked before or during smoking process    5   030830  Aquatic invertebrates; jellyfish (Rhopilema spp.), live, fresh, chilled, frozen, dried, salted or in brine, smoked, whether or not cooked before or during smoking   5     030890   Aquatic invertebrates; other than crustaceans, molluscs, sea urchins, sea cucumbers and jellyfish, live, fresh, chilled, frozen, dried, salted or in brine, smoked, cooked or not before or during smoking, includes edible flours, meals, and pellets     5   040110  Dairy produce; milk and cream, not concentrated, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, of a fat content not exceeding 1% (by weight)   5  Code    Dismantlemen  040120  Dairy produce; milk and cream, not concentrated, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, of a fat content exceeding 1% but not exceeding 6% (by weight)   5   040140  Dairy produce; milk and cream, not concentrated, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, of a fat content, by weight, exceeding 6% but not exceeding 10%   5   040150  Dairy produce; milk and cream, not concentrated, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, of a fat content, by weight, exceeding 10%   5   040210  Dairy produce; milk and cream, concentrated or containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, in powder, granules or other solid forms, of a fat content not exceeding 1.5% (by weight)   5   040221  Dairy produce; milk and cream, concentrated, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, in powder, granules or other solid forms, of a fat content exceeding 1.5% (by weight)   5   040229  Dairy produce; milk and cream, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, in powder, granules or other solid forms, of a fat content exceeding 1.5% (by weight)   5   040291  Dairy produce; milk and cream, concentrated, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, other than in powder, granules or other solid forms   5   040299  Dairy produce; milk and cream, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, other than in powder, granules or other solid forms   5   040310  Dairy produce; yoghurt, whether or not concentrated or containing added sugar or other sweetening matter or flavoured or containing added fruit or cocoa   5    040390  Dairy produce; buttermilk, curdled milk or cream, kephir, fermented or acidified milk or cream, whether or not concentrated or containing added sweetening, flavouring, fruit or cocoa (excluding yoghurt)    5   040410  Dairy produce; whey, whether or not concentrated or containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   040490  Dairy produce; natural milk constituents (excluding whey), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter, n.e.s. in chapter 04   5  040510  Dairy produce; derived from milk, butter  5  040520  Dairy produce; dairy spreads  5   040590  Dairy produce; fats and oils derived from milk (other than butter or dairy spreads)   5  04061 0  Dairy produce; fresh cheese (including whey cheese), not fermented, and curd               5  040620   Dairy produce; cheese of all kinds, grated or powdered   5  040630  Dairy produce; cheese, processed (not grated or powdered)  5  040640  Dairy produce; cheese, blue-veined (not grated, powdered or processed)  5   040690  Dairy produce; cheese (not grated, powdered or processed), n.e.s. in heading no. 0406  5  Code    Dismantlemen  040711  Birds' eggs, in shell; fresh, fertilised eggs for incubation, of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (domestic hens)   3   040719  Birds' eggs, in shell; fresh, fertilised eggs for incubation, other than fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (domestic hens)   3   040721  Birds' eggs, in shell; fresh, not for incubation, of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (domestic hens)   3   040729  Birds' eggs, in shell; fresh, not for incubation, other than fowls of the species Gallus domesticus (domestic hens)   3  040790  Birds' eggs, in shell; preserved or cooked  3  040811  Eggs; birds' eggs, yolks, dried, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening  3   040819  Eggs; birds' eggs, yolks, fresh, cooked by steaming or by boiling in water, moulded, frozen or otherwise preserved, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   3   040891  Eggs; birds' eggs (not in shell, excluding yolks only), dried, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   3    040899  Eggs; birds' eggs (not in shell, excluding yolks only), fresh, cooked by steaming or boiling in water, moulded, frozen, otherwise preserved, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter    3  040900  Honey; natural  5  041000  Animal products; edible, n.e.s. in this or other chapters  3   050100  Animal products; hair, human, unworked, whether or not washed or scoured, and waste of human hair   1  050210  Animal products; hair and bristles, of pigs, hogs or boars, and waste thereof  1   050290  Animal products; badger hair and other brush making hair and waste of such bristles or hair, n.e.s. in heading no. 0502 (excluding horsehair)   1   050400   Animal products; guts, bladders and stomachs of animals (other than fish), whole and pieces thereof   3   050510  Animal products; feathers and down used for stuffing, not further worked than cleaned, disinfected or treated for preservation   1     050590   Animal products; skins and other parts of birds, feathers and down (not for stuffing), powder and waste of such, not further worked than cleaned, disinfected or treated for preservation     3  050610  Animal products; ossein and bones treated with acid  3   050690  Animal products; bones and horn-cores and powder or waste of such, unworked, defatted, simply prepared (not cut to shape), or treated with acid or degelatinised, n.e.s. in heading no. 0506   3   050710  Animal products; ivory, unworked or simply prepared but not cut to shape, ivory powder and waste   3    050790  Animal products; tortoise-shell, whalebone and whalebone hair, horns, antlers, hooves, nails, claws and beaks, unworked or simply prepared but not cut to shape, waste and powder of these products    3  Code    Dismantlemen   050800  Animal products; coral and similar materials, shells of molluscs, crustaceans, echinoderms, cuttle-bone etc., unworked or simply prepared (but not cut to shape), and powder and waste thereof    3    051000  Animal products; ambergris, castoreum, civet, musk, cantharides, bile (dried or not) glands and other animal products, for pharmaceutical purposes, fresh, chilled, frozen or otherwise provisionally preserved    3  051110  Animal products; bovine semen  1   051191  Animal products; of fish or crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates and dead animals of chapter 3, unfit for human consumption   5   051199   Animal products; n.e.s. in chapter 5   1   060110   Plants, live; bulbs, tubers, tuberous roots, corms, crowns and rhizomes, dormant   1    060120  Plants, live; bulbs, tubers, tuberous roots, corms, crowns and rhizomes, in growth or in flower, chicory plants and roots other than of heading no. 1212    1  060210  Plants, live; unrooted cuttings and slips  1  060220  Plants, live; edible fruit or nut trees, shrubs and bushes, grafted or not  1  060230  Plants, live; rhododendrons and azaleas, grafted or not  1  060240  Plants, live; roses, grafted or not  1     060290     Plants, live; n.e.s. in heading no. 0602     1   060311  Flowers, cut; roses, flowers and buds of a kind suitable for bouquets or ornamental purposes, fresh   5   060312  Flowers, cut; carnations, flowers and buds of a kind suitable for bouquets or ornamental purposes, fresh   5   060313  Flowers, cut; orchids, flowers and buds of a kind suitable for bouquets or ornamental purposes, fresh   5   060314  Flowers, cut; chrysanthemums, flowers and buds of a kind suitable for bouquets or ornamental purposes, fresh   5   060315  Flowers, cut; lilies (Lilium spp.), flowers and flower buds of a kind suitable for bouquets or ornamental purposes, fresh   5   060319  Flowers, cut; flowers and buds of a kind suitable for bouquets or ornamental purposes, fresh, other than roses, carnations, orchids, or chrysanthemums   5   060390   Flowers; n.e.s. in heading no. 0603   3   060420  Foliage, branches and other parts of plants, without flowers or flower buds, and grasses, mosses and lichens; suitable for bouquets or for ornamental purposes, fresh   2  Code    Dismantlement    060490  Foliage, branches and other parts of plants, without flowers or flower buds, and grasses, mosses and lichens; suitable for bouquets or for ornamental purposes, dried, dyed, bleached, impregnated or otherwise prepared    2  070110  Vegetables; seed potatoes, fresh or chilled  1  070190  Vegetables; potatoes (other than seed), fresh or chilled  5  070200  Vegetables; tomatoes, fresh or chilled  5  070310  Vegetables, alliaceous; onions and shallots, fresh or chilled  5  070320  Vegetables, alliaceous; garlic, fresh or chilled  5  070390  Vegetables, alliaceous; leeks and other kinds n.e.s. in heading no. 0703, fresh or chilled  5  070410  Vegetables, brassica; cauliflowers and headed broccoli, fresh or chilled  5  070420  Vegetables, brassica; brussel sprouts, fresh or chilled  5   070490   Vegetables, brassica; edible, n.e.s. in heading no. 0704, fresh or chilled   5  070511  Vegetables; cabbage (head) lettuce (lactuca sativa), fresh or chilled  5  070519  Vegetables; lettuce (lactuca sativa), (other than cabbage lettuce), fresh or chilled  5  070521  Vegetables; witloff chicory (cichorium intybus var. foliosum), fresh or chilled  5  070529  Vegetables; chicory (cichorium spp.), (other than witloof chicory), fresh or chilled  5  070610  Vegetables, root; carrots and turnips, fresh or chilled  5   070690  Vegetables, root; salad beetroot, salsify, celeric, radishes and similar edible roots, fresh or chilled   5  070700  Vegetables; cucumbers and gherkins, fresh or chilled  5  070810  Vegetables, leguminous; peas (pisum sativum), shelled or unshelled, fresh or chilled  5   070820  Vegetables, leguminous; beans (vigna spp., phaseolus spp.), shelled or unshelled, fresh or chilled   5   070890  Vegetables, leguminous; (other than peas and beans), shelled or unshelled, fresh or chilled   5  070920  Vegetables; asparagus, fresh or chilled  5  070930  Vegetables; aubergines, (egg plants), fresh or chilled  5  070940  Vegetables; celery (other than celeriac), fresh or chilled  5  070951  Vegetables; mushrooms, fresh or chilled  5  070959  Vegetables; mushrooms other than of the genus Agaricus, fresh or chilled  5  070960  Vegetables; fruits of the genus capsicum or of the genus pimenta  5  070970  Vegetables; spinach, New Zealand spinach and orache spinach (garden spinach), fresh or chilled  5  070991  Vegetables; globe artichokes, fresh or chilled  5  070992  Vegetables; olives, fresh or chilled  5  070993  Vegetables; pumpkins, squash and gourds (Cucurbita spp.), fresh or chilled  5  070999  Vegetables; edible, n.e.c. in chapter 07, fresh or chilled  5  071010  Vegetables; potatoes, uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen  5  Code    Dismantlemen  071021  Vegetables, leguminous; peas (pisum sativum), shelled or unshelled, uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen   5   071022  Vegetables, leguminous; beans (vigna spp., phaseolus spp.), shelled or unshelled, uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen   5   071029  Vegetables, leguminous; (other than peas or beans), shelled or unshelled, uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen   5   071030  Vegetables; spinach, New Zealand spinach and orache spinach (garden spinach), uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen   5  071040  Vegetables; sweetcorn, uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen  5   071080   Vegetables; uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen, n.e.s. in chapter 7   5  071090  Vegetable mixtures; uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen  5    071120   Vegetables; olives, provisionally preserved but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption    3    071140   Vegetables; cucumbers and gherkins, provisionally preserved but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption    5    071151   Vegetables; mushrooms of the genus Agaricus, provisionally preserved but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption    3     071159   Vegetables; mushrooms other than of the genus Agaricus, provisionally preserved but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption     3     071190    Vegetables and mixed vegetables; n.e.s. in heading no. 0711, provisionally preserved but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption     3  071220  Vegetables; onions, whole, cut, sliced, broken or in powder but not further prepared, dried  5   071231  Vegetables; mushrooms of the genus Agaricus, whole, cut, sliced, broken or in powder but not further prepared, dried   3   071232  Vegetables; wood ears (Auricularia spp), whole, cut, sliced, broken or in powder but not further prepared, dried   3   071233  Vegetables; jelly fungi (Tremella spp)), whole, cut, sliced, broken or in powder but not further prepared, dried   3    071239   Vegetables; mushrooms, other than the genus Agaricus and truffles, whole, cut, sliced, broken or in powder but not further prepared, dried    3  Code    Dismantlemen  071290  Vegetables; mixtures of vegetables n.e.s. in heading no. 0712, whole, cut, sliced, broken or in powder but not further prepared, dried   5  071310  Vegetables, leguminous; peas (pisum sativum), shelled, whether or not skinned or split, dried  5  071320  Vegetables, leguminous; chickpeas (garbanzos), shelled, whether or not skinned or split, dried  5   071331  Vegetables, leguminous; beans of the species vigna mungo (l.) hepper or vigna radiata (l.) wilczek, dried, shelled, whether or not skinned or   5   071332  Vegetables, leguminous; small red (adzuki) beans (phaseolus or vigna angularis), shelled, dried, whether or not skinned or split   5   071333  Vegetables, leguminous; kidney beans, including white pea beans (phaseolus vulgaris), dried, shelled, whether or not skinned or split   5   071334  Vegetables, leguminous; bambara beans (Vigna subterranea or Voandzeia subterranea), shelled, whether or not skinned or split, dried   5   071335  Vegetables, leguminous; cow peas (Vigna unguiculata), shelled, whether or not skinned or split, dried   5     071339    Vegetables, leguminous; n.e.s. in item no. 0713.30, dried, shelled, whether or not skinned or split     5  071340  Vegetables, leguminous; lentils, shelled, whether or not skinned or split, dried  3   071350  Vegetables, leguminous; broad beans (vicia faba var. major) and horse beans (vicia faba var. equina and vicia faba var. minor), dried, shelled, whether or not skinned or split   3   071360  Vegetables, leguminous; pigeon peas (Cajanus cajan), shelled, whether or not skinned or split, dried   3   071390  Vegetables, leguminous; n.e.s. in heading no. 0713, shelled, whether or not skinned or split, dried   3   071410  Vegetable roots and tubers; manioc (cassava), with high starch or inulin content, whether or not sliced or in the form of pellets, fresh or dried   1   071420  Vegetable roots and tubers; sweet potatoes, with high starch or inulin content, whether or not sliced or in the form of pellets, fresh or dried   1   071430  Vegetable roots and tubers; yams (Dioscorea spp.) with high starch or inulin content, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not sliced or in the form of pellets   1   071440  Vegetable roots and tubers; taro (Colocasia spp.) with high starch or inulin content, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not sliced or in the form of pellets   1   071450  Vegetable roots and tubers; yautia (Xanthosoma spp.) with high starch or inulin content, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not sliced or in the form of pellets   1     071490   Vegetable roots and tubers; arrowroot, salep, Jerusalem artichokes and similar roots and tubers, high starch or inulin content, whether or not sliced or in the form of pellets, fresh or dried; sago pith     1   Code    Dismantlemen 080111  Nuts, edible; coconuts, fresh or dried, whether or not shelled or peeled, desiccated  3  080112  Nuts, edible; coconuts, in the inner shell (endocarp)  3  080119  Nuts, edible; coconuts, fresh or dried, whether or not shelled or peeled, other than desiccated  3  080121  Nuts, edible; brazil nuts, in shell, fresh or dried  3  080122  Nuts, edible; brazil nuts, shelled, fresh or dried  3  080131  Nuts, edible; cashew nuts, in shell, fresh or dried  3  080132  Nuts, edible; cashew nuts, shelled, fresh or dried  3  080211  Nuts, edible; almonds, fresh or dried, in shell  3  080212  Nuts, edible; almonds, fresh or dried, shelled  3  080221  Nuts, edible; hazelnuts or filberts (corylus spp.), fresh or dried, in shell  3  080222  Nuts, edible; hazelnuts or filberts (corylus spp.), fresh or dried, shelled  3  080231  Nuts, edible; walnuts, fresh or dried, in shell  3  080232  Nuts, edible; walnuts, fresh or dried, shelled  3  080241  Nuts, edible; chestnuts (Castanea spp.), fresh or dried, in shell  3  080242  Nuts, edible; chestnuts (Castanea spp.), fresh or dried, shelled  3  080251  Nuts, edible; pistachios, fresh or dried, in shell  5  080252  Nuts, edible; pistachios, fresh or dried, shelled  5  080261  Nuts, edible; macadamia, fresh or dried, in shell  3  080262  Nuts, edible; macadamia, fresh or dried, shelled  3  080270  Nuts, edible; kola nuts (Cola spp.), fresh or dried, whether or not shelled or peeled  3  080280  Nuts, edible; areca nuts, fresh or dried, whether or not shelled or peeled  3     080290    Nuts, edible; n.e.s. in heading no. 0801 and 0802, fresh or dried, whether or not shelled or peeled     3  080310  Fruit, edible; plantains, fresh or dried  2  080390  Fruit, edible; bananas, other than plantains, fresh or dried  2  080410  Fruit, edible; dates, fresh or dried  3  080420  Fruit, edible; figs, fresh or dried  3  080430  Fruit, edible; pineapples, fresh or dried  2  080440  Fruit, edible; avocados, fresh or dried  2  080450  Fruit, edible; guavas, mangoes and mangosteens, fresh or dried  2  080510  Fruit, edible; oranges, fresh or dried  5  080521  Fruit, edible; mandarins (including tangerines and satsumas), fresh or dried  5  080522  Fruit, edible; clementines, fresh or dried  5  080529  Fruit, edible; tangelos, wilkings and similar citrus hybrid, fresh or dried  5  080540  Fruit, edible; grapefruit, fresh or dried  5   080550  Fruit, edible; lemons (Citrus limon, Citrus limonum), limes (Citrus aurantifolia , Citrus latifolia), fresh or dried   5     080590    Fruit, edible; citrus fruit n.e.s. in heading no. 0805, fresh or dried     5  080610  Fruit, edible; grapes, fresh  3  080620  Fruit, edible; grapes, dried  3  080711  Fruit, edible; watermelons, fresh  3  080719  Fruit, edible; melons, (other than watermelons), fresh  3  080720  Fruit, edible; papaws (papayas), fresh  2  Code    Dismantlemen 080810  Fruit, edible; apples, fresh  5  080830  Fruit, edible; pears, fresh  3  080840  Fruit, edible; quinces, fresh  3  080910  Fruit, edible; apricots, fresh  3  080921  Fruit, edible; sour cherries (Prunus cerasus), fresh  3  080929  Fruit, edible; cherries, other than sour cherries (Prunus cerasus), fresh  3  080930  Fruit, edible; peaches including nectarines, fresh  3  080940  Fruit, edible; plums and sloes, fresh  3  081010  Fruit, edible; strawberries, fresh  3  081020  Fruit, edible; raspberries, blackberries, mulberries and loganberries, fresh  3  081030  Fruit, edible; black, white or red currants and gooseberries, fresh  3  081040  Fruit, edible; cranberries, bilberries and other fruits of the genus vaccinium, fresh  3  081050  Fruit, edible; kiwifruit, fresh  3  081060  Fruit, edible; durians, fresh  3  081070  Fruit, edible; persimmons, fresh  3        081090       Fruit, edible; fruits n.e.s. in heading no. 0801 to 0810, fresh        3   081110  Fruit, edible; strawberries, uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling in water, frozen, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   3   081120  Fruit, edible; raspberries, blackberries, mulberries, loganberries, black, white or red currants and gooseberries, uncooked or cooked, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening   3    081190  Fruit, edible; fruit and nuts n.e.s. in heading no. 0811, uncooked or cooked, frozen whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter    3    081210   Fruit, edible; cherries, provisionally preserved, but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption    3    081290   Fruit, edible; fruit and nuts n.e.s. in heading no. 0812, provisionally preserved, but unsuitable in that state for immediate consumption    3  081310  Fruit, edible; apricots, dried  3  081320  Fruit, edible; prunes, dried  3  081330  Fruit, edible; apples, dried  3    081340    Fruit, edible; fruit n.e.s. in heading no. 0812, dried    3  081350  Nuts, edible; mixtures of nuts or dried fruits of chapter 8  3  Code    Dismantlemen  081400  Peel; of citrus fruit or melons (including watermelons), fresh, frozen, dried or provisionally preserved in brine, in sulphur water and other preservative solutions   3  090111  Coffee; not roasted or decaffeinated  5  090112  Coffee; decaffeinated, not roasted  5  090121  Coffee; roasted, not decaffeinated  5  090122  Coffee; roasted, decaffeinated  5  090190  Coffee; husks and skins, coffee substitutes containing coffee in any proportion  5  090210  Tea, green; (not fermented), in immediate packings of a content not exceeding 3kg  5  090220  Tea, green; (not fermented), in immediate packings of a content exceeding 3kg  5   090230  Tea, black; (fermented) and partly fermented tea, in immediate packings of a content not exceeding 3kg   5   090240  Tea, black; (fermented) and partly fermented tea, in immediate packings of a content exceeding 3kg   5  090300  Mate  5  090411  Spices; pepper (of the genus piper), neither crushed nor ground  3  090412  Spices; pepper (of the genus piper), crushed or ground  3  090421  Spices; fruits of the genus Capsicum or Pimenta, dried, neither crushed nor ground  3  090422  Spices; fruits of the genus Capsicum or Pimenta, crushed or ground  3  090510  Spices; vanilla, neither crushed nor ground  5  090520  Spices; vanilla, crushed or ground  5  090611  Spices; cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum Blume), neither crushed nor ground  5   090619  Spices; cinnamon and cinnamon-tree flowers, other than cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum Blume), neither crushed nor ground   5  090620  Spices; cinnamon and cinnamon-tree flowers, crushed or ground  5  090710  Spices; cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems), neither crushed nor ground  5  090720  Spices; cloves (whole fruit, cloves and stems), crushed or ground  5  090811  Spices; nutmeg, neither crushed nor ground  3  090812  Spices; nutmeg, crushed or ground  3  090821  Spices; mace, neither crushed nor ground  3  090822  Spices; mace, crushed or ground  3  090831  Spices; cardamoms, neither crushed nor ground  3  090832  Spices; cardamoms, crushed or ground  3  090921  Spices; coriander seeds, neither crushed nor ground  3  090922  Spices; coriander seeds, crushed or ground  3  090931  Spices; cumin seeds, neither crushed nor ground  3  090932  Spices; cumin seeds, crushed or ground  3  090961  Spices; seeds of anise, badian, caraway or fennel; juniper berries, neither crushed nor ground  3  090962  Spices; seeds of anise, badian, caraway or fennel; juniper berries, crushed or ground  3  091011  Spices; ginger, neither crushed nor ground  5  091012  Spices; ginger, crushed or ground  5  091020  Spices; saffron  5  091030  Spices; turmeric (curcuma)  5  091091  Spices; mixtures  5  Code    Dismantlemen    091099    Spices; mixtures of 2 or more products of the same heading     5  100111  Cereals; wheat and meslin, durum wheat, seed  3  100119  Cereals; wheat and meslin, durum wheat, other than seed  3  100191  Cereals; wheat and meslin, other than durum wheat, seed  3  100199  Cereals; wheat and meslin, other than durum wheat, other than seed  3  100210  Cereals; rye, seed  3  100290  Cereals; rye, other than seed  3  100310  Cereals; barley, seed  3  100390  Cereals; barley, other than seed  3  100410  Cereals; oats, seeds  1  100490  Cereals; oats, other than seed  1  100510  Cereals; maize (corn), seed  1  100590  Cereals; maize (corn), other than seed  5  100610  Cereals; rice in the husk (paddy or rough)  5  100620  Cereals; husked (brown) rice  3  100630  Cereals; rice, semi-milled or wholly milled, whether or not polished or glazed  3  100640  Cereals; rice, broken  3  100710  Cereals; grain sorghum, seed  3  100790  Cereals; grain sorghum, other than seed  3  100810  Cereals; buckwheat  3  100821  Cereals; millet, seed  3  100829  Cereals; millet, other than seed  3  100830  Cereals; canary seed  3  100840  Cereals; fonio (Digitaria spp.)  5  100850  Cereals; quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa)  5  100860  Cereals; triticale  5   100890   Cereals; n.e.s. in chapter 10   5  110100  Wheat or meslin flour  5  110220  Cereal flour; of maize (corn)  5  110290  Cereal flours; n.e.s. in heading no. 1102  5  110311  Cereal groats and meal; of wheat  5  110313  Cereal groats and meal; of maize (corn)  5  110319  Cereal groats and meal; n.e.s. in heading no. 1103  5  110320  Cereal pellets  5  110412  Cereal grains; rolled or flaked, of oats  5  110419  Cereal grains; rolled or flaked, of cereals excluding barley and oats  5   110422   Cereal grains; worked (eg hulled, pearled, sliced or kibbled) of oats   5   110423  Cereal grains; worked (eg hulled, pearled, sliced or kibbled) of maize (corn)   5    110429   Cereal grains; worked (eg hulled, pearled, sliced or kibbled) of cereals n.e.s. in item no. 1104.2, except rice of heading no. 1006    5  110430  Cereal; germ of cereals, whole, rolled, flaked or ground  5  110510  Flour and meal; of potatoes  5  Code    Dismantlemen 110520  Flakes; of potatoes  5  110610  Flour and meal; of the dried leguminous vegetables of heading no. 0713  5  110620  Flour and meal; of sago, roots or tubers of heading no. 0714  5  110630  Flour, meal and powder; of the products of chapter 8  5  110710  Malt; not roasted  5  110720  Malt; roasted  5  110811  Starch; wheat  5  110812  Starch; maize (corn) starch  5  110813  Starch; potato  5  110814  Starch; manioc (cassava)  5  110819  Starch; n.e.s. in item no. 1108.11 to 1108.14  5  110820  Inulin  1  110900  Wheat gluten; whether or not dried  3  120110  Soya beans; seed, whether or not broken  3  120190  Soya beans; other than seed, whether or not broken  3  120230  Ground-nuts; seed, not roasted or otherwise cooked, whether or not shelled or broken  5  120241  Ground-nuts; other than seed, not roasted or otherwise cooked, in shell  5   120242  Ground-nuts; other than seed, not roasted or otherwise cooked, shelled, whether or not broken,   5  120300  Copra  3  120400  Oil seeds; linseed, whether or not broken  1   120510   Oil seeds; low erucic acid rape or colza seeds, whether or not broken   1    120590   Oil seeds; rape or colza seeds, other than low erucic, whether or not broken    1  120600  Oil seeds; sunflower seeds, whether or not broken  1  120710  Oleaginous fruits; palm nuts and kernels, whether or not broken  1  120721  Oil seeds; cotton seeds, seed, whether or not broken  1  120729  Oil seeds; cotton seeds, other than seed, whether or not broken  1  120730  Oil seeds; castor oil seeds, whether or not broken  1  120740  Oil seeds; sesamum seeds, whether or not broken  1  120750  Oil seeds; mustard seeds, whether or not broken  1  120760  Oil seeds; safflower seeds, whether or not broken  1  120770  Oil seeds; melon seeds, whether or not broken  1  120791  Oil seeds; poppy seeds, whether or not broken  1     120799     Oil seeds and oleaginous fruits; n.e.s. in heading no. 1207, whether or not broken     1  120810  Flours and meals; of soya beans  5  120890  Flours and meals of oil seeds or oleaginous fruits; excluding soya beans and mustard seeds  5  120910  Seed; sugar beet seed, of a kind used for sowing  1  120921  Seed; lucerne (alfalfa) seed, of a kind used for sowing  1  120922  Seed; clover (trifolium spp.) seed, of a kind used for sowing  1  Code    Dismantlemen 120923  Seed; fescue, of a kind used for sowing  1  120924  Seed; kentucky blue grass (poa pratensis l.) seed, of a kind used for sowing  1  120925  Seed; rye grass (lolium multiflorum lam., lolium perenne l.) seed, of a kind used for sowing  1    120929   Seed; of forage plants, other than beet seed, n.e.s. in item no. 1209.2    1  120930  Seed; of herbaceous plants cultivated principally for their flowers, of a kind used for sowing  1  120991  Seed; vegetable seed, of a kind used for sowing  1      120999     Seed; n.e.s. in heading no. 1209, of a kind used for sowing      1  121010  Hop cones; neither ground nor powdered nor in the form of pellets  3  121020  Hop cones; ground, powdered or in the form of pellets; lupulin  3   121120  Ginseng roots, used primarily in perfumery, in pharmacy or for insecticidal, fungicidal or similar purposes; fresh or dried, whether or not cut, crushed or powdered   1   121130  Coca leaf; used primarily in perfumery, in pharmacy or for insecticidal, fungicidal or similar purposes, fresh or dried, whether or not crushed or powdered   1   121140  Poppy straw; used primarily in perfumery, in pharmacy or for insecticidal, fungicidal or similar purposes, fresh or dried, whether or not crushed or powdered   1   121150  Ephedra, of a kind used primarily in perfumery, in pharmacy or for insecticidal, fungicidal or similar purposes, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not cut, crushed or powdered   1     121190   Plants and parts (including seeds and fruits) n.e.s. in heading no. 1211, used primarily in perfumery, pharmacy or for insecticidal, fungicidal purposes; fresh or dried, whether or not cut, crushed or powdered     1   121221  Seaweeds and other algae; fit for human consumption, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not ground   1   121229  Seaweeds and other algae; not fit for human consumption, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not ground   1   121291  Sugar beet; of a kind used primarily for human consumption, fresh or dried, whether or not ground   2   121292  Sugar cane; of a kind used primarily for human consumption, fresh or dried, whether or not ground   1  121293  Sugar cane; fit for human consumption, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not ground  1   121294  Chicory roots (Chicorium intybus sativum); fit for human consumption, fresh, chilled, frozen or dried, whether or not ground   1  Code    Dismantlemen  121299  Vegetable products (including unroasted chicory roots, chicorium intybus sativum variety); n.e.s. in chapter 12, fresh or dried, ground or unground, primarily for human consumption   1   121300  Cereal straw and husks; unprepared, whether or not chopped, ground, pressed or in the form of pellets   1  121410  Lucerne (alfalfa) meal and pellets  5    121490   Forage products including swedes, mangolds, fodder roots, hay, sainfoin, clover, forage kale, lupines, vetches etc., pelletised or otherwise    1  130120  Gum Arabic  5   130190  Natural gums, resins, gum-resins, balsams, n.e.s. in heading no. 1301   5  130211  Vegetable saps and extracts; opium  5  130212  Vegetable saps and extracts; of liquorice  5  130213  Vegetable saps and extracts; of hops  2  130214  Vegetable saps and extracts; of pyrethrum or of the roots of plants containing rotenone  1  130219  Vegetable saps and extracts; n.e.s. in item no. 1302.1  1  130220  Pectic substances; pectinates and pectates  1  130231  Mucilages and thickeners; agar-agar, whether or not modified, derived from vegetable products  1   130232  Mucilages and thickeners; whether or not modified, derived from locust beans, locust bean seeds or guar seeds   1   130239  Mucilages and thickeners; whether or not modified, derived from vegetable products, n.e.s. in item no. 1302.3   1  140110  Bamboo used primarily for plaiting  1  140120  Rattans used primarily for plaiting  1    140190   Vegetable materials of a kind used primarily for plaiting; n.e.s. in heading no. 1401    1  140420  Vegetable products; cotton linters  3  140490  Vegetable products; n.e.s. in chapter 14  1  150110  Pig fat; lard, other than that of heading 0209 and 1503  5  150120  Pig fat; not lard, other than that of heading 0209 or 1503  5  150190  Poultry fat; other than that of heading 0209 or 1503  5  150210  Tallow; other than those of heading 1503  5  150290  Fats of bovine animals, sheep or goats; excluding tallow, and other than those of heading 1503  5   150300  Lard stearin, lard oil, oleostearin, oleo-oil and tallow oil; not emulsified or mixed or otherwise prepared   1   150410  Oils of fish; fish-liver oils and their fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   3   150420  Fats and oils and their fractions; of fish, (excluding liver-oils)   1  150430  Fats and oils and their fractions; of marine mammals  3  150500  Wool grease and fatty substances derived therefrom (including lanolin)  3  Code    Dismantlement     150600    Animal fats and oils and their fractions; whether or not refined, but not chemically modified, n.e.s. in chapter 15     5   150710  Vegetable oils; soya-bean oil and its fractions, crude, whether or not degummed, not chemically modified   5   150790  Vegetable oils; soya-bean oil and its fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5  150810  Vegetable oils; ground-nut oil and its fractions, crude, not chemically modified  5   150890  Vegetable oils; ground-nut oil and its fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5   150910  Vegetable oils; olive oil and its fractions, virgin, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5   150990  Vegetable oils; olive oil and its fractions, other than virgin, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5    151000  Vegetable oils; oils and their fractions n.e.s. in chapter 15, obtained solely from olives, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified, including blends of these oils or fractions with oils or fractions of heading no. 1509    5  151110  Vegetable oils; palm oil and its fractions, crude, not chemically modified  5   151190  Vegetable oils; palm oil and its fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5  151211  Vegetable oils; sunflower seed or safflower oil and their fractions, crude, not chemically modified  5   151219  Vegetable oils; sunflower seed or safflower oil and their fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5   151221  Vegetable oils; cotton-seed oil and its fractions; crude, whether or not gossypol has been removed, not chemically modified   5   151229  Vegetable oils; cotton-seed oil and its fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5  151311  Vegetable oils; coconut (copra) oil and its fractions, crude, not chemically modified  5   151319  Vegetable oils; coconut (copra) oil and its fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5  151321  Vegetable oils; palm kernel or babassu oil and their fractions, crude, not chemically modified  5   151329  Vegetable oils; palm kernel or babassu oil and their fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5   151411  Vegetable oils; low erucic acid rape or colza oil and its fractions, crude   5   151419  Vegetable oils; low erucic acid rape or colza oil and its fractions, other than crude, but not chemically modified   5   151491  Vegetable oils; excluding low erucic acid rape or colza oil and its fractions, crude   5  Code    Dismantlement    151499   Vegetable oils; excluding low erucic acid rape or colza oil and its fractions, other than crude, but not chemically modified    5  151511  Vegetable oils; linseed oil and its fractions, crude, not chemically modified  1   151519  Vegetable oils; linseed oil and its fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5  151521  Vegetable oils; maize (corn) oil and its fractions, crude, not chemically modified  5   151529  Vegetable oils; maize (corn) oil and its fractions, other than crude, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5  151530  Vegetable oils; castor oil and its fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified  1   151550  Vegetable oils; sesame oil and its fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified   5     151590    Vegetable fats and oils and their fractions; fixed, n.e.s. in heading no. 1515, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified     5   151610  Animal fats and oils and their fractions; partly or wholly hydrogenated, inter-esterified, re-esterified or elaidinised, whether or not refined, but not further prepared   5   151620  Vegetable fats and oils and their fractions; partly or wholly hydrogenated, inter-esterified, re- esterified or elaidinised, whether or not refined, but not further prepared   5  151710  Margarine; excluding liquid margarine  5      151790    Edible mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats or oils or of fractions of different fats or oils of this chapter, other than edible fats or oils of heading no. 1516      5     151800   Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their fractions; oxidised, boiled or otherwise chemically modified, (excluding those of heading no. 1516), inedible mixtures or preparations of fats or oils     2  152000  Glycerol, crude; glycerol waters and glycerol lyes  3  152110  Vegetable waxes (other than triglycerides); whether or not refined or coloured  1  152190  Waxes, other than vegetable, n.e.s. in heading no. 1521; whether or not refined or coloured  1  152200  Degras; residues resulting from the treatment of fatty substances or animal or vegetable waxes  1   160100  Meat preparations; sausages and similar products, of meat, meat offal or blood, and food preparations based on these products   5   160210   Meat preparations; homogenised preparations of meat, meat offal or blood   5  Code    Dismantlement    160220   Meat preparations; of the prepared or preserved liver of any animal (excluding homogenised preparations)    5      160231    Meat preparations; of turkeys, prepared or preserved meat or meat offal (excluding livers and homogenised preparations)      5      160232     Meat preparations; of the poultry of heading no. 0105, (ie of fowls of the species gallus domesticus)      5      160239    Meat preparations; of poultry (excluding turkeys), prepared or preserved meat or meat offal (excluding livers and homogenised preparations)      5   160241  Meat preparations; of swine, hams and cuts thereof, prepared or preserved (excluding homogenised preparations)   5   160242  Meat preparations; of swine, shoulders and cuts thereof, prepared or preserved (excluding homogenised preparations)   5       160249      Meat preparations; of swine, meat or meat offal (including mixtures), prepared or preserved, n.e.s. in heading no. 1602       5      160250    Meat preparations; of bovine animals, meat or meat offal, prepared or preserved (excluding livers and homogenised preparations)      5      160290     Meat preparations; of meat, meat offal or the blood of any animal, n.e.s. in heading no. 1602      5  160300  Extracts and juices; of meat, fish or crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates  5   160411  Fish preparations; salmon, prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)   3  Code    Dismantlemen 160412  Fish preparations; herrings, prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)  3   160413  Fish preparations; sardines, sardinella and brisling or sprats, prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)   5   160414  Fish preparations; tunas, skipjack and Atlantic bonito (sarda spp.), prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)   5   160415  Fish preparations; mackerel, prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)   5  160416  Fish preparations; anchovies, prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)  3   160417  Fish preparations; eels, prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)   5  160418  Fish preparations; shark fins, prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced)  5     160419    Fish preparations; fish prepared or preserved, whole or in pieces (but not minced), n.e.s. in heading no. 1604     5   160420  Fish preparations; fish minced or in forms n.e.s. in heading no. 1604, prepared or preserved   5  160431  Fish preparations; caviar  5  160432  Fish preparations; caviar substitutes, prepared from fish eggs  5  160510  Crustacean preparations; crab, prepared or preserved  5  160521  Crustacean preparations; shrimps and prawns, prepared or preserved, not in airtight containers  5  160529  Crustacean preparations; shrimps and prawns, prepared or preserved, in airtight containers  5  160530  Crustacean preparations; lobster, prepared or preserved  5   160540  Crustacean preparations; prepared or preserved crustaceans (excluding crab, shrimps, prawns and lobster)   5  160551  Mollusc preparations; oysters, prepared or preserved  5  160552  Mollusc preparations; scallops, including queen scallops, prepared or preserved  5  160553  Mollusc preparations; mussels, prepared or preserved  5  160554  Mollusc preparations; cuttle fish and squid, prepared or preserved  5  160555  Mollusc preparations; octopus, prepared or preserved  5  160556  Mollusc preparations; clams, cockles and arkshells, prepared or preserved  5  160557  Mollusc preparations; abalone, prepared or preserved  5  160558  Mollusc preparations; snails, other than sea snails, prepared or preserved  5   160559   Mollusc preparations; n.e.c. in item no. 1605.5, prepared or preserved   5  160561  Aquatic invertebrates; sea cucumbers, prepared or preserved  5  160562  Aquatic invertebrates; sea urchins, prepared or preserved  5  Code    Dismantlemen 160563  Aquatic invertebrates; jellyfish, prepared or preserved  5   160569  Aquatic invertebrates; other than crustaceans, molluscs, sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and jellyfish, prepared or preserved   5  170112  Sugars; beet sugar, raw, in solid form, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter  5    170113   Sugars; cane sugar, raw, in solid form, as specified in Subheading Note 2 to this chapter, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter    5   170114  Sugars; cane sugar, raw, in solid form, other than as specified in Subheading Note 2 to this chapter, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter   5  170191  Sucrose; chemically pure, containing added flavouring or colouring matter, in solid form  5   170199   Sucrose; chemically pure, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter, in solid form   5   170211  Sugars; lactose and lactose syrup, containing by weight 99% or more lactose, expressed as anhydrous lactose, calculated on the dry matter   3   170219  Sugars; lactose and lactose syrup, containing by weight less than 99% lactose, expressed as anhydrous lactose, calculated on the dry matter   3   170220  Sugars; maple sugar chemically pure, in solid form; maple syrup, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter   5   170230  Sugars; glucose and glucose syrup, not containing fructose or containing in the dry state less than 20% by weight of fructose, the syrup not containing added flavouring or colouring matter   3   170240  Sugars; glucose and glucose syrup, containing in the dry state at least 20% but less than 50% by weight of fructose, the syrup not containing added flavouring or colouring matter   3  170250  Sugars; fructose, chemically pure, in solid form  3    170260  Sugars; fructose (excluding chemically pure fructose), in solid form, containing in the dry state more than 50% by weight of fructose; fructose syrup, not containing added flavouring or colouring matter    5      170290      Sugars; n.e.s. in heading no. 1702, including invert sugar      5  170310  Sugars; molasses, from sugar cane, resulting from the extraction or refining of sugar  3  170390  Sugars; molasses, from sugar beet, resulting from the extraction or refining of sugar  3  170410  Sugar confectionery; chewing gum, whether or not sugar-coated, not containing cocoa  5  170490  Sugar confectionery; (excluding chewing gum, including white chocolate), not containing cocoa  5  180100  Cocoa beans; whole or broken, raw or roasted  3  180200  Cocoa; shells, husks, skins and other cocoa waste  5  180310  Cocoa; paste, not defatted  5   Code    Dismantlemen 180320  Cocoa; paste, wholly or partly defatted  5  180400  Cocoa; butter, fat and oil  5  180500  Cocoa; powder, not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  5  180610  Cocoa; powder, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  5     180620  Chocolate & other food preparations containing cocoa; in blocks, slabs or bars weighing more than 2kg or in liquid, paste, powder, granular or other bulk form in containers or immediate packings, content exceeding 2kg     5   180631  Chocolate and other food preparations containing cocoa; in blocks, slabs or bars, filled, weighing 2kg or less   5   180632  Chocolate and other food preparations containing cocoa; in blocks, slabs or bars, (not filled), weighing 2kg or less   5    180690   Chocolate and other food preparations containing cocoa; n.e.s. in chapter 18    5       190110      Food preparations; of flour, meal, starch, malt extract or milk products, for infant use, put up for retail sale       3       190120      Food preparations; mixes and doughs for the preparation of bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits and other bakers' wares       5        190190       Food preparations; of flour, meal, starch, malt extract or milk products, for uses n.e.s. in heading no. 1901        5  190211  Food preparations; pasta, containing eggs, uncooked, not stuffed or otherwise prepared  5   190219  Food preparations; pasta, uncooked (excluding that containing eggs), not stuffed or otherwise prepared   5   190220  Food preparations; pasta, stuffed (with meat or other substances), whether or not cooked or otherwise prepared   5  Code    Dismantlemen 190230  Food preparations; pasta (excluding stuffed), cooked or otherwise prepared  5  190240  Food preparations; couscous  3   190300  Food preparations; tapioca and substitutes thereof, prepared from starch in the form of flakes, grains, pearls, siftings or similar   5  190410  Food preparations; obtained by the swelling or roasting of cereals or cereal products  5   190420  Food preparations; obtained from unroasted cereal flakes or from mixtures of unroasted cereal flakes and roasted cereal flakes or swelled cereals   5    190430  Prepared foods obtained by the swelling or roasting of cereals or cereal products (eg corn flakes); cereals, not maize (corn), in grain form or in the form of flakes or other worked grains, from bulgur wheat    5     190490    Food preparations; cereal or cereal products (excluding maize), in grain form, pre-cooked or otherwise prepared     5  190510  Food preparations; crispbread, whether or not containing cocoa  5  190520  Food preparations; gingerbread and the like, whether or not containing cocoa  5  190531  Food preparations; sweet biscuits, whether or not containing cocoa  5  190532  Food preparations; waffles and wafers, whether or not containing cocoa  5   190540  Food preparations; rusks, toasted bread and similar toasted products, whether or not containing cocoa   3      190590   Food preparations; bakers' wares n.e.s. in heading no. 1605, whether or not containing cocoa; communion wafers, empty cachets suitable for pharmaceutical use, sealing wafers, rice papers and similar products      5  200110  Vegetable preparations; cucumbers and gherkins, prepared or preserved by vinegar or acetic acid  5   200190  Vegetable preparations; vegetables, fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants, prepared or preserved by vinegar or acetic acid (excluding cucumbers, gherkins and onions)   5   200210  Vegetable preparations; tomatoes, whole or in pieces, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid   5   200290  Vegetable preparations; tomatoes, (other than whole or in pieces), prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid   5  200310  Vegetable preparations; mushrooms, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid  5   200390  Vegetable preparations; mushrooms other than of the genus Agaricus, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid   3   200410  Vegetable preparations; potatoes, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, frozen   3  Code    Dismantlemen   200490  Vegetable preparations; vegetables and mixtures of vegetables (excluding potatoes), prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, frozen    5   200510  Vegetable preparations; homogenised vegetables, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   5   200520  Vegetable preparations; potatoes, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   3   200540  Vegetable preparations; peas (pisum sativum), prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   5   200551  Vegetable preparations; beans, shelled, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   5   200559  Vegetable preparations; beans, (not shelled), prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   5   200560  Vegetable preparations; asparagus, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   3   200570  Vegetable preparations; olives, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   3   200580  Vegetable preparations; sweetcorn (zea mays var. saccharata), prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   5   200591  Vegetable preparations; bamboo shoots, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen   5      200599    Vegetable preparations; vegetables and mixtures of vegetables n.e.c. in heading no. 2005, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid, not frozen      5  200600  Fruit, nuts, fruit-peel and other parts of plants; preserved by sugar (drained, glace or crystallised)  5     200710   Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, fruit or nut puree and fruit or nut pastes; homogenised, cooked preparations, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter     5   200791  Jams, jellies, marmalades, purees and pastes; of citrus fruit, being cooked preparations (excluding homogenised), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5    200799  Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, purees and pastes; of fruit or nuts n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, cooked preparations (excluding homogenised), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter    5  200811  Nuts; ground-nuts, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit  5  Code    Dismantlemen   200819   Nuts and other seeds; whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit (excluding ground-nuts except in mixtures)    5    200820  Fruit; pineapples, prepared or preserved in ways n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit    5   200830  Fruit; citrus, prepared or preserved in ways n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit   5   200840  Fruit; pears, prepared or preserved in ways n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit   3    200850  Fruit; apricots, prepared or preserved in ways n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit    3    200860  Fruit; cherries, prepared or preserved in ways n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit    3     200870   Fruit; peaches, prepared or preserved in ways n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit     3   200880  Fruit; strawberries, prepared or preserved in ways n.e.s. in heading no. 2007, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit   5   200891  Palm hearts; prepared or preserved, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit   3   200893  Fruit; cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon, Vaccinium oxycoccos, Vaccinium vitis-idaea), prepared or preserved, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit   5       200897    Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants; mixtures (other than those of subheading no 2008.19); prepared or preserved in ways n.e.c. in headings 2007 and 2008, whether or not containing added sugar, or other sweetening matter or spirit, n.e.c.       5       200899     Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants; prepared or preserved, whether or not containing added sugar, other sweetening matter or spirit, n.e.s. in heading no. 2008       5  Code    Dismantlemen  200911  Juice; orange, frozen, unfermented, (not containing added spirit), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200912  Juice; orange, not frozen, of a Brix value not exceeding 20, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200919  Juice; orange, not frozen, unfermented, (not containing added spirit), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200921  Juice; grapefruit, of a Brix value not exceeding 20, unfermented, (not containing added spirit), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200929  Juice; grapefruit, of a Brix value exceeding 20, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5    200931  Juice; of single citrus fruit (excluding orange or grapefruit),of a Brix value not exceeding 20, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter    5    200939  Juice; of single citrus fruit (excluding orange or grapefruit), of a Brix value exceeding 20, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter    5   200941  Juice; pineapple, of a Brix value not exceeding 20, unfermented, (not containing added spirit), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200949  Juice; pineapple, of a Brix value exceeding 20, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200950  Juice; tomato, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200961  Juice; grape, of a Brix value not exceeding 30, unfermented, (not containing added spirit), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200969  Juice; grape, of a Brix value exceeding 30, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200971  Juice; apple, of a Brix value not exceeding 20, unfermented, (not containing added spirit), whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   200979  Juice; apple, of a Brix value exceeding 20, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5    200981  Juice; Cranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpon, Vaccinium oxycoccos, Vaccinium vitis-idaea) juice, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter    5    200989  Juice; of any single fruit or vegetable n.e.c. in heading no. 2009, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter    5  Code    Dismantlemen  200990  Juices; mixtures, unfermented, not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   5   210111  Extracts, essences and concentrates; of coffee, and preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates or with a basis of coffee   5  210112  Preparations with a basis of extracts, essences or concentrates or with a basis of coffee  5   210120  Extracts, essences and concentrates; of tea or mate, and preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates or with a basis of tea or mate   5   210130  Chicory, roasted and other roasted coffee substitutes; extracts, essences and concentrates thereof   5  210210  Yeasts; active  2   210220  Yeasts; inactive, other single-cell micro-organisms, dead   2  210230  Baking powders; prepared  2  210310  Sauces; soya  5  210320  Sauces; tomato ketchup and other tomato sauces  3  210330  Mustard flour and meal and prepared mustard  3    210390   Sauces and preparations therefor; mixed condiments and mixed seasonings    5  210410  Soups and broths and preparations therefor  3     210420     Homogenised composite food preparations     5  210500  Ice cream and other edible ice; whether or not containing cocoa  3  210610  Protein; concentrates and textured protein substances  2  210690  Food preparations; n.e.s. in item no. 2106.10  5   220110  Waters; mineral and aerated, including natural or artificial, (not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter nor flavoured)   5    220190   Waters; other than mineral and aerated, (not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter nor flavoured), ice and snow    5   220210  Waters; including mineral and aerated, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter or flavoured   5  220291  Non-alcoholic beverages; non-alcoholic beer  5   220299  Non-alcoholic beverages; other than non-alcoholic beer, n.e.c. in item no. 2202.10, not including fruit or vegetable juices of heading no. 2009   5  220300  Beer; made from malt  5  220410  Wine; sparkling  5   220421   Wine; still, in containers holding 2 litres or less   5  Code    Dismantlemen   220422   Wine; still, in containers holding more than 2 litres but not more than 10 litres    5   220429   Wine; still, in containers holding more than 2 litres   5   220430   Grape must; n.e.s. in heading no. 2009, n.e.s. in item no. 2204.2   3   220510  Vermouth and other wine of fresh grapes, flavoured with plants or aromatic substances, in containers holding 2 litres or less   5   220590  Vermouth and other wine of fresh grapes, flavoured with plants or aromatic substances, in containers holding more than 2 litres   5     220600     Beverages, fermented; (eg cider, perry, mead)     5  220710  Undenatured ethyl alcohol; of an alcoholic strength by volume of 80% vol. or higher  5  220720  Ethyl alcohol and other spirits; denatured, of any strength  5  220820  Spirits obtained by distilling grape wine or grape marc  5  220830  Whiskies  5  220840  Rum and tafia  5  220850  Gin and geneva  5  220860  Vodka  5  220870  Liqueurs and cordials  5      220890     Spirits, liqueurs and other spirituous beverages; n.e.s. in heading no. 2208      5  220900  Vinegar and substitutes for vinegar; obtained from acetic acid  5   230110  Flours, meals and pellets; of meat or meat offal, greaves   1   230120   Flours, meals and pellets; of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates   1   230210  Bran, sharps and other residues; of maize (corn), whether or not in the form of pellets, derived from the sifting, milling or other workings thereof   1   230230  Bran, sharps and other residues; of wheat, whether or not in the form of pellets, derived from the sifting, milling or other workings thereof   1   230240  Bran, sharps and other residues; of other cereals, whether or not in the form of pellets, derived from the sifting, milling or other workings thereof   1  Code    Dismantlemen  230250  Bran, sharps and other residues; of leguminous plants, whether or not in the form of pellets, derived from the sifting, milling or other workings thereof   1  230310  Residues of starch manufacture and similar residues; whether or not in the form of pellets  1  230320  Beet-pulp, bagasse and other waste of sugar manufacture; whether or not in the form of pellets  1  230330  Brewing or distilling dregs and waste; whether or not in the form of pellets  1   230400  Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of soya-bean oil   3   230500  Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of ground-nut oil   1   230610  Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of cotton seed oils   1   230620  Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of linseed oils   1   230630  Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of sunflower seed oils   1     230641   Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of low erucic acid rape or colza seed oils     1     230649   Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of rape seed oils (other than low erucic acid rape or colza)     1   230650  Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of coconut or copra seed oils   1   230660  Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of palm nuts or kernels oils   1     230690    Oil-cake and other solid residues; whether or not ground or in the form of pellets, resulting from the extraction of oils, n.e.s. in heading no. 2306     1  230700  Wine lees; argol  1   230800  Vegetable materials and vegetable waste, vegetable residues and by-products; whether or not in the form of pellets, of a kind used in animal feeding, not elsewhere specified or included   1  230910  Dog or cat food; put up for retail sale, used in animal feeding  5   230990  Dog or cat food; (not put up for retail sale), used in animal feeding   3  240110  Tobacco, (not stemmed or stripped)  5  240120  Tobacco; partly or wholly stemmed or stripped  5  240130  Tobacco refuse  5   240210  Cigars, cheroots and cigarillos; containing tobacco including the weight of every band, wrapper or attachment thereto   5  Code    Dismantlemen 240220  Cigarettes; containing tobacco  5   240290  Cigars, cigarillos and cheroots; containing tobacco substitutes including the weight of every band, wrapper or attachment thereto   5   240311  Tobacco; smoking, water pipe tobacco as specified in Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter, whether or not containing tobacco substitutes in any proportion   5   240319  Tobacco; smoking, other than water pipe tobacco, whether or not containing tobacco substitutes in any proportion   5   240391   Tobacco; "homogenised" or "reconstituted"   5      240399     Tobacco; other than "homogenised" or "reconstituted" or "smoking"      5   250100  Salt (including table salt and denatured salt); pure sodium chloride whether or not in aqueous solution; sea water   5  250200  Iron pyrites; unroasted  1  250300  Sulphur of all kinds; other than sublimed, precipitated and colloidal sulphur  1  250410  Graphite; natural, in powder or in flakes  1  250490  Graphite; natural, in other forms, excluding powder or flakes  1  250510  Sands; natural, silica and quartz sands, whether or not coloured  1   250590  Sands; natural, (other than silica and quartz sands), whether or not coloured, (other than metal bearing sands of chapter 26)   1  250610  Quartz; other than natural sands  1   250620  Quartzite; whether or not roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape   1  250700  Kaolin and other kaolinic clays; whether or not calcined  1  250810  Clays (excluding expanded clays of heading no. 6806); bentonite, whether or not calcined  1  250830  Clays (excluding expanded clays of heading no. 6806); fireclay, whether or not calcined  1   250840  Clays (excluding expanded clays of heading no. 6806); n.e.s. in heading no. 2508, whether or not calcined   1   250850  Clays (excluding expanded clays of heading no. 6806); andalusite, kyanite and sillimanite, whether or not calcined   1  250860  Clays (excluding expanded clays of heading no. 6806); mullite  1  250870  Clays (excluding expanded clays of heading no. 6806); chamotte or dinas earths  1  250900  Chalk  1   251010  Natural calcium phosphates, natural aluminium calcium phosphates and phosphatic chalk; unground   1  251020  Natural calcium phosphates, natural aluminium calcium phosphates and phosphatic chalk; ground  1  251110  Barium sulphate (barytes); natural  1  Code    Dismantlemen  251120  Barium carbonate (witherite); natural, whether or not calcined, other than barium oxide of heading no. 2816   1   251200  Siliceous fossil meals (eg kieselguhr, tripolite and diatomite) and similar siliceous earths; whether or not calcined, of an apparent specific gravity of 1 or less   1  251310  Pumice stone, whether or not heat treated  1  251320  Emery, natural corundum, natural garnet and other natural abrasives, whether or not heat-  1   251400  Slate; whether or not roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape   1   251511  Marble and travertine; having a specific gravity of 2.5 or more, crude or roughly trimmed by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape   2   251512  Marble and travertine; merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape, having a specific gravity of 2.5 or more   5     251520    Ecaussine and other calcareous monumental or building stone; alabaster, having a specific gravity of 2.5 or more     2   251611   Granite; crude or roughly trimmed   2   251612  Granite; merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape   2   251620  Sandstone;. whether or not roughly trimmed, cut, by sawing etc, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape   2      251690    Monumental or building stone; n.e.s. in heading no. 2516, whether or not roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape      2   251710  Pebbles, gravel, broken or crushed stone; of a kind commonly used for concrete aggregates, for road metalling or for railway or other ballast, shingle and flint, whether or not heat-treated   2   251720  Macadam of slag, dross or similar industrial waste; whether or not incorporating the materials in item no. 2517.10   2  251730  Tarred macadam  2  251741  Stones; of marble, in granules, chippings and powder, whether or not heat-treated  1    251749   Stones; of heading no. 2515 or 2516 (excluding marble), in granules, chippings and powder, whether or not heat-treated    1  Code    Dismantlemen    251810    Dolomite; (not calcined), roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape     2   251820  Dolomite; calcined, roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape   2  251830  Dolomite; agglomerated (including tarred)  2  251910  Magnesium carbonate (magnesite); natural  1    251990  Magnesia, fused or dead-burned (sintered); whether or not containing small quantities of other oxides added before sintering, other magnesium oxide, whether or not pure, (not natural magnesium carbonate)    1  252010  Gypsum; anhydrite  1   252020  Plasters; (consisting of calcined gypsum or calcium sulphate), whether or not coloured, with or without small quantities of accelerators or retarders   2   252100  Limestone flux; limestone and other calcareous stone, of a kind used for the manufacture of lime or cement   1  252210  Quicklime; excluding calcium oxide and hydroxide of heading no. 2825  1  252220  Slaked lime; excluding calcium oxide and hydroxide of heading no. 2825  1  252230  Hydraulic lime; excluding calcium oxide and hydroxide of heading no. 2825  2  252310  Cement clinkers (whether or not coloured)  2  252321  Cement; portland, white, whether or not artificially coloured  3  252329  Cement; portland, other than white, whether or not artificially coloured  3  252330  Cement; aluminous ("ciment fondu"), whether or not coloured or in the form of clinkers  3  252390  Cement; hydraulic kinds n.e.s. in heading no. 2523  3  252410  Asbestos; crocidolite (blue asbestos)  5  252490  Asbestos; other than crocidolite (blue asbestos)  5  252510  Mica; crude and rifted into sheets or splittings  2  252520  Mica; powder  2  252530  Mica; waste  2   252610  Steatite; natural, (not crushed or powdered), whether or not roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape; talc   1   252620  Steatite; natural, crushed, powdered, whether or not roughly trimmed or merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape; talc   1    252800  Natural borates and concentrates thereof (whether or not calcined), but not including borates separated from natural brine; natural boric acid containing not more than 85 % of H3BO3 calculated on the dry weight    1  252910  Felspar  1  252921  Fluorspar; containing by weight 97% or less of calcium fluoride  1  252922  Fluorspar; containing by weight more than 97% of calcium fluoride  1  252930  Leucite; nepheline and nepheline syenite  1  Code    Dismantlemen 253010  Vermiculite, perlite and chlorites; unexpanded  1  253020  Kieserite, epsomite (natural magnesium sulphates)  1  253090  Mineral substances; n.e.s. in chapter 25  3  260111  Iron ores and concentrates; non-agglomerated  1  260112  Iron ores and concentrates; agglomerated (excluding roasted iron pyrites)  1  260120  Iron pyrites; roasted  1   260200  Manganese ores and concentrates, including manganiferous iron ores and concentrates with a manganese content of 20% or more, calculated on the dry weight   1  260300  Copper ores and concentrates  1  260400  Nickel ores and concentrates  1  260500  Cobalt ores and concentrates  1  260600  Aluminium ores and concentrates  1  260700  Lead ores and concentrates  1  260800  Zinc ores and concentrates  1  260900  Tin ores and concentrates  1  261000  Chromium ores and concentrates  1  261100  Tungsten ores and concentrates  1  261210  Uranium ores and concentrates  1  261220  Thorium ores and concentrates  1  261310  Molybdenum ores and concentrates; roasted  1  261390  Molybdenum ores and concentrates; other than roasted  1  261400  Titanium ores and concentrates  1  261510  Zirconium ores and concentrates  1  261590  Niobium, tantalum, vanadium ores and concentrates  1  261610  Silver ores and concentrates  1  261690  Precious metal ores and concentrates; (excluding silver)  1  261710  Antimony ores and concentrates  1     261790    Ores and concentrates n.e.s. in chapter 26; other than antimony     1  261800  Slag, granulated (slag sand); from the manufacture or iron or steel  1   261900  Slag, dross; (other than granulated slag), scalings and other waste from the manufacture of iron or steel   1   262011  Ash and residues; (not from the manufacture of iron or steel), containing mainly zinc, hard zinc spelter   1   262019  Ash and residues; (not from the manufacture of iron or steel), containing mainly zinc, other than hard zinc spelter   1    262021   Ash and residues; (other than from the manufacture of iron or steel), containing mainly lead; leaded gasoline sludges and leaded anti- knock compound sludges    5   262029  Ash and residues; (other than from the manufacture of iron or steel), containing mainly lead; excluding leaded gasoline sludges and leaded anti-knock compound sludges   5  262030  Ash and residues; (not from the manufacture of iron or steel), containing mainly copper  5  262040  Ash and residues; (not from the manufacture of iron or steel), containing mainly aluminium  5  Code    Dismantlemen   262060  Ash and residues; (other than from the manufacture of iron or steel), containing arsenic, mercury, thallium or their mixtures, of a kind used for the extraction of arsenic or those metals or for the manufacture of their chemical compounds    5     262091  Ash and residues; (not from the manufacture of iron or steel), other than those containing lead, arsenic, mercury, thallium or their mixtures, and not of a kind used for the extraction of those metals nor for the manufacture of their chemical compounds     5       262099     Ash and residues; (other than from the manufacture of iron or steel),not containing mainly lead, or arsenic, mercury, thallium, antimony, beryllium, cadmium, chromium or their mixtures       5  262110  Slag and ash; ash and residues from the incineration of municipal waste  5     262190   Slag and ash n.e.c. in chapter 26; including seaweed ash (kelp) but excluding ash and residues from the incineration of municipal waste     3  270111  Coal; anthracite, whether or not pulverised, but not agglomerated  1  270112  Coal; bituminous, whether or not pulverised, but not agglomerated  1  270119  Coal; (other than anthracite and bituminous), whether or not pulverised but not agglomerated  1  270120  Briquettes, ovoids and similar solid fuels; manufactured from coal  1  270210  Lignite; whether or not pulverised, but not agglomerated, excluding jet  1  270220  Lignite; agglomerated, excluding jet  1  270300  Peat; (including peat litter), whether or not agglomerated  1  270400  Coke and semi-coke; of coal, lignite or peat, whether or not agglomerated; retort carbon  1   270500  Gases; coal, water, producer and similar gases (excluding petroleum and other gaseous hydrocarbons)   1   270600  Tar; distilled from coal, lignite or peat, and other mineral tars, whether or not dehydrated or partially distilled, including reconstituted tars   1  270710  Oils and products of the distillation of high temperature coal tar; benzole  2  270720  Oils and products of the distillation of high temperature coal tar; toluole  2  270730  Oils and products of the distillation of high temperature coal tar; xylole  2  270740  Oils and products of the distillation of high temperature coal tar; naphthalene  2   270750  Aromatic hydrocarbon mixtures; n.e.s. in heading no. 2707, of which 65% or more by volume (including losses) distils at 250 degrees celsius by the ASTM D 86 method   2  270791  Oils and other products of the distillation of high temperature coal tar; creosote oils  2  Code    Dismantlemen     270799     Oils and other products of the distillation of high temperature coal tar; n.e.s. in heading no. 2707      2  270810  Pitch; obtained from coal tar or from other mineral tars  2  270820  Pitch coke; obtained from coal tar or from other mineral tars  2  270900  Oils; petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals, crude  2    271012   Petroleum spirit for motor vehicles **LEGACY NON-WCO CODE**    3  271019  Light petroleum distillates nes **LEGACY NON- WCO CODE**  3     271020  Petroleum oils and oils from bituminous minerals, containing biodiesel, not crude, not waste oils; preparations n.e.c, containing by weight 70% or more of petroleum oils or oils from bituminous minerals     3   271091  Heavy furnace oil (heating or motor fuel) <1% sulphur **LEGACY NON-WCO CODE**   3    271099   Petroleum oils and products nes **LEGACY NON- WCO CODE**    3  271111  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons; liquefied, natural gas  1  271112  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons; liquefied, propane  1  271113  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons; liquefied, butanes  1   271114  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons; liquefied, ethylene, propylene, butylene and butadiene   1   271119  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons; liquefied, n.e.s. in heading no. 2711   1  271121  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons; in gaseous state, natural gas  1  271129  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons; in gaseous state, other than natural gas  1  271210  Petroleum jelly  5   271220  Paraffin wax; containing by weight less than 0.75% of oil, obtained by synthesis or by other processes, whether or not coloured   1    271290   Paraffin wax; containing by weight 0.75% or more of oil, obtained by synthesis or by other processes, whether or not coloured    1  271311  Petroleum coke; (not calcined), obtained from bituminous minerals  1  271312  Petroleum coke; calcined, obtained from bituminous minerals  1  271320  Petroleum bitumen; obtained from bituminous minerals  1  Code    Dismantlemen 271390  Residues; of petroleum oils or of oils obtained from bituminous minerals  1  271410  Bituminous or oil shale and tar sands  1  271490  Bitumen and asphalt, natural; asphaltites and asphaltic rock  1   271500  Bituminous mixtures based on natural asphalt, on natural bitumen, on petroleum bitumen, on mineral tar or on mineral tar pitch (eg bituminous mastics, cut-backs)   1  271600  Electrical energy  1  280110  Chlorine  1  280120  Iodine  1  280130  Fluorine; bromine  1  280200  Sulphur; sublimed or precipitated, colloidal  1  280300  Carbon; carbon blacks and other forms of carbon n.e.s.  1  280410  Hydrogen  1  280421  Gases, rare; argon  1  280429  Gases, rare; other than argon  1  280430  Nitrogen  1  280440  Oxygen  1  280450  Boron; tellurium  1  280461  Silicon; containing by weight not less than 99.99% of silicon  1  280469  Silicon; containing by weight less than 99.99% of silicon  1  280470  Phosphorus  1  280480  Arsenic  1  280490  Selenium  1  280511  Alkali metals; sodium  1  280512  Alkali or alkali-earth metals; calcium  1  280519  Alkali metals; other than sodium  1  280530  Earth-metals, rare; scandium and yttrium, whether or not intermixed or interalloyed  1  280540  Mercury  1  280610  Hydrogen chloride (hydrochloric acid)  1  280620  Chlorosulphuric acid  1  280700  Sulphuric acid; oleum  1  280800  Nitric acid; sulphonitric acids  1  280910  Diphosphorus pentoxide  1  280920  Phosphoric acid and polyphosphoric acids  1  281000  Oxides of boron; boric acids  1  281111  Hydrogen fluoride (hydrofluoric acid)  1  281112  Hydrogen cyanide (hydrocyanic acid)  1     281119     Inorganic acids; other than hydrogen fluoride     1  281121  Carbon dioxide  1  281122  Silicon dioxide  1   281129   Inorganic oxygen compounds; of non-metals, n.e.s. in item no. 2811.2   1  281211  Carbonyl dichloride (phosgene)  1  281212  Phosphorus oxychloride  1  281213  Phosphorus trichloride  1  281214  Phosphorus pentachloride  1  281215  Sulphur monochloride  1  281216  Sulphur dichloride  1  281217  Thionyl chloride  1  Code    Dismantlement    281219   Arsenic trichloride and other chlorides and chloride oxides, n.e.c. in item no. 2812    1  281290  Halides and halide oxides of non-metals; excluding chloride  1  281310  Carbon disulphide  1  281390  Sulphides of non-metals, (excluding carbon); commercial phosphorus trisulphide  1  281410  Ammonia; anhydrous  1  281420  Ammonia; in aqueous solution  1  281511  Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda); solid  1  281512  Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda); in aqueous solution (soda lye or liquid soda)  1  281520  Potassium hydroxide (caustic potash)  1  281530  Peroxides of sodium or potassium  1  281610  Hydroxide and peroxide of magnesium  1  281640  Oxides, hydroxides and peroxides, of strontium or barium  1  281700  Zinc; oxide and peroxide  1  281810  Aluminium oxide; artificial corundum  1  281820  Aluminium oxide; other than artificial corundum  1  281830  Aluminium hydroxide  1  281910  Chromium trioxide  1  281990  Chromium oxides and hydroxides; excluding chromium trioxide  1  282010  Manganese dioxide  1  282090  Manganese oxides; excluding manganese dioxide  1  282110  Iron oxides and hydroxides  1  282120  Earth colours; containing 70% or more by weight of combined iron evaluated as Fe2o3  1  282200  Cobalt oxides and hydroxides; commercial cobalt oxides  1  282300  Titanium oxides  1  282410  Lead; lead monoxide (litharge, massicot)  1  282490  Lead oxides; n.e.s. in heading no. 2824  1  282510  Hydrazine and hydroxylamine and their inorganic salts  1  282520  Lithium oxide and hydroxide  1  282530  Vanadium oxides and hydroxides  1  282540  Nickel oxides and hydroxides  1  282550  Copper oxides and hydroxides  1  282560  Germanium oxides and zirconium dioxide  1  282570  Molybdenum oxides and hydroxides  1  282580  Antimony oxides  1  282590  Inorganic bases, metal oxides, hydroxides and peroxides; n.e.s. in heading no. 2825  1  282612  Fluorides; of aluminium  1  282619  Fluorides; other than of ammonium or sodium or aluminium  1  282630  Sodium hexafluoroaluminate (synthetic cryolite)  1   282690  Fluorides; fluorosilicates, fluoroaluminates and other complex fluorine salts, n.e.s. in heading no. 2826   1  282710  Chlorides; of ammonium  1  282720  Chlorides; of calcium  1  282731  Chlorides; of magnesium  1  282732  Chlorides; of aluminium  1  282735  Chlorides; of nickel  1  282739  Chlorides; of metals n.e.s. in heading no. 2827  1  282741  Chloride oxides and chloride hydroxides; of copper  1  282749  Chloride oxides and chloride hydroxides; other than of copper  1  Code    Dismantlemen 282751  Bromides; of sodium or of potassium  1  282759  Bromides and bromide oxides; other than item no. 2827.51  1  282760  Iodides and iodide oxides  1  282810  Hypochlorites; commercial calcium hypochlorite and other calcium hypochlorites  1  282890  Hypochlorites; n.e.s. in heading no. 2828  3  282911  Chlorates; of sodium  1  282919  Chlorates; other than sodium  1   282990  Perchlorates; bromates and perbromates; iodates and periodates   1  283010  Sulphides; of sodium  1   283090   Sulphides and polysulphides; n.e.s. in heading no. 2830   1  283110  Dithionites and sulphoxylates; of sodium  1  283190  Dithionites and sulphoxylates; other than sodium  1  283210  Sulphites; of sodium  1  283220  Sulphites; other than of sodium  1  283230  Thiosulphates  1  283311  Sodium sulphates; disodium sulphate  1  283319  Sodium sulphates; other than disodium sulphate  1  283321  Sulphates; of magnesium  1  283322  Sulphates; of aluminium  1  283324  Sulphates; of nickel  1  283325  Sulphates; of copper  1  283327  Sulphates; of barium  1  283329  Sulphates; n.e.s. in item no. 2833.2  1  283330  Alums  1  283340  Peroxosulphates (persulphates)  1  283410  Nitrites  1  283421  Nitrates; of potassium  1  283429  Nitrates; of other than potassium or bismuth  1  283510  Phosphinates (hypophosphites) and phosphonates (phosphites)  1  283522  Phosphates; of mono- or disodium  1  283524  Phosphates; of potassium  1  283525  Phosphates; calcium hydrogenorthophosphate ("dicalcium phosphate")  1   283526   Phosphates; of calcium n.e.s. in item no. 2835.25   1  283529  Phosphates; n.e.s in item no. 2835.2  1  283531  Polyphosphates; sodium triphosphate (sodium tripolyphosphate)  1    283539   Polyphosphates; (other than sodium triphosphate (sodium tripolyphosphate))    1  283620  Carbonates; disodium carbonate  1  283630  Carbonates; sodium hydrogencarbonate (sodium bicarbonate)  1  283640  Carbonates; potassium carbonate  1  283650  Carbonates; calcium carbonate  1  283660  Carbonates; barium carbonate  1  283691  Carbonates; lithium carbonate  1  283692  Carbonates; strontium carbonate  1  Code    Dismantlement      283699      Carbonates; n.e.s. in heading no. 2836      1  283711  Cyanides and cyanide oxides; of sodium  1  283719  Cyanides and cyanide oxides; other than of sodium  1  283720  Complex cyanides  1  283911  Silicates; sodium metasilicates  1  283919  Silicates; of sodium (excluding sodium metasilicates)  1  283990  Silicates; commercial alkali metal silicates, other than of sodium or potassium  1  284011  Borates; disodium tetraborate (refined borax), anhydrous  1  284019  Borates; disodium tetraborate (refined borax), other than anhydrous  1  284020  Borates; n.e.s. in heading no. 2840  1  284030  Peroxoborates (perborates)  1  284130  Salts; sodium dichromate  1   284150  Salts; chromates, dichromates, peroxochromates; n.e.s. in heading no. 2841   1   284161  Salts; of oxometallic or peroxometallic acids, manganites, manganates and permanganates, potassium permanganate   1   284169  Salts; of oxometallic or peroxometallic acids, manganites, manganates and permanganates, other than potassium permanganate   1  284170  Salts; molybdates  1  284180  Salts; tungstates (wolframates)  1    284190   Salts of oxometallic or peroxometallic acids; n.e.s. in heading no. 2841    1    284210    Salts; double or complex silicates    1     284290    Salts; of inorganic acids or peroxoacids, excluding azides     1  284310  Colloidal precious metals; whether or not chemically defined  1  284321  Silver compounds; silver nitrates  1   284329   Silver compounds; excluding silver nitrates   1  284330  Gold compounds  1   284390  Inorganic or organic compounds; of precious metals (excluding gold and silver), whether or not chemically defined, amalgams of precious metals   1  Code    Dismantlement   284410  Uranium; natural uranium and its compounds, alloys, dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing natural uranium or natural uranium compounds   1    284420  Uranium; enriched in U235, plutonium, their compounds, alloys dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing uranium enriched in U235, plutonium or compounds of these products    1    284430  Uranium; depleted in U235, thorium, their compounds, alloys, dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing uranium depleted in U235, thorium; compounds of these products    1    284440  Radioactive elements, isotopes, compounds, n.e.s. in heading no. 2844 alloys, dispersions (including cermets), ceramic products and mixtures containing these elements, isotopes or compounds; radioactive residues    1  284450  Spent (irradiated) fuel elements (cartridges) of nuclear reactors  1  284510  Heavy water (deuterium oxide)  1   284590  Isotopes (excluding those of heading no. 2844); compounds, inorganic or organic, of such isotopes, whether or not chemically defined   1  284610  Cerium compounds  1   284690  Compounds, inorganic or organic (excluding cerium), of rare-earth metals, of yttrium, scandium or of mixtures of these metals   1  284700  Hydrogen peroxide; whether or not solidified with urea  1  284910  Carbides; of calcium, whether or not chemically defined  1  284920  Carbides; of silicon, whether or not chemically defined  1   284990   Carbides; whether or not chemically defined, n.e.s. in heading no. 2849   1    285000  Hydrides, nitrides, azides, silicides and borides, whether or not chemically defined, other than compounds which are also carbides of heading no. 2849    1  285210  Inorganic or organic compounds of mercury, excluding amalgams, chemically defined  1  285290  Inorganic or organic compounds of mercury; excluding amalgams, not chemically defined,  1  285310  Inorganic compounds; cyanogen chloride (chlorcyan)  1     285390  Phosphides, chemically defined or not, not ferrophosphorus; other inorganic compounds n.e.c. (including distilled, conductivity water and water of like purity); liquid air, rare gases removed or not; compressed air; amalgams, not precious metal amalgams     1  290110  Acyclic hydrocarbons; saturated  1  290121  Acyclic hydrocarbons; unsaturated, ethylene  1  290122  Acyclic hydrocarbons; unsaturated, propene (propylene)  1  290123  Acyclic hydrocarbons; unsaturated, butene (butylene) and isomers thereof  1  290124  Acyclic hydrocarbons; unsaturated, buta-1,3-diene and isoprene  1  Code    Dismantlement   290129   Acyclic hydrocarbons; unsaturated, n.e.s. in heading no. 2901   1  290211  Cyclic hydrocarbons; cyclohexane  1  290219  Cyclic hydrocarbons; cyclanes, cyclenes and cycloterpenes, excluding cyclohexane  1  290220  Cyclic hydrocarbons; benzene  1  290230  Cyclic hydrocarbons; toluene  1  290241  Cyclic hydrocarbons; o-xylene  1  290242  Cyclic hydrocarbons; m-xylene  1  290243  Cyclic hydrocarbons; p-xylene  1  290244  Cyclic hydrocarbons; mixed xylene isomers  1  290250  Cyclic hydrocarbons; styrene  1  290260  Cyclic hydrocarbons; ethylbenzene  1  290270  Cyclic hydrocarbons; cumene  1   290290   Cyclic hydrocarbons; n.e.s. in heading no. 2902   1   290311  Saturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; chloromethane (methyl chloride) and chloroethane (ethyl chloride)   1   290312  Saturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; dichloromethane (methylene chloride)   1  290313  Saturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; chloroform (trichloromethane)  1  290314  Saturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; carbon tetrachloride  1   290315  Saturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; 1,2-dichloroethane (ethylene dichloride)   1     290319     Saturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; n.e.s. in item no. 2903.1     1  290321  Unsaturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; vinyl chloride (chloroethylene)  1  290322  Unsaturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; trichloroethylene  1   290323  Unsaturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; tetrachloroethylene (perchloroethylene)   1   290329   Unsaturated chlorinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; n.e.s. in item no. 2903.2   1   290331  Fluorinated, brominated or iodinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; ethylene dibromide (ISO) (1,2-dibromoethane)   1   290339  Fluorinated, brominated or iodinated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons; other than ethylene dibromide (ISO) (1,2-dibromoethane)   1   290371  Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; chlorodifluoromethane   1   290372  Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; dichlorotrifluoroethane   1   290373  Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; dichlorofluoroethanes   1  Code    Dismantlement   290374  Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; chlorodifluoroethanes   1   290375  Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; dichloropentafluoropropanes   1    290376  Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; bromochlorodifluoromethane, bromotrifluoromethane, and dibromotetrafluoroethanes    1     290377   Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; n.e.c. in headings 290371 to 290376, perhalogenated only with fluorine and chlorine     1    290378  Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; perhalogenated derivatives, other than those only with fluorine and chlorine, n.e.c. in item no. 2903.71 to 2903.76    1     290379    Halogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens; n.e.c. in item no. 2903.7     1   290381  Halogenated derivatives of cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic hydrocarbons; 1,2,3,4,5,6- Hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH (ISO)), including lindane (ISO, INN)   1   290382  Halogenated derivatives of cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic hydrocarbons; aldrin (ISO), chlordane (ISO), and heptachlor (ISO)   1  290383  Halogenated derivatives of cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic hydrocarbons; mirex (ISO)  1    290389   Halogenated derivatives of cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic hydrocarbons; n.e.c. in item no. 2903.8    1   290391  Halogenated derivatives of aromatic hydrocarbons; chlorobenzene, o-dichlorobenzene, and p-dichlorobenzene   1   290392  Halogenated derivatives of aromatic hydrocarbons; hexachlorobenzene (ISO) and DDT (ISO) (clofenotane (INN), and 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2- bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane)   1  290393  Halogenated derivatives of aromatic hydrocarbons; pentachlorobenzene (ISO)  1  290394  Halogenated derivatives of aromatic hydrocarbons;  hexabromobiphenyls  1     290399  Halogenated derivatives of aromatic hydrocarbons; other than chlorobenzene, o- dichlorobenzene, p-dichlorobenzene, hexachlorobenzene (ISO), and DDT (ISO) (clofenotane (INN), and 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p- chlorophenyl)ethane)     1   290410  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; containing only sulpho groups, their salts and ethyl esters, whether or not halogenated   1   290420  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; containing only nitro or only nitroso groups, whether or not halogenated   1  Code    Dismantlemen 290431  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; perfluorooctane sulphonic acid, whether or not halogenated  1   290432  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; ammonium perfluorooctane sulphonate, whether or not halogenated   1   290433  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; lithium perfluorooctane sulphonate, whether or not halogenated   1   290434  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; potassium perfluorooctane sulphonate, whether or not halogenated   1   290435  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; salts of perfluorooctane sulphonic acid n.e.c in heading no. 2904, whether or not halogenated   1  290436  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; perfluorooctane sulphonyl fluoride, whether or not halogenated  1  290491  Derivatives of hydrocarbons; trichloronitromethane (chloropicrin), whether or  1     290499     Derivatives of hydrocarbons n.e.c. in heading no. 2904, whether or not halogenated     1  290511  Alcohols; saturated monohydric, methanol (methyl alcohol)  1   290512  Alcohols; saturated monohydric, propan-1-ol (propyl alcohol) and propan-2-ol (isopropyl alcohol)   1  290513  Alcohols; saturated monohydric, butan-1-ol (n- butyl alcohol)  1  290514  Alcohols; saturated monohydric, butanols excluding item no. 2905.13  1  290516  Alcohols; saturated monohydric, octanol (octyl alcohol) and isomers thereof  1   290517  Alcohols; saturated monohydric, dodecan-1-ol (lauryl alcohol), hexadecan-1-ol (cetyl alcohol) and octadecan-1-ol (stearyl alcohol)   1    290519    Alcohols; saturated monohydric, n.e.s. in item no. 2905.1    1  290522  Alcohols; unsaturated monohydric, acyclic terpene alcohols  1  290529  Alcohols; acyclic, unsaturated monohydric, n.e.s in item no. 2905.2  1  290531  Alcohols; acyclic, diols; ethylene glycol (ethanediol)  1  290532  Alcohols; acyclic, diols; propylene glycol (propane- 1, 2-diol)  1  290539  Alcohols; acyclic, diols, n.e.s. in item no. 2905.3  1  290541  Alcohols; polyhydric, 2-ethyl-2- (hydroxymethyl) propane-1,3-diol (trimethylolpropane)  1  290542  Alcohols; polyhydric, pentaerythritol  1  290543  Alcohols; polyhydric, mannitol  3  290544  Alcohols; polyhydric, d-glucitol (sorbitol)  3  290545  Alcohols; polyhydric, glycerol  3   290549   Alcohols; polyhydric, n.e.s. in item no. 2905.4   1   290551  Alcohols; acyclic; halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives thereof, ethchlorvynol (INN)   1  Code    Dismantlemen  290559  Alcohols; acyclic; halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives thereof, other than ethchlorvynol (INN)   1  290611  Alcohols; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic and derivatives, menthol  1   290612  Alcohols; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic and derivatives, cyclohexanol, methylcyclohexanols and dimethylcyclohexanols   1  290613  Alcohols; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic and derivatives, sterols and inositols  1    290619   Alcohols; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic and derivatives, n.e.s. in item no. 2906.1    1  290621  Alcohols; aromatic alcohols and derivatives, benzyl alcohol  1  290629  Alcohols; aromatic and derivatives, other than benzyl alcohol  1  290711  Monophenols; phenol (hydroxybenzene) and its salts  1  290712  Monophenols; cresols and their salts  1  290713  Monophenols; octylphenol, nonylphenol and their isomers, salts thereof  1  290715  Monophenols; naphthols and their salts  1   290719   Monophenols; n.e.s. in item no. 2907.1   1  290721  Polyphenols; resorcinol and its salts  1  290722  Polyphenols; hydroquinone (quinol) and its salts  1  290723  Polyphenols; 4,4'-isopropylidenediphenol (bisphenol A, diphenylolpropane) and its salts  1   290729   Polyphenols; n.e.s. in item no. 2907.2   1   290811  Phenol or phenol-alcohol derivatives containing only halogen substituents and their salts; pentachlorophenol (ISO)   1   290819  Phenol or phenol-alcohol derivatives containing only halogen substituents and their salts; other than pentachlorophenol (ISO)   1   290891  Phenol or phenol-alcohol derivatives (other than derivatives containing only halogen substituents and their salts); dinoseb (ISO) and its salts   1   290892  Phenol or phenol-alcohol derivatives, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives thereof; 4,6- dinitro-o-cresol (DNOC (ISO)) and its salts   1   290899  Phenol or phenol-alcohol derivatives (other than derivatives containing only halogen substituents and their salts); n.e.c. in item no. 2908   1   290911  Ethers; acyclic, and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, diethyl ether   1   290919  Ethers; acyclic, and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, other than diethyl ether   1   290920  Ethers; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   1  290930  Ethers; aromatic, and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  1   290941  Ether-alcohols and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; 2,2 oxydiethanol (diethylene glycol, digol)   1  Code    Dismantlemen  290943  Ether-alcohols and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; monobutyl ethers of ethylene glycol or of diethylene glycol   1   290944  Ether-alcohols and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; monoalkylethers of ethylene glycol or of diethylene glycol n.e.s. in heading no. 2909   1   290949  Ether-alcohols and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; n.e.s. in item no. 2909.4   1   290950  Ether-phenols, ether-alcohol-phenols and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   1   290960  Alcohol peroxides, ether peroxides, ketone peroxides and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   1   291010  Epoxides, epoxyalcohols, epoxyphenols and epoxyethers; with a three-membered ring and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; oxirane (ethylene oxide)   1   291020  Epoxides, epoxyalcohols, epoxyphenols and epoxyethers; with a three-membered ring and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, methyloxirane (propylene   1    291030  Epoxides, epoxyalcohols, epoxyphenols and epoxyethers; with a three-membered ring and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, 1-chloro-2,3-epoxypropane (epichlorohydrin)    1   291040  Epoxides, epoxyalcohols, epoxyphenols and epoxyethers; with a three-membered ring and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, dieldrin (ISO, INN)   1   291050  Epoxides, epoxyalcohols, epoxyphenols and epoxyethers; with a three-membered ring and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, endrin (ISO)   1     291090   Epoxides, epoxyalcohols, epoxyphenols and epoxyethers; with a three-membered ring and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, n.e.s. in heading no. 2910     1   291100  Acetals and hemiacetals; whether or not with other oxygen function, and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   1  291211  Aldehydes; acyclic, without other oxygen function, methanal (formaldehyde)  1  291212  Aldehydes; acyclic, without other oxygen function, ethanal (acetaldehyde)  1   291219  Aldehydes; acyclic, without other oxygen function, n.e.s. in item no. 2912.1   1  291221  Aldehydes; cyclic, without other oxygen function, benzaldehyde  1  291229  Aldehydes; cyclic, without other oxygen function, other than benzaldehyde  1   291241  Aldehyde-ethers, aldehyde-phenols and aldehydes with other oxygen function; vanillin (4-hydroxy-3- methoxybenzaldehyde)   1   291242  Aldehyde-ethers, aldehyde-phenols and aldehydes with other oxygen function; ethylvanillin (3-ethoxy- 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde)   1  Code    Dismantlemen   291249   Aldehyde-ethers, aldehyde-phenols and aldehydes with other oxygen function; n.e.s. in item no. 2912.4    1  291250  Aldehydes; cyclic polymers of aldehydes  1  291260  Paraformaldehyde  1   291300  Aldehydes; halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of products of heading no. 2912   1  291411  Ketones; acyclic, without other oxygen function, acetone  1  291412  Ketones; acyclic, without other oxygen function, butanone (methyl ethyl ketone)  1  291413  Ketones; acyclic, without other oxygen function, 4- methylpentan-2-one (methyl isobutyl ketone)  1   291419   Ketones; acyclic, without other oxygen function, n.e.s. in item no. 2914.1   1   291422  Ketones; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic, without other oxygen function, cyclohexanone and methylcyclohexanones   1  291423  Ketones; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic, without other oxygen function, ionones and  1   291429  Ketones; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic, without other oxygen function, n.e.s. in item no. 2914.2   1  291431  Ketones; aromatic, (without other oxygen function), phenylacetone (phenylpropan-2-one)  1   291439  Ketones; aromatic, (without other oxygen function), excluding phenylacetone (phenylpropan- 2-one)   1  291440  Ketone-alcohols and ketone-aldehydes  1  291450  Ketone-phenols and ketones with other oxygen function  1  291461  Quinones; anthraquinone  1  291462  Quinones; coenzyme Q10 (ubidecarenone (INN))  1  291469  Quinones; other than anthraquinone  1   291471  Ketones and quinones; halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; chlordecone (ISO)   1   291479  Ketones and quinones; halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, other than chlordecone (ISO)   1  291511  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; formic acid  1  291512  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; salts of formic acids  1  291513  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; esters of formic acid  1  291521  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; acetic acid  1  291524  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; acetic anhydride  1  291529  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; acetic acid and its salts n.e.s. in item no. 2915.2  1  291531  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; ethyl acetate  1  291532  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; vinyl acetate  1  291533  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; n- butyl acetate  1  Code    Dismantlemen 291536  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; dinoseb (ISO) acetate  1  291539  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; esters of acetic acid n.e.s. in item no. 2915.3  1   291540  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; mono-, di- or trichloroacetic acids, their salts and esters   1  291550  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; propionic acid, its salts and esters  1  291560  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; butyric, valeric acids; their salts and esters  1  291570  Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; palmitic acid, stearic acid, their salts and esters  1     291590   Acids; saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, n.e.s. in heading no. 2915     1  291611  Acids; unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; acrylic acid and its salts  1  291612  Acids; unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; esters of acrylic acid  1  291613  Acids; unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; methacrylic acid and its salts  1  291614  Acids; unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; esters of methacrylic acid  1   291615  Acids; unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; oleic, linoleic or linolenic acids, their salts and esters   1    291616  Acids; unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic, cyclic monocarboxylic, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, binapacryl (ISO)    1    291619    Acids; unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids; n.e.s. in item no. 2916.1    1    291620   Acids; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic monocarboxylic acids, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and their derivatives    1  291631  Acids; aromatic monocarboxylic acids, benzoic acid, its salts and esters  1  291632  Acids; aromatic monocarboxylic acids, benzoyl peroxide and benzoyl chloride  1  291634  Acids; aromatic monocarboxylic acids, phenylacetic acid and its salts  1      291639     Acids; aromatic monocarboxylic acids, n.e.s. in item no. 2916.3      1  291711  Acids; acyclic polycarboxylic acids; oxalic acid, its salts and esters  1  291712  Acids; acyclic polycarboxylic acids; adipic acid, its salts and esters  1  291713  Acids; acyclic polycarboxylic acids; azelaic acid, sebacic acid, their salts and esters  1  Code    Dismantlemen 291714  Acids; acyclic polycarboxylic acids; maleic  1     291719     Acids; acyclic polycarboxylic acids; n.e.s. in item no. 2917.1     1   291720  Acids; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic polycarboxylic acids, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and derivatives   1  291732  Acids; aromatic polycarboxylic acids; dioctyl orthophthalates  1  291733  Acids; aromatic polycarboxylic acids; dinonyl or didecyl orthophthalates  1  291734  Acids; aromatic polycarboxylic acids; other esters of orthophthalic acids  1  291735  Acids; aromatic polycarboxylic acids; phthalic anhydride  1  291736  Acids; aromatic polycarboxylic acids; terephthalic acid and its salts  1  291737  Acids; aromatic polycarboxylic acids; dimethyl terephthalate  1     291739    Acids; aromatic polycarboxylic acids; n.e.s. in item no. 2917.3     1   291811  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), lactic acid, its salts and esters   1  291812  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), tartaric acid  1   291813  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function); salts and esters of tartaric acid   1  291814  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), citric acid  1   291815  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), salts and esters of citric acid   1   291816  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), gluconic acid, its salts and esters   1   291817  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), phenylglycolic acid (mandelic acid), its salts and esters   1   291818  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), chlorobenzilate (ISO)   1    291819   Acids; carboxylic acids, (with alcohol function but without other oxygen function), n.e.s. in item no. 2918.1    1   291821  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with phenol function but without other oxygen function), salicylic acid and its salts   1   291822  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with phenol function but without other oxygen function), o-acetylsalicylic acid, its salts and esters   1   291823  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with phenol function but without other oxygen function), other esters of salicylic acid and its salts n.e.s. in item no. 2918.2   1  Code    Dismantlement    291829   Acids; carboxylic acids, (with phenol function but without other oxygen function), their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and their derivatives, n.e.s. in item no. 2918.2    1   291830  Acids; carboxylic acids, (with aldehyde or ketone function but without other oxygen function), their anhydrides, halides, peroxides, peroxyacids and their derivatives   1    291891  Acids; carboxylic acids, with additional oxygen function (not alcohol, phenol, aldehyde or ketone) and their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids; 2,4,5-T (ISO) (2,4,5- trichlorophenoxyacetic acid), its salts and esters    1     291899  Acids; carboxylic acids, with additional oxygen function (not alcohol, phenol, aldehyde or ketone) and their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; other than 2,4,5- T (ISO)     1   291910  Esters; phosphoric, and their salts, including lactophosphates, their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; tris(2,3- dibromopropyl) phosphate   1   291990  Esters; phosphoric, and their salts, including lactophosphates, their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives; other than tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate   1   292011  Esters; thiophosphoric esters (phosphorothioates) and their salts, their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, parathion (ISO) and parathion-methyl (ISO) (methyl-parathion)   1   292019  Esters; thiophosphoric esters (phosphorothioates) and their salts; other than parathion (ISO) and parathion-methyl (ISO) (methyl-parathion)   1   292021  Esters; phosphite esters and their salts; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, dimethyl phosphite   1   292022  Esters; phosphite esters and their salts; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, diethyl phosphite   1   292023  Esters; phosphite esters and their salts; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, trimethyl phosphite   1   292024  Esters; phosphite esters and their salts; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, triethyl phosphite   1   292029  Esters; phosphite esters and their salts; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, n.e.c. in heading no. 2920   1   292030  Esters; of other inorganic acids of non-metals (excluding esters of hydrogen halides) and their salts; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, endosulfan (ISO)   1      292090    Esters of inorganic acids (excluding esters of hydrogen halides) and their salts, their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives, n.e.s. in heading no. 2920      1  Code    Dismantlement   292111  Amine-function compounds; acyclic monoamines and their derivatives, methylamine, di- or trimethylamine and their salts   1  292112  Amine-function compounds; acyclic monoamines and their derivatives; diethylamine and its salts  1   292113  Amine-function compounds; acyclic monoamines and their derivatives, and salts thereof, 2-(N,N- Diethylamino)ethylchloride hydrochloride   1   292114  Amine-function compounds; acyclic monoamines and their derivatives, and salts thereof, 2-(N,N- Diisopropylamino)ethylchloride hydrochloride   1   292119  Amine-function compounds; acyclic monoamines and their derivatives, and salts thereof, n.e.s. in item no. 2921.1   1  292121  Amine-function compounds; acyclic polyamines and their derivatives, ethylenediamine and its salts  1   292122  Amine-function compounds; acyclic polyamines and their derivatives, hexamethylenediamine and its salts   1   292129  Amine-function compounds; acyclic polyamines and their derivatives, and salts thereof, n.e.s. in item no. 2921.2   1   292130  Amine-function compounds; cyclanic, cyclenic or cycloterpenic mono- or polyamines and their derivatives; salts thereof   1  292141  Amine-function compounds; aromatic monoamines and their derivatives, aniline and its  1   292142  Amine-function-compounds; aromatic monoamines and their derivatives, aniline derivatives and their salts   1   292143  Amine-function compounds; aromatic monoamines and their derivatives, toluidines and their derivatives; salts thereof   1   292144  Amine-function compounds; aromatic monoamines and their derivatives, diphenylamine and its derivatives; salts thereof   1    292145  Amine-function compounds; aromatic monoamines and their derivatives; 1- naphthylamine (alpha-naphthylamine), 2- naphthylamine (beta-naphthaylamine) and their derivatives; salts thereof    1    292146  Amine-function compounds; aromatic monoamines and derivatives; amphetamine (INN), benzphetamine (INN), dexamphetamine (INN), etilamphetamine (INN), fencamfamin (INN), lefetamine (INN), levamphetamine (INN), mefenorex (INN), phentermine (INN); salts of    1      292149     Amine-function compounds; aromatic monoamines and their derivatives; salts thereof; n.e.s. in item no. 2921.4      1   292151  Amine-function compounds; aromatic amines and their derivatives; o-, m-, p-phenylenediamine, diaminotoluenes and their derivatives; salts thereof   1   292159   Amine-function compounds; aromatic polyamines and their derivatives, other than item no. 2921.51   1   292211  Amino-alcohols, their ethers and esters; (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), monoethanolamine and its salts   1  Code    Dismantlement   292212  Amino-alcohols, their ethers and esters; (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), diethanolamine and its salts   1   292214  Amino-alcohols, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function;their ethers and esters; salts thereof; dextropropoxyphene (INN) and its salts   1   292215  Amino-alcohols, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function; their ethers and esters; salts thereof, triethanolamine   1   292216  Amino-alcohols, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function; their ethers and esters; salts thereof, Diethanolammonium perfluorooctane sulphonate   1   292217  Amino-alcohols, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function; their ethers and esters; salts thereof, Methyldiethanolamine and ethyldiethanolamine   1   292218  Amino-alcohols, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function; their ethers and esters; salts thereof, 2-(N,N- Diisopropylamino)ethanol   1      292219     Amino-alcohols, their ethers and esters; (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), n.e.s. in item no. 2922.1      1    292221  Amino-naphthols and other amino-phenols; their ethers and esters, (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), aminohydroxynaphthalenesulphonic acids and their salts    1    292229  Amino-naphthols and other amino-phenols; their ethers and esters, (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), n.e.s. in item no. 2922.2    1   292231  Amino-aldehydes, amino-ketones and amino- quinones; other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function; salts thereof   1    292239  Amino-aldehydes, amino-ketones and amino- quinones; other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function; salts thereof, excluding amfepramone (INN), methadone (INN), and normethadone (INN) and salts thereof    1   292241  Amino-acids; their esters, (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), lysine and its esters; salts thereof   1   292242  Amino-acids; their esters, (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), glutamic acid and its salts   1   292243  Amino-acids; their esters, (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), anthranilic acid and its salts   1   292244  Amino-acids, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function, and their esters; tilidine (INN) and its esters; salts thereof   1    292249   Amino-acids; their esters, (other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function), n.e.s. in item no. 2922.4    1  Code    Dismantlement     292250    Amino-alcohol-phenols, amino-acid-phenols and other amino-compounds with oxygen function     1  292310  Quaternary ammonium salts and hydroxides; choline and its salts  1  292320  Lecithins and other phosphoaminolipids  1   292330  Quaternary ammonium salts and hydroxides; tetraethylammonium perfluorooctane sulphonate, whether or not chemically defined   1   292340  Quaternary ammonium salts and hydroxides; didecyldimethylammonium perfluorooctane sulphonate, whether or not chemically defined   1   292390   Quaternary ammonium salts and hydroxides; n.e.s. in heading no. 2923   1  292411  Acyclic amides (including acyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; salts thereof  1   292412  Acyclic amides (including acyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; salts thereof; fluoroacetamide (ISO), monocrotophos (ISO) and phosphamidon (ISO)   1   292419  Acyclic amides (including acyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; salts thereof, other than meprobamate   1   292421  Cyclic amides (including cyclic carbamates) and their derivatives, ureines and their derivatives; salts thereof   1   292423  Cyclic amides (including cyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; 2-acetamidobenzoic acid (N- acetylanthranillic acid) and its salts   1  292424  Cyclic amides (including cyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; ethinamate and its salts  1  292425  Cyclic amides (including cyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; alachlor (ISO) and its salts  1    292429   Cyclic amides (including cyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; n.e.s. in item no. 2924.2    1  292511  Imides and their derivatives; saccharin and its salts  1  292512  Imides and their derivatives; glutethimide (INN)  1   292519   Imides and their derivatives; other kinds, excluding saccharin   1  292521  Imines and their derivatives; salts thereof; chlordimeform (ISO)  1  292529  Imines and their derivatives; salts thereof; other than chlordimeform (ISO)  1  292610  Nitrile-function compounds; acrylonitrile  1  292620  Nitrile-function compounds; 1-cyanoguanidine (dicyandiamide)  1   292630  Nitrile-function compounds; fenproporex (INN) and its salts; methadone (INN) intermediate (4- cyano-2-dimethylamino-4,4-diphenylbutane)   1  292640  Nitrile-function compounds; alpha- phenylacetoacetonitrile  1  Code    Dismantlement    292690   Nitrile-function compounds; n.e.s. in heading no. 2926    1  292700  Diazo-, azo- or azoxy compounds  1  292800  Organic derivatives of hydrazine or of hydroxylamine  1  292910  Nitrogen-function compounds; n.e.s. in chapter 29, isocyanates  1      292990     Nitrogen-function compounds; n.e.s. in chapter 29, excluding isocyanates      1  293020  Organo-sulphur compounds; thiocarbamates and dithiocarbamates  1  293030  Organo-sulphur compounds; thiuram mono-, di- or tetrasulphides  1  293040  Organo-sulphur compounds; methionine  1  293060  Organo-sulphur compounds; 2-(N,N- Diethylamino)ethanethiol  1  293070  Organo-sulphur compounds; bis(2- hydroxyethyl)sulfide (thiodiglycol (INN))  1  293080  Organo-sulphur compounds; aldicarb (ISO), captafol (ISO) and methamidophos (ISO)  1     293090    Organo-sulphur compounds; n.e.s. in heading no. 2930     1  293110  Organo-inorganic compounds; tetramethyl lead and tetraethyl lead  1  293120  Organo-inorganic compounds; tributyltin compounds  1  293131  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, dimethyl methylphosphonate  1  293132  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, dimethyl propylphosphonate  1  293133  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, diethyl ethylphosphonate  1   293134  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, sodium-3-(hydroxysilyl)propyl methylphosphonate   1   293135  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, 2,4,6-tripropyl-1,3,5,2,4,6- trioxatriphosphinane 2,4,6-trioxide   1   293136  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, (5-ethyl-2-methyl-2-oxido-1,3,2- dioxaphosphinan-5-yl)methyl methyl methylphosphonate   1   293137  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, bis[(5-Ethyl-2-methyl-2-oxido-1,3,2- dioxaphosphinan-5-yl)methyl methyl methylphosphonate]   1   293138  Organo-inorganic compounds; organo-phosphorus derivatives, salt of methylphosphonic acid and (aminoiminomethyl)urea (1 : 1)   1  293139  Organo-inorganic compounds; other organo- phosphorus derivatives, n.e.c. in heading no. 2931  1  Code    Dismantlemen   293190   Organo-inorganic compounds; other than tetramethyl lead, tetraethyl lead, and tributyltin compounds    1   293211  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, tetrahydrofuran   1   293212  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, 2-furaldehyde (furfuraldehyde)   1   293213  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, furfuryl alcohol and tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol   1   293214  Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, sucralose   1    293219   Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, n.e.s. in item no. 2932.10    1   293220  Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, lactones   1   293291  Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, (other than lactones or compounds containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure), isosafrole   1    293292  Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, (other than lactones or compounds containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure), 1-(1,3- benzodiaxol-5-yl) propan-2-one    1   293293  Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, (other than lactones or compounds containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure), piperonal   1   293294  Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, (other than lactones or compounds containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure), safrole   1    293295  Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, (other than lactones or compounds containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure), tetrahydrocannabinols (all isomers)    1      293299   Heterocyclic compounds; with oxygen hetero- atom(s) only, (other than lactones or compounds containing an unfused furan ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure), n.e.s. in item no. 2932.9      1   293311  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused pyrazole ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, phenazone (antipyrin) and its   1   293319  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused pyrazole ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, other than those of item no. 2933.11   1  Code    Dismantlemen  293321  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused imidazole ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, hydantoin and its derivatives   1    293329  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused imidazole ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, other than hydantoin and its derivatives    1   293331  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused pyridine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, pyridine and its salts   1   293332  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused pyridine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, piperidine and its salts   1      293333    Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused pyridine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, other than pyridine and its salts, other than piperidine and its salts      1        293339       Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused pyridine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, other than pyridine and its salts        1   293341  Heterocyclic compounds; containing a quinoline or isoquinoline ring-system (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, not further fused, levorphanol (INN) and its salts   1    293349   Heterocyclic compounds; containing a quinoline or isoquinoline ring-system (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, not further fused, other than levorphanol (INN) and its salts    1   293352  Heterocyclic compounds; containing a pyrimidine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) or piperazine ring in the structure, malonylurea (barbituric acid) and its derivatives; salts thereof   1    293353  Allobarbital (INN), amobarbital (INN), barbital (INN), butalbital (INN), butobarbital, cyclobarbital (INN), methylphenobarbital (INN), pentobarbital (INN), phenobarbital (INN), secbutabarbital (INN), secobarbital (INN), and vinylbital and salts thereof    1   293354  Heterocyclic compounds; containing a pyrimidine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) or piperazine ring in the structure, derivatives of malonylurea (barbituric acid) and salts thereof, n.e.c. in 2933.5   1    293355  Heterocyclic compounds; containing a pyrimidine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) or piperazine ring in the structure; loprazolam (INN), mecloqualone (INN), methaqualone (INN), and zipeprol (INN); salts thereof    1  Code    Dismantlemen      293359      Heterocyclic compounds; containing a pyrimidine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) or piperazine ring in the structure, nucleic acids and their salts, excluding malonylurea       1   293361  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused triazine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, melamine   1   293369  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused triazine ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure, others excluding melamine   1  293371  Heterocyclic compounds; lactams; 6-hexanelactam (epsilon-caprolactam)  1  293372  Heterocyclic compounds; lactams; clobazam (INN) and methyprylon (INN)  1   293379   Heterocyclic compounds; lactams; other than 6- hexanelactam (epsilon caprolactam)   1       293391      Heterocyclic compounds; n.e.c. in headings no. 2933.1, 2933.2, 2933.3, 2933.4, 2933.5, 2933.6, 2933.7       1  293392  Heterocyclic compounds; azinphos-methyl (ISO)  1             293399            Heterocyclic compounds; n.e.c. in headings no. 2933             1   293410  Heterocyclic compounds; containing an unfused thiazole ring (whether or not hydrogenated) in the structure   1   293420  Heterocyclic compounds; containing a benzothiazole ring-system (whether or not hydrogenated), not further fused   1  Code    Dismantlemen  293430  Heterocyclic compounds; containing a phenothiazine ring-system (whether or not hydrogenated), not further fused   1    293491   Other heterocyclic compounds, n.e.s. in 2934.1, 2934.2 and 2934.3    1          293499         Nucleic acids and their salts, other heterocyclic compounds, n.e.c. in heading number 2934          1  293510  Sulphonamides; N-methylperfluorooctane sulphonamide  1  293520  Sulphonamides; N-ethylperfluorooctane sulphonamide  1  293530  Sulphonamides; N-ethyl-N-(2-hydroxyethyl) perfluorooctane sulphonamide  1  293540  Sulphonamides;   N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-N- methylperfluorooctane  sulphonamide  1     293550    Sulphonamides; other perfluorooctane sulphonamides     1  293590  Sulphonamides; n.e.c. in heading no. 2935  1  293621  Vitamins; vitamins A and their derivatives, unmixed  1  293622  Vitamins; vitamin B1 and its derivatives, unmixed  1  293623  Vitamins; vitamin B2 and its derivatives, unmixed  1  293624  Vitamins; D- or DL-pantothenic acid (vitamin B3 or vitamin B5) and its derivatives, unmixed  1  293625  Vitamins; vitamin B6 and its derivatives, unmixed  1  293626  Vitamins; vitamin B12 and its derivatives, unmixed  1  293627  Vitamins; vitamin C and its derivatives, unmixed  1  293628  Vitamins; vitamin E and its derivatives, unmixed  1   293629   Vitamins; n.e.s. in item no. 2936.2, and their derivatives, unmixed   1   293690  Vitamins; n.e.s. in heading no. 2936, including natural concentrates   1   293711  Polypeptide hormones, protein hormones and glycoprotein hormones, their derivatives and structural analogues; somatotropin, its derivatives and structural analogues   1  Code    Dismantlemen  293712  Polypeptide hormones, protein hormones and glycoprotein hormones, their derivatives and structural analogues; insulin and its salts   1    293719  Polypeptide hormones, protein hormones and glycoprotein hormones, their derivatives and structural analogues; other than somatotropin, (its derivatives and structural anaologues) and insulin and its salts    1   293721  Hormones; cortisone, hydrocortisone, prednisone (dehydrocortisone) and prednisolone (dehydrohydrocortisone)   1  293722  Hormones; halogenated derivatives or adrenal cortical hormones  1  293723  Steroidal hormones, their derivatives and structural analogues; oestrogens and progestogens  1     293729    Hormones; adrenal cortical hormones and their derivatives, n.e.s. in item no. 2937.2     1   293750  Prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes, their derivatives and structural analogues   1      293790   Hormones, prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes, natural or reproduced by synthesis; derivatives and structural analogues therof, including chain modified polypeptides, used primarily as hormones, n.e.c. in 2937      1  293810  Glycosides; rutoside (rutin) and its derivatives  1   293890  Glycosides; natural or reproduced by synthesis, other than rutoside (rutin) and its derivatives   1     293911    Alkaloids, vegetable; of opium and their derivatives; salts thereof     1      293919     Alkaloids, vegetable; of opium and their derivatives; other than in 2939.11, salts thereof      1  293920  Alkaloids, vegetable; of cinchona and their derivatives; salts thereof  1  293930  Alkaloids, vegetable; caffeine and its salts  1  293941  Alkaloids, vegetable; ephedrine and its salts  1  293942  Alkaloids, vegetable; pseudoephedrine (INN) and its salts  1   293943  Alkaloids, vegetable; ephedrines and their salts, other than ephedrine and its salts and other than pseudoephedrine (INN) and its salts   1  293944  Alkaloids, vegetable; norephedrine and its salts  1   293949  Alkaloids, vegetable; ephedrines and their salts, other than ephedrine and its salts and other than pseudoephedrine (INN) and its salts   1   293951  Alkaloids vegetable; theophylline and aminophylline (theophylline-ethylenediamine) and their derivatives; salts thereof, fenetylline (INN) and its salts   1  Code    Dismantlemen  293959  Alkaloids vegetable; theophylline and aminophylline (theophylline-ethylenediamine) and their derivatives; salts thereof, other than fenetylline   1  293961  Alkaloids, vegetable; of rye ergot and their derivatives, ergometrine (INN) and its salts  1  293962  Alkaloids, vegetable; of rye ergot and their derivatives, ergotamine (INN) and its salts  1  293963  Alkaloids, vegetable; of rye ergot and their derivatives, lysergic acid and its salts  1   293969  Alkaloids, vegetable; of rye ergot and their derivatives, salts thereof, n.e.s. in item no. 2939.6   1   293971  Alkaloids; of vegetal origin, cocaine, ecgonine, levometamfetamine, metamfetamine (INN), metamfetamine racemate; salts, esters and other derivatives thereof   1       293979     Alkaloids; of vegetal origin, other than cocaine, ecgonine, levometamfetamine, metamfetamine (INN), metamfetamine racemate; salts, esters and other derivatives; n.e.c. in heading no. 2939       1   293980  Alkaloids; natural or reproduced by synthesis, and their salts, esters and other derivatives n.e.c. in heading no. 2939   1     294000   Sugars; chemically pure, other than sucrose, lactose, maltose, glucose and fructose; sugar ethers and sugar esters, and their salts, other than products of heading no. 2937, 2938 or 2939     1  294110  Antibiotics; penicillins and their derivatives with a penicillanic acid structure; salts thereof  1  294120  Antibiotics; streptomycins and their derivatives; salts thereof  1  294130  Antibiotics; tetracyclines and their derivatives; salts thereof  1  294140  Antibiotics; chloramphenicol and its derivatives; salts thereof  1  294150  Antibiotics; erythromycin and its derivatives; salts thereof  1    294190    Antibiotics; n.e.s. in heading no. 2941    1  294200  Organic compounds; n.e.s. in chapter 29  1  300120  Glands; extracts of glands, other organs or of their secretions, for organo-therapeutic uses  1    300190  Glands; heparin and its salts; other human or animal substances prepared for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, not elsewhere specified or included    1   300211  Blood, human or animal, antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products; malaria diagnostic test kits   1   300212  Blood, human or animal, antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products; antisera and other blood fractions   1  Code    Dismantlemen   300213  Blood, human or animal, antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products; immunological products, unmixed, not put up in measured doses or in forms or packings for retail sale    1    300214  Blood, human or animal, antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products; immunological products, mixed, put up in measured doses or in forms or packings for retail sale    1   300215  Blood, human or animal, antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products; immunological products, put up in measured doses or in forms or packings for retail sale   1   300219  Blood, human or animal, antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products; n.e.c. in heading 3002.1   1  300220  Vaccines; for human medicine  1  300230  Vaccines; for veterinary medicine  1   300290   Toxins, cultures of micro-organisms (excluding yeasts) and similar products   1    300310  Medicaments; containing penicillins, streptomycins or their derivatives, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not in measured doses, not packaged for retail sale)    1     300320   Medicaments; containing antibiotics other than penicillins, streptomycins and their derivatives, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not in measured doses, not packaged for retail sale)     1   300331  Medicaments; containing insulin (but not containing antibiotics), for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, not packaged for retail sale   1    300339  Medicaments; containing hormones (excluding insulin), (but not containing antibiotics), for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, not packaged for retail sale    1   300341  Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives, containing ephedrine or its salts, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not packaged for retail sale)   1    300342  Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives, containing pseudoephedrine (INN) or its salts, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not packaged for retail sale)    1    300343  Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives, containing norephedrine or its salts, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not packaged for retail sale)    1     300349   Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives; other than ephedrine, pseudoephedrine (INN) or norephedrine or their salts; for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not packaged for retail sale)     1  Code    Dismantlemen      300360      Medicaments; containing antimalarial active principles described in subheading note 2 to this chapter, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not packaged for retail sale)       1      300390    Medicaments; (not containing antibiotics, hormones, alkaloids or their derivatives), for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, (not packaged for retail sale)      1     300410   Medicaments; containing penicillins, streptomycins or their derivatives, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale     1     300420   Medicaments; containing antibiotics (other than penicillins, streptomycins or their derivatives), for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale     1   300431  Medicaments; containing insulin (but not containing antibiotics), for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale   1    300432   Medicaments; containing adrenal cortex hormones (but not containing antibiotics), for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale    1     300439   Medicaments; containing hormones (but not insulin), adrenal cortex hormones or antibiotics, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale     1    300441  Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives, containing ephedrine or its salts, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale    1     300442   Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives, containing pseudoephedrine (INN) or its salts, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale     1    300443   Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives, containing norephedrine or its salts, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale    1  Code    Dismantlemen     300449   Medicaments; containing alkaloids or their derivatives; other than ephedrine, pseudoephedrine (INN) or norephedrine or their salts; for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale      1      300450    Medicaments; containing vitamins or their derivatives, for therapeutic or prophylactic use, packaged for retail sale      1         300460       Medicaments; containing antimalarial active principles described in Subheading Note 2 to this Chapter, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale         1      300490    Medicaments; consisting of mixed or unmixed products n.e.s. in heading no. 3004, for therapeutic or prophylactic uses, packaged for retail sale      1    300510   Dressings, adhesive; and other articles having an adhesive layer, packed for retail sale for medical, surgical, dental or veterinary purposes    1     300590   Wadding, gauze, bandages and similar articles; (excluding adhesive dressings), impregnated or coated with pharmaceutical substances, packaged for retail sale     1      300610    Pharmaceutical goods; sterile surgical catgut, suture materials, tissue adhesives, laminaria, laminaria tents and absorbable surgical or dental haemostatics      1  300620  Pharmaceutical goods; blood-grouping reagents  1   300630  Pharmaceutical goods; opacifying preparations for x-ray examinations, diagnostic reagents designed to be administered to the patient   1  300640  Pharmaceutical goods; dental cements and other dental fillings, bone reconstruction cements  1  Code    Dismantlemen 300650  Pharmaceutical goods; first aid boxes and kits  1   300660   Pharmaceutical goods; chemical contraceptive preparations based on hormones or spermicides   1     300670  Pharmaceutical goods; Gel preparations designed to be used in human or veterinary medicine as a lubricant for parts of the body for surgical operations or physical examinations or as a coupling agent between the body and medical instruments     1  300691  Pharmaceutical goods; appliances identifiable for ostomy use  5  300692  Pharmaceutical goods; waste pharmaceuticals  1     310100   Fertilizers, animal or vegetable; whether or not mixed together or chemically treated; fertilizers, produced by the mixing or chemical treatment of animal or vegetable products     1   310210  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, urea, whether or not in aqueous solution   1   310221  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, ammonium sulphate   1   310229   Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, other than ammonium sulphate   1   310230  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, ammonium nitrate, whether or not in aqueous solution   1    310240   Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; ammonium nitrate with calcium carbonate or other inorganic non- fertilizing substances, mixtures thereof    1   310250  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, sodium nitrate   1   310260  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, double salts and mixtures of calcium nitrate and ammonium nitrate   1   310280  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, mixtures of urea and ammonium nitrate in aqueous or ammoniacal solution   1      310290    Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; nitrogenous, other kinds including mixtures not specified in the foregoing subheadings      1   310311  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; phosphatic, superphosphates, containing by weight 35% or more of diphosphorus pentaoxide (P2O5)   1    310319   Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; phosphatic, superphosphates, other than containing by weight 35% or more of diphosphorus pentaoxide (P2O5)    1  Code    Dismantlemen  310390   Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; phosphatic, n.e.s. in heading no. 3103   1   310420   Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; potassic, potassium chloride   1   310430  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; potassic, potassium sulphate   1     310490     Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; potassic, n.e.s. in heading no. 3104     1   310510  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; in tablets or similar forms or in packages of a gross weight not exceeding 10kg   1   310520  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; containing the three fertilizing elements nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium   1   310530  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; diammonium hydrogenorthophosphate (diammonium phosphate)   1     310540  Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; ammonium dihydrogenorthophosphate (monoammonium phosphate) and mixtures thereof with diammonium hydrogenorthophosphate (diammonium phosphate)     1     310551     Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; containing nitrates and phosphates     1      310559    Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; containing the two fertilizing elements nitrogen and phosphorus, other than nitrates and phosphates      1   310560   Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; containing the two fertilizing elements phosphorus and potassium   1     310590     Fertilizers, mineral or chemical; n.e.s. in heading no. 3105     1  320110  Tanning extracts of vegetable origin; quebracho extract  1  320120  Tanning extracts of vegetable origin; wattle extract  1  Code    Dismantlemen   320190   Tanning extracts of vegetable origin; tannins and their salts, ethers, esters and other derivatives, n.e.s. in heading no. 3201    1  320210  Tanning substances; synthetic organic tanning substances  1   320290  Tanning substances; inorganic tanning substances; tanning preparations, whether or not containing natural tanning substances; enzymatic preparations for pre- tanning   1      320300   Colouring matter of vegetable or animal origin, including dyeing extracts not animal black, whether or not chemically defined; preparations based on colouring matter of vegetable or animal origin      1     320411     Dyes; disperse dyes and preparations based thereon     1      320412    Dyes; acid, whether or not premetallised and preparations based thereon, mordant dyes and preparations based thereon      1     320413     Dyes; basic dyes and preparations based thereon     1     320414     Dyes; direct dyes and preparations based thereon     1      320415     Dyes; vat dyes (including those usable in that state as pigments) and preparations based thereon      1     320416     Dyes; reactive dyes and preparations based thereon     1  Code    Dismantlemen    320417     Dyes; pigments and preparations based thereon     1      320419    Dyes; n.e.s., including mixtures of colouring matter of two or more of those from item no. 3204.11 to 3204.19      1   320420  Dyes; synthetic organic products of a kind used as fluorescent brightening agents   1   320490  Dyes; synthetic organic products n.e.s. in heading no. 3204 (eg of a kind used as luminophores), whether or not chemically defined   1     320500     Colour lakes; preparations based on colour lakes as specified in note 3 to this chapter     2     320611   Colouring matter; pigments and preparations based on titanium dioxide, containing 80% or more by weight of titanium dioxide calculated on the dry weight     2     320619   Colouring matter; pigments and preparations based on titanium dioxide, containing less than 80% by weight of titanium dioxide calculated on the dry weight     2     320620    Colouring matter; pigments and preparations based on chromium compounds     2    320641   Colouring matter; ultramarine and preparations based thereon    2     320642    Colouring matter; lithopone and other pigments and preparations based on zinc sulphide     2      320649     Colouring matter; other preparations n.e.s. in item no. 3206.4      2  Code    Dismantlemen 320650  Colouring matter; inorganic products of a kind used as luminophores  2   320710  Pigments; prepared pigments, opacifiers, colours and similar preparations   2  320720  Enamels and glazes; vitrifiable enamels and glazes, engobes (slips) and similar preparations  2  320730  Lustres; liquid lustres and similar preparations  2  320740  Glass; glass frit and other glass, in the form of powder, granules or flakes  2    320810   Paints and varnishes; based on polyesters, dispersed or dissolved in a non-aqueous medium    5     320820   Paints and varnishes; based on acrylic or vinyl polymers, dispersed or dissolved in a non-aqueous medium     5      320890    Paints and varnishes; based on polymers n.e.s. in heading no. 3208, dispersed or dissolved in a non- aqueous medium      5   320910  Paints and varnishes; based on acrylic or vinyl polymers, dispersed or dissolved in an aqueous medium   5   320990  Paints and varnishes; (based on polymers other than acrylic or vinyl), dispersed or dissolved in an aqueous medium   5   321000  Paints and varnishes; (including enamels, lacquers and distempers), prepared water pigments of a kind used for finishing leather   5  321100  Driers; prepared  1  321210  Pigments; of a kind used in the manufacture of paints, stamping foils  1     321290    Pigments; of a kind used in the manufacture of paints, other than stamping foils     2    321310   Colours; in sets, of a kind used by artists, students or signboard painters    2    321390   Colours; (other than in sets), of a kind used by artists, students or signboard painters    2  321410  Mastics; painters' fillings  3  321490  Mastics; n.e.s. in heading no. 3214  3  321511  Ink; for printing, black, whether or not concentrated or solid  1  321519  Ink; for printing, other than black, whether or not concentrated or solid  2  Code    Dismantlemen  321590  Ink; writing, drawing and other inks, n.e.s. in heading no. 3215, whether or not concentrated or solid   3   330112  Oils, essential; of orange (terpeneless or not), including concretes and absolutes   2  330113  Oils, essential; of lemon (terpeneless or not), including concretes and absolutes  2   330119  Oils, essential; of citrus fruits n.e.s. in heading no. 3301 (terpeneless or not), including concretes and absolutes   2   330124  Oils, essential; of peppermint (mentha piperita), terpeneless or not, including concretes and absolutes   2   330125  Oils, essential; of mints (excluding peppermint), terpeneless or not, including concretes and absolutes   2   330129  Oils, essential; n.e.s. in heading no. 3301 (terpeneless or not), including concretes and absolutes   2  330130  Resinoids  2     330190    Oils, essential; concentrates in fats, fixed oils, waxes and the like, terpenic by-products, aqueous distillates and solutions     2    330210   Odoriferous substances and mixtures; of a kind used in the food or drink industries    2     330290   Odoriferous substances and mixtures; used as raw materials in industries other than the food or drink industries     3   330300   Perfumes and toilet waters   5  330410  Cosmetic and toilet preparations; lip make-up  5  330420  Cosmetic and toilet preparations; eye make-up  5  330430  Cosmetic and toilet preparations; manicure or pedicure preparations  5   330491  Cosmetic and toilet preparations; powders, whether or not compressed (excluding lip, eye, manicure or pedicure preparations)   5     330499   Cosmetic and toilet preparations; n.e.s. in heading no. 3304, for the care of the skin (excluding medicaments, including sunscreen or sun tan preparations)     5  330510  Hair preparations; shampoos  5  330520  Hair preparations; for permanent waving or straightening  5  330530  Hair preparations; lacquers  5   330590   Hair preparations; n.e.s. in heading no. 3305   5  330610  Oral or dental hygiene preparations; dentifrices  5  330620  Oral or dental hygiene preparations; yarn used to clean between the teeth (dental floss)  1  Code    Dismantlemen  330690   Oral or dental hygiene preparations; other than dentifrices   5  330710  Perfumery, cosmetic or toilet preparations; pre- shave, shaving or after-shave preparations  5  330720  Perfumery, cosmetic or toilet preparations; personal deodorants and antiperspirants  5  330730  Perfumery, cosmetic or toilet preparations; perfumed bath salts and other bath preparations  5    330741  Perfumes and deodorizors; perfuming or deodorizing preparations for rooms, "agarbatti" and other odoriferous preparations which operate by burning (including those used during religious rites)    5   330749  Perfumes and deodorizors; perfuming or deodorizing preparations for rooms, (excluding those which operate by burning)   5  330790  Perfumes and deodorizors; perfuming or deodorizing preparations n.e.s. in heading no.  5    340111  Soap and organic surface-active products; in the form of bars, cakes, moulded shapes, and paper, wadding, felt and nonwovens, impregnated, coated or covered with soap or detergent, for toilet use (including medicated products)    5    340119  Soap and organic surface-active products; in the form of bars, cakes, moulded shapes, and paper, wadding, felt and nonwovens, impregnated, coated or covered with soap or detergent, not for toilet use    5  340120  Soap; in forms n.e.s. in item no. 3401.11  5   340130  Organic surface-active products and preparations for washing the skin, in the form of liquid or cream and put up for retail sale, whether or not containing soap   5  340211  Organic surface-active agents; anionic (other than soap), whether or not put up for retail sale  5  340212  Organic surface-active agents; cationic (other than soap), whether or not put up for retail sale  5  340213  Organic surface-active agents; non-ionic (other than soap), whether or not put up for retail sale  5   340219  Organic surface-active agents; whether or not put up for retail sale, n.e.s. in heading no. 3402   5      340220    Washing and cleaning preparations; surface-active, whether or not containing soap (excluding those of heading no. 3401), put up for retail sale      5      340290    Washing and cleaning preparations; surface-active, whether or not containing soap (excluding those of heading no. 3401), including auxiliary washing preparations, not for retail sale      5  Code    Dismantlemen   340311   Lubricating preparations; for the treatment of textile and similar materials (leather, furskins etc), containing less than 70% (by weight) of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals    2      340319    Lubricating preparations; (other than for the treatment of textile and similar materials), containing less than 70% (by weight) of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals      2   340391  Lubricating preparations; for the treatment of textile and similar materials (leather, furskins etc), (not containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals)   2      340399    Lubricating preparations; other than for the treatment of textile and similar materials, not containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals      2  340420  Waxes; artificial and prepared, of polyethylene glycol  3  340490  Waxes; artificial and prepared, other than of chemically modified lignite or polyethylene glycol  3     340510   Polishes, creams and similar preparations; for footwear or leather, excluding waxes of heading no. 3404     5     340520    Polishes, creams and similar preparations; for the maintenance of wooden furniture, floors or other woodwork, excluding waxes of heading no. 3404     5     340530   Polishes, creams and similar preparations; for coachwork, other than metal polishes, excluding waxes of heading no. 3404     5   340540  Scouring pastes and powders and other scouring preparations; (whether or not in the form of paper, wadding, felt, nonwovens, cellular plastics, cellular rubber, impregnated, coated or covered)   5   340590  Polishes, creams and similar preparations; n.e.s. in heading no. 3405, excluding waxes of heading no. 3404   5  340600  Candles, tapers and the like  5     340700   Modelling pastes; preparations known as "dental wax", put up in sets, in packings for retail sale or in plates, horseshoe shapes, sticks or similar forms, other preparations for use in dentistry     3  350110  Casein  3  Code    Dismantlemen   350190   Caseinates and other casein derivatives; casein glues    3  350211  Albumins; egg albumin, dried  3  350219  Albumins; egg albumin, not dried  3   350220   Albumins; milk albumin, including concentrates of two or more whey proteins   3     350290     Albuminates and other albumin derivatives (excluding egg albumin)     3     350300   Gelatin (including gelatin in rectangular sheets, whether or not surface-worked or coloured) and gelatin derivatives; isinglass; other glues of animal origin, excluding casein glues of heading no. 3501     3    350400   Peptones and their derivatives; other protein substances and their derivatives n.e.s. or included, hide powder, whether or not chromed    3  350510  Dextrins and other modified starches  3   350520   Glues; based on starches, or on dextrins or other modified starches   3   350610  Glues or adhesives; prepared, products suitable for use as glues or adhesives, put up for retail sale as glues or adhesives, not exceeding a net weight of 1kg   3   350691   Adhesives; prepared, based on rubber or plastics (including artificial resins)   3   350699  Glues and other adhesives; prepared, n.e.s. in heading no. 3506, not exceeding a net weight of 1kg   3  350710  Enzymes; rennet and concentrates thereof  2  350790  Enzymes and prepared enzymes; other than rennet and concentrates thereof  2  360100  Explosives; propellent powders  2  360200  Explosives, prepared; other than propellent powders  2   360300  Fuses and detonators; safety or detonating fuses, percussion or detonating caps, igniters, electric detonators   2  360410  Pyrotechnic products; fireworks  3   360490  Pyrotechnic products; signalling flares, rain rockets, fog signals and other pyrotechnic articles (excluding fireworks)   3  360500  Matches; other than pyrotechnic articles of heading no. 3604  5  Code    Dismantlemen  360610  Fuels; liquid or liquefied-gas, in containers, of a kind used for filling or refilling cigarette or similar lighters, (of a capacity not exceeding 300cm3)   3      360690    Ferro-cerium and other pyrophoric alloys in all forms; articles of combustible materials n.e.s. in chapter 36      3   370110  Photographic plates and film; for x-ray, in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, of any material other than paper, paperboard or textiles   1   370120  Photographic plates and film; instant print film, in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, whether or not in packs   3   370130  Photographic plates and film; in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, with any side exceeding 225mm, of any materials other than paper,   1     370191   Photographic plates and film; for colour photography (polychrome), in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, with no side exceeding 255mm, of any material other than paper, paperboard or textiles     3     370199   Photographic plates and film; (for other than colour photography), in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, with no side exceeding 255mm, of any material other than paper, paperboard or textiles     1   370210  Photographic film; for x-rays, in rolls, sensitised and unexposed   1    370231  Photographic film; for colour photography (polychrome), in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, without sprocket holes, of a width not exceeding 105mm    3     370232    Photographic film; in rolls, with silver halide emulsion, sensitised, unexposed, without sprocket holes, of a width not exceeding 105mm     3     370239   Photographic film; in rolls, (other than with silver halide emulsion and for colour photography), sensitised, unexposed, without sprocket holes, of a width not exceeding 105mm     3     370241   Photographic film; for colour photography (polychrome), in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, without sprocket holes, of a width exceeding 610mm and of a length exceeding 200m     3  Code    Dismantlemen   370242   Photographic film; in rolls, (other than for colour photography), sensitised, unexposed, without sprocket holes, of a width exceeding 610mm and of a length exceeding 200m    3    370243   Photographic film; in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, without sprocket holes, of a width exceeding 610mm and of a length not exceeding 200m    1    370244   Photographic film; in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, without sprocket holes, of a width exceeding 105mm but not exceeding 610mm    1    370252  Photographic film; for colour photography (polychrome), in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width not exceeding 16mm and of a length exceeding 14m    3   370253  Photographic film; for colour photography (polychrome) slides, in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width exceeding 16mm but not exceeding 35mm and of a length not exceeding   3     370254   Photographic film; for colour photography (polychrome), in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width exceeding 16mm but not 35mm and of a length not exceeding 30m, excluding film for slides     3     370255   Photographic film; for colour photography (polychrome), in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width exceeding 16mm but not 35mm and of a length exceeding 30m     3    370256   Photographic film; for colour photography (polychrome), in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width exceeding 35mm    3    370296  Photographic film; other than for colour photography, in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width not exceeding 35mm and of a length not exceeding 30m (other than of paper, paperboard or textiles)    1    370297  Photographic film; other than for colour photography, in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width not exceeding 35mm and of a length exceeding 30m (other than paper, paperboard or textiles)    1    370298  Photographic film; other than for colour photography, in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width exceeding 35mm (other than of paper, paperboard or textiles)    1   370310  Photographic paper, paperboard and textiles; in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of a width exceeding 610mm   1   370320  Photographic paper, paperboard and textiles; for colour photography (polychrome), (other than in rolls of a width exceeding 610mm), sensitised, unexposed   3  Code    Dismantlemen  370390  Photographic paper, paperboard and textiles; (for other than colour photography, other than in rolls of a width exceeding 610mm), sensitised, unexposed   3  370400  Photographic plates, film, paper, paperboard and textiles; exposed but not developed  3    370500   Photographic plates and film; exposed and developed, other than cinematographic film    1   370610  Cinematographic film; exposed and developed, whether or not incorporating sound track or consisting only of sound track, of a width of 35cm or more   1   370690  Cinematographic film; exposed and developed, whether or not incorporating a sound track or consisting only of sound track, of a width less than 35mm   1   370710  Photographic goods; sensitised emulsions, put up in measured portions or put up for retail sale in a form ready for use   1      370790    Photographic goods; chemical preparations other than sensitised emulsions, put up in measured portions or put up for retail sale in a form ready for use      1   380110   Graphite; artificial   2  380120  Graphite; colloidal or semi-colloidal  1  380130  Carbonaceous pastes; for electrodes and similar pastes for furnace linings  1    380190   Graphite or other carbon based preparations; in the form of pastes, blocks, plates or other semi- manufactures    1   380210   Carbon; activated   1    380290   Chemical products; activated natural mineral products, animal black, including spent animal black    1  380300  Chemical products; tall oil, whether or not refined  1    380400  Lyes, residual; from the manufacture of wood pulp, whether or not concentrated, desugared or chemically treated, including lignin sulphonates but excluding tall oil of heading no. 3803    1  380510  Terpenic oils; gum, wood or sulphate turpentine oils  1    380590  Terpenic oils; produced by the treatment of coniferous woods, crude dipentene, sulphite turpentine and other crude para-cymene, n.e.s. in heading no. 3805    1  380610  Rosin and resin acids  1  Code    Dismantlemen  380620   Rosin; salts of rosin or of resin acids   1  380630  Ester gums  1     380690     Rosin; spirit and oils, n.e.s. in heading no. 3806     1   380700  Wood tar; wood tar oils; wood creosote; wood naphtha; vegetable pitch; brewers' pitch and similar preparations based on rosin, resin acids or on vegetable pitch   1   380852  Insecticides and the like; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter; for retail sale or as preparations or articles; DDT (ISO) (clofenotane (INN)), in packings of 300g or less   1               380859            Insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, disinfectants, herbicides and the like; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter; not DDT (ISO) (clofenotane (INN)), put up in forms or packings for retail sale or as preparations or articles               5      380861    Insecticides and the like; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 2 to this Chapter; in packings of a net weight content not exceeding 300g; for retail sale or as preparations or articles      5      380862   Insecticides; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 2 to this Chapter; put up in forms or packings for retail sale or as preparations or articles, in packings of a net weight content exceeding 300g but not exceeding 7.5kg      5      380869   Insecticides; containing goods named in Subheading Note 2 to this Chapter, put up in forms or packings for retail sale or as preparations or articles, in packings of a net weight content exceeding 7.5kg      5  Code    Dismantlemen  380891  Insecticides; not containing substances of 3808.50; put up in forms or packings for retail sale or as preparations or articles   5   380892  Fungicides; not containing substances of 3808.50; put up in forms or packings for retail sale or as preparations or articles   1    380893  Herbicides, anti-sprouting products and plant- growth regulators; not containing substances of 3808.50; put up in forms or packings for retail sale or as preparations or articles    1   380894  Disinfectants and similar products; not containing substances of 3808.50; in forms, packings or articles for retail sale   1     380899   Rodenticides and similar products; not containing substances of 3808.50; n.e.c. in heading no. 3808.9, in forms, packings or articles for retail sale     1     380910   Finishing agents and dye carriers; to accelerate dyeing or fixing of dye-stuffs, other products and preparations, used in textile, paper, leather etc industries, with basis of amylaceous substances, n.e.s.     3     380991   Finishing agents and dye carriers; to accelerate dyeing or fixing of dye-stuffs, other products and preparations, used in the textile industry (excluding those with a basis of amylaceous substances)     1     380992   Finishing agents and dye carriers; to accelerate dyeing or fixing of dye-stuffs, other products and preparations, used in the paper industry (excluding those with a basis of amylaceous substances)     1     380993   Finishing agents and dye carriers; to accelerate dyeing or fixing of dye-stuffs, other products and preparations, used in the leather or like (excluding paper and textile) industries, (excluding those with a basis of amylaceous substances)     1   381010  Pickling preparations for metal surfaces; soldering, brazing or welding powders and pastes consisting of metal and other materials   1      381090    Fluxes and other auxiliary preparations; for soldering, brazing or welding, or preparations used as cores or coatings for welding electrodes or rods      1  381111  Anti-knock preparations; based on lead compounds  1  381119  Anti-knock preparations; other than those based on lead compounds  1  Code    Dismantlemen 381121  Lubricating oil additives; containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals  2  381129  Lubricating oil additives; not containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals  2     381190   Oxidation and gum inhibitors, viscosity improvers, anti-corrosive preparations, other prepared additives for mineral oils or liquids used as mineral oils (including gasoline), n.e.s. in heading no. 3811     2  381210  Rubber accelerators; prepared  1  381220  Plasticisers, compound; for rubber or plastics  1   381231  Anti-oxidising preparations and other compound stabilisers; for rubber or plastics, mixtures of oligomers of 2,2,4-trimethyl-1,2-dihydroquinoline (TMQ)   1   381239  Anti-oxidising preparations and other compound stabilisers; for rubber or plastics, other than mixtures of oligomers of 2,2,4-trimethyl-1,2- dihydroquinoline (TMQ)   1    381300    Fire-extinguishers; preparations and charges and charged fire-extinguishing grenades    1   381400  Solvents and thinners; organic composite solvents and thinners, n.e.s. or included, prepared paint or varnish removers   2   381511  Catalysts, supported; reaction initiators, reaction accelerators and catalytic preparations, with nickel or nickel compounds as the active substance, n.e.s. or included   1   381512  Catalysts, supported; reaction initiators, reaction accelerators and catalytic preparations, with precious metal or precious metal compounds as the active substance, n.e.s. or included   1   381519  Catalysts, supported; reaction initiators, reaction accelerators and catalytic preparations, with an active substance other than nickel or precious metals or their compounds, n.e.s. or included   1   381590  Reaction initiators, reaction accelerators and catalytic preparations, unsupported, n.e.s. or included   1   381600  Refractory cements, mortars, concretes and similar compositions; other than products of heading no. 3801   2   381700  Mixed alkylbenzenes and mixed alkylnaphthalenes, other than those of heading no. 2707 or 2902   1      381800    Chemical elements; doped for use in electronics, in the form of discs, wafers or similar forms; chemical compounds doped for use in electronics      1   381900  Hydraulic fluids; for brakes and other prepared liquids for hydraulic transmission, not containing or containing less than 70% by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous   3  Code    Dismantlemen  382000   Anti-freezing preparations and prepared de-icing fluids   1   382100   Culture media, prepared; for development of micro-organisms   1       382200      Reagents; composite diagnostic or laboratory reagents, other than those of heading no. 3002 or 3006       1  382311  Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids, acid oils from refining; stearic acid  3  382312  Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids, acid oils from refining; oleic acid  3  382313  Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids, acid oils from refining; tall oil fatty acids  3   382319  Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids; acid oils from refining; (other than stearic acid, oleic acid or tall oil fatty acids)   3  382370  Industrial fatty alcohols  3  382410  Binders, prepared; for foundry moulds or cores  1  382430  Metal carbides, non-agglomerated; mixed together or with metallic binders  1  382440  Cements, mortars or concretes; their prepared additives  1  382450  Mortars and concretes; non-refractory  1  382460  Sorbitol; other than that of subheading no.  3    382471  Mixed gases; containing perhalogenated derivatives of acyclic hydrocarbons containing two or more different halogens, containing acyclic hydrocarbons perhalogenated only with fluorine and chlorine    1    382472  Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane or propane; containing bromochlorodifluoromethane, bromotrifluoromethane or dibromotetrafluoroethanes    1   382473  Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane or propane; containing hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs)   1     382474  Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane or propane; containing hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), whether or not containing perfluorocarbons (PFCs) or hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), but not containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)     1   382475  Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane or propane; containing carbon tetrachloride   1   382476  Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane or propane; containing 1,1,1- trichloroethane (methyl chloroform)   1   382477  Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane or propane; containing bromomethane (methyl bromide) or bromochloromethane   1  Code    Dismantlemen   382478  Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane or propane; containing perfluorocarbons (PFCs) or hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), but not containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) or hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)    1   382479  Mixed gases; containing acyclic hydrocarbons, perhalogenated other than only with fluorine and chlorine   1  382481  Mixtures and preparations containing oxirane (ethylene oxide)  3   382482  Mixtures and preparations containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs) or polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs)   3  382483  Mixtures and preparations containing tris(2,3- dibromopropyl) phosphate  3     382484   Chemical products, mixtures and preparations; containing aldrin, camphechlor (toxaphene), chlordane, chlordecone, DDT (chlorfenotane, 1,1,1- trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane), dieldrin, endosulfan, endrin, heptachlor or mirex     1    382485  Chemical products, mixtures and preparations; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 3 to this Chapter; containing 1,2,3,4,5,6- hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH (ISO)), including lindane (ISO, INN)    1   382486  Chemical products, mixtures and preparations; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 3 to this Chapter; containing pentachlorobenzene (ISO), or hexachlorobenzene (ISO)   1    382487  Chemical products, mixtures and preparations; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 3 to this Chapter; containing perfluorooctane sulphonic acid, its salts, perfluorooctane sulphonamides, or perfluorooctane sulphonyl    1   382488  Chemical products, mixtures and preparations; containing goods specified in Subheading Note 3 to this Chapter; containing tetra-, penta-, hexa-, hepta- or octabromodiphenyl ethers   1    382491  Chemical products, mixtures and preparations; consisting mainly of (5-ethyl-2-methyl-2-oxido- 1,3,2-dioxaphosphinan-5-yl)methyl methylphosphonate and bis[(5-ethyl-2-methyl-2- oxido-1,3,2-dioxaphosphinan-5-yl)methyl]    1   382499  Chemical products, mixtures and preparations; n.e.c. heading 3824   1   382510  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; municipal waste   5   382520  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; sewage sludge   5   382530  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; clinical waste   5   382541  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; halogenated waste organic solvents   5   382549  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; waste organic solvents, other than halogenated   5  Code    Dismantlemen  382550  Residual products of chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; wastes of metal pickling liquors, hydraulic fluids, brake fluids and anti-freeze fluids   3    382561  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; (other than sewage sludge, municipal waste or waste covered in 27.10); other wastes n.e.c. in 3825; those mainly containing organic constituents    5    382569  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; (other than sewage sludge, municipal waste or waste covered by 27.10); other wastes n.e.c. in 3825; except those mainly containing organic constituents    5   382590  Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included; n.e.c. in 3825 or 27.10   2   382600  Biodiesel and mixtures thereof; not containing or containing less than 70% by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals   3  390110  Ethylene polymers; in primary forms, polyethylene having a specific gravity of less than 0.94  2  390120  Ethylene polymers; in primary forms, polyethylene having a specific gravity of 0.94 or more  2  390130  Ethylene polymers; in primary forms, ethylene- vinyl acetate copolymers  2   390140  Ethylene polymers; in primary forms, ethylene- alpha-olefin copolymers, having a specific gravity of less than 0.94   2   390190  Ethylene polymers; in primary forms, n.e.s. in heading no. 3901   2  390210  Propylene, other olefin polymers; polypropylene in primary forms  2  390220  Propylene, other olefin polymers; polyisobutylene in primary forms  2  390230  Propylene, other olefin polymers; propylene copolymers in primary forms  2   390290  Propylene, other olefin polymers; n.e.s. in heading no. 3902, in primary forms   2  390311  Styrene polymers; expansible polystyrene, in primary forms  2  390319  Styrene polymers; (other than expansible polystyrene), in primary forms  2  390320  Styrene polymers; styrene-acrylonitrile (SAN) copolymers, in primary forms  2  390330  Styrene polymers; acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) copolymers, in primary forms  2   390390   Styrene polymers; in primary forms, n.e.s. in heading no. 3903   2   390410  Vinyl chloride, other halogenated olefin polymers; polyvinyl chloride (not mixed with any other substances), in primary forms   2   390421  Vinyl chloride, other halogenated olefin polymers; non-plasticised polyvinyl chloride, in primary forms, mixed with other substances   2   390422  Vinyl chloride, other halogenated olefin polymers; plasticised polyvinyl chloride, in primary forms, mixed with other substances   2   390430  Vinyl chloride, other halogenated olefin polymers; vinyl chloride-vinyl acetate copolymers, in primary forms   2  Code    Dismantlemen  390440  Vinyl chloride, other halogenated olefin polymers; vinyl chloride copolymers, in primary forms n.e.s. in heading no. 3904   2  390450  Vinyl chloride, other halogenated olefin polymers; vinylidene chloride polymers, in primary forms  2  390461  Halogenated olefin polymers; fluoro-polymers, polytetrafluoroethylene, in primary forms  2   390469  Halogenated olefin polymers; fluoro-polymers (other than polytetrafluoroethylene), in primary forms   2    390490   Vinyl chloride, other halogenated olefin polymers; n.e.s. in heading no. 3904    2  390512  Polyvinyl acetate; in aqueous dispersion, in primary forms  2  390519  Vinyl acetate polymers; (other than in aqueous dispersion), in primary forms  2  390521  Vinyl acetate copolymers; in aqueous dispersion, in primary forms  2  390529  Vinyl acetate copolymers; (other than in aqueous dispersion), in primary forms  2  390530  Polyvinyl alcohol; whether or not containing unhydrolysed acetate groups  2   390591  Vinyl acetate, vinyl ester polymers, vinyl polymers; n.e.s. in heading no. 3905, in primary forms, copolymers   2     390599   Vinyl acetate, vinyl ester polymers, vinyl polymers; n.e.s. in heading no. 3905, in primary forms, other than copolymers     2  390610  Acrylic polymers; polymethyl methacrylate, in primary forms  2  390690  Acrylic polymers; (other than polymethyl methacrylate), in primary forms  2  390710  Polyacetals; in primary forms  2  390720  Polyethers; in primary forms, excluding polyacetals  2  390730  Epoxide resins; in primary forms  2  390740  Polycarbonates; in primary forms  2  390750  Alkyd resins; in primary forms  2  390761  Poly(ethylene terephthalate); in primary forms, having a viscosity of 78ml/g or higher  2  390769  Poly(ethylene terephthalate); in primary forms, having a viscosity of less than 78ml/g  2  390770  Poly(lactic acid); in primary forms  2   390791   Polyesters; n.e.s. in heading no. 3907, unsaturated, in primary forms   2   390799  Polyesters; n.e.s. in heading no. 3907, saturated, in primary forms   2  390810  Polyamides; polyamide-6, -11, -12, -6,6, -6,9, -6,10 or -6,12, in primary forms  2  390890  Polyamides; n.e.s. in heading no. 3908, in primary forms  2  390910  Amino-resins; urea and thiourea resins, in primary forms  2  390920  Amino-resins; melamine resins, in primary forms  2   390931  Amino-resins; n.e.c. in heading no. 3909, in primary forms, poly(methylene phenyl isocyanate) (Crude MDI, polymeric MDI)   2  Code    Dismantlemen  390939  Amino-resins; n.e.c. in heading no. 3909, in primary forms, other than poly(methylene phenyl isocyanate) (Crude MDI, polymeric MDI)   2  390940  Phenolic resins; in primary forms  2  390950  Polyurethanes; in primary forms  2  391000  Silicones; in primary forms  2   391110  Petroleum resins, coumarone, indene or coumarone-indene resins and polyterpenes; in primary forms   2   391190  Polysulphides, polysulphones and similar products of chemical synthesis n.e.s. in chapter 39; in primary forms   2  391211  Cellulose acetates; non-plasticised, in primary forms  2  391212  Cellulose acetates; plasticised, in primary forms  2  391220  Cellulose nitrates (including collodions); in primary forms  2  391231  Cellulose ethers; carboxymethylcellulose and its salts, in primary forms  2   391239  Cellulose ethers; (other than carboxymethylcellulose and its salts), in primary forms   2   391290  Cellulose and its chemical derivatives; n.e.s. in item no. 3912, in primary forms   2  391310  Polymers, natural; alginic acid, its salts and esters, in primary forms  2   391390   Polymers, natural and modified natural; in primary forms (excluding alginic acid, its salts and esters)   2  391400  Ion-exchangers; based on polymers of heading no. 3901 to 3913, in primary forms  2  391510  Ethylene polymers; waste, parings and scrap  2  391520  Styrene polymers; waste, parings and scrap  2  391530  Vinyl chloride polymers; waste, parings and scrap  2   391590  Plastics n.e.s. in heading no. 3915; waste, parings and scrap   2   391610  Ethylene polymers; monofilament, of which any cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1mm, rods, sticks and profile shapes, whether or not surface- worked but not otherwise worked   2   391620  Vinyl chloride polymers; monofilament, of which any cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1mm, rods, sticks and profile shapes, whether or not surface- worked but not otherwise worked   2    391690   Plastics; monofilament, of plastics n.e.s. in heading no. 3916, cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1mm, rods, sticks and profile shapes, whether or not surface-worked but not otherwise worked    2  391710  Plastics; artificial guts (sausage casings) of hardened protein or of cellulosic materials  5  391721  Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, rigid, of polymers of ethylene  5  391722  Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, rigid, of polymers of propylene  5  391723  Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, rigid, of polymers of vinyl chloride  5   391729  Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, rigid, of plastics n.e.s. in heading no. 3917   5  Code    Dismantlemen 391731  Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, flexible, having a minimum burst pressure of 27.6MPa  3   391732  Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, other than those of item no. 3917.31, not reinforced or otherwise combined with other materials, without fittings   5   391733  Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, other than those of item no. 3917.31, not reinforced or otherwise combined with other materials, with fittings   5   391739   Plastics; tubes, pipes and hoses thereof, n.e.s. in item no. 3917.30   5  391740  Plastics; tube, pipe and hose fittings (eg joints, elbows, flanges)  3      391810     Floor, wall or ceiling coverings; of polymers of vinyl chloride, whether or not self-adhesive, in rolls or in the form of tiles      3     391890    Floor, wall or ceiling coverings; of plastics (excluding polymers of vinyl chloride), whether or not self-adhesive, in rolls or in the form of tiles     3   391910  Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil, tape, strip, other flat shapes thereof, self-adhesive, in rolls of a width not exceeding 20cm   1   391990  Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil, tape, strip, other flat shapes thereof, self-adhesive, other than in rolls of a width not exceeding 20cm   2      392010    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polymers of ethylene, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392020    Plastics; of polymers of propylene, plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392030    Plastics; of polymers of styrene, plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2  Code    Dismantlemen     392043   Plastics; polymers of vinyl chloride, containing by weight not less than 6% of plasticisers; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392049   Plastics; polymers of vinyl chloride,containing by weight, less than 6% of plasticisers; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392051   Plastics; of acrylic polymers, polymethyl methacrylate, plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392059   Plastics; of acrylic polymers (excluding polymethyl methacrylate), plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2     392061   Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polycarbonates, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials     2      392062    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polyethylene terephthalate, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      1      392063    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of unsaturated polyesters, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392069    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polyesters n.e.s. in heading no. 3920, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2  Code    Dismantlemen     392071    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of regenerated cellulose; non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392073    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of cellulose acetate, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392079   Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of cellulose derivatives n.e.s. in heading no. 3920, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392091    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polyvinyl butyral, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2     392092   Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polyamides, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials     2      392093    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of amino-resins, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2      392094    Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of phenolic resins, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials      2       392099     Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of plastics n.e.s. in heading no. 3920, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials       2  Code    Dismantlemen     392111     Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polymers of styrene, cellular      2      392112     Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polymers of vinyl chloride, cellular      2      392113     Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of polyurethanes, cellular      5      392114     Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of regenerated cellulose, cellular      2       392119      Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, of plastics n.e.s. in heading no. 3921, cellular       2     392190     Plastics; plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, other than cellular     3  392210  Plastics; baths, shower-baths and wash-basins  5  392220  Plastics; lavatory seats and covers  5    392290   Plastics; bidets, lavatory pans, flushing cisterns and similar sanitary ware n.e.s. in heading no. 3922    5  392310  Plastics; boxes, cases, crates and similar articles for the conveyance or packing of goods  3  392321  Ethylene polymers; sacks and bags (including cones), for the conveyance or packing of goods  3   392329  Plastics; sacks and bags (including cones), for the conveyance or packing of goods, of plastics other than ethylene polymers   3  392330  Plastics; carboys, bottles, flasks and similar articles, for the conveyance or packing of goods  3  Code    Dismantlemen 392340  Plastics; spools, cops, bobbins and similar supports, for the conveyance or packing of goods  3  392350  Plastics; stoppers, lids, caps and other closures, for the conveyance or packing of goods  3     392390     Plastics; articles for the conveyance or packing of goods n.e.s. in heading no. 3923     5  392410  Plastics; tableware and kitchenware  5     392490     Plastics; household and toilet articles     5  392510  Plastics; builders' ware, reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers of a capacity exceeding 300  3  392520  Plastics; builders' ware, doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors  3   392530  Plastics; builders' ware, shutters, blinds (including venetian blinds) and similar articles and parts thereof   5      392590     Plastics; builders' ware, n.e.s. or included in heading no. 3925      3  392610  Plastics; office or school supplies  5   392620   Plastics; articles of apparel and clothing accessories (including gloves)   5   392630   Plastics; fittings for furniture, coachwork or the like   5  392640  Plastics; statuettes and other ornamental articles  5   392690   Plastics; other articles n.e.s. in chapter 39   5   400110  Rubber; natural rubber latex, whether or not pre- vulcanised, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2  400121  Rubber; natural (excluding latex), in smoked  2   400122  Rubber; technically specified natural rubber (TSNR), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip (excluding latex and smoked sheets)   2    400129   Rubber; natural (excluding latex, technically specified natural rubber and smoked sheets), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip    2   400130  Balata, gutta-percha, guayule, chicle and similar natural gums; in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2  Code    Dismantlemen  400211  Rubber; synthetic, styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) and carboxylated styrene-butadiene rubber (XSBR) latex, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2   400219  Rubber; synthetic, styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) and carboxylated styrene-butadiene rubber (XSBR), (other than latex), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2  400220  Rubber; synthetic, butadiene rubber (BR), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip  2   400231  Rubber; synthetic, isobutene-isoprene (butyl) rubber (IIR), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2   400239  Rubber; synthetic, halo-isobutene-isoprene rubber (CIIR or BIIR), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2   400241  Rubber; synthetic, chloroprene (chlorobutadiene) rubber (CR), latex, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2   400249  Rubber; synthetic, chloroprene (chlorobutadiene) rubber (CR), (other than latex), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2   400251  Rubber; synthetic, acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR), latex, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2   400259  Rubber; synthetic, acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR), (other than latex), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2  400260  Rubber; synthetic, isoprene rubber (IR), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip  2   400270  Rubber; synthetic, ethylene-propylene-non- conjugated diene rubber (EPDM), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2    400280   Rubber; mixtures of natural and synthetic rubbers of heading no. 4001 and 4002, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip    2      400291     Rubber; n.e.s. in chapter 40, latex, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip      2     400299     Rubber; n.e.s. in chapter 40, (other than latex), in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip     2  400300  Rubber; reclaimed rubber, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip  2   400400  Rubber; waste, parings and scrap of rubber (other than hard rubber) and powders and granules obtained therefrom   2   400510  Rubber; unvulcanised, compounded with carbon black or silica, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip   2     400520    Rubber; unvulcanised, compounded, solutions and dispersions other than those of item no. 4005.10     2  Code    Dismantlemen    400591    Rubber; unvulcanised, (compounded other than with carbon black or silica), in plates, sheets and strip     2      400599    Rubber; unvulcanised, (compounded other than with carbon black or silica), in primary forms, (other than plates, sheets, strip, solutions or dispersions)      2  400610  Rubber; unvulcanised, "camel-back" strips for retreading rubber tyres  5     400690     Rubber; unvulcanised, other than "camel back" strips for retreading rubber tyres     5    400700    Rubber; vulcanised, thread and cord    3  400811  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), in plates, sheets and strip of cellular rubber  5   400819  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), cellular rubber, (other than in plates, sheets or strip)   5  400821  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), in plates, sheets and strip, of non-cellular rubber  5   400829  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), non- cellular rubber, in forms other than plates, sheets or strip   3   400911  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, not reinforced or otherwise combined with other materials, without fittings   5   400912  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, not reinforced or otherwise combined with other materials, with fittings   5   400921  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, reinforced or otherwise combined only with metal, without fittings   5   400922  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, reinforced or otherwise combined only with metal, with fittings   5   400931  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, reinforced or otherwise combined only with textile materials, without fittings   5   400932  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, reinforced or otherwise combined only with textile materials, with fittings   5    400941  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, reinforced or otherwise combined with materials other than metal or textiles, without fittings    5   Code    Dismantlemen   400942  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), tubing, piping and hoses, reinforced or otherwise combined with materials other than metal or textiles, with fittings    3  401011  Rubber; vulcanised, conveyor belts or belting, reinforced only with metal  2  401012  Rubber; vulcanised, conveyor belts or belting, reinforced only with textile materials  3   401019  Rubber; vulcanised, conveyor belts or belting, (reinforced with other than metal only, textile materials only or plastics only)   2   401031  Rubber; vulcanised, endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts), V-ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 60cm but not exceeding 180 cm   2   401032  Rubber; vulcanised, endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts), other than V- ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 60cm but not exceeding 180 cm   2   401033  Rubber; vulcanised, endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts), V-ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 180cm but not exceeding 240 cm   2   401034  Rubber; vulcanised, endless transmission belts of trapezoidal cross-section (V-belts), other than V- ribbed, of an outside circumference exceeding 180cm but not exceeding 240 cm   2   401035  Rubber; vulcanised, endless synchronous belts, of an outside circumference exceeding 60 cm but not exceeding 150 cm   2   401036  Rubber; vulcanised, endless synchronous belts, of an outside circumference exceeding 150 cm but not exceeding 198 cm   2    401039    Rubber; vulcanised, conveyor or transmission belts or belting, n.e.c. in heading no. 4010    2   401110  Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on motor cars (including station wagons and racing cars)   3   401120  Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on buses or lorries   3  401130  Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on aircraft  1  401140  Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on motorcycles  2  401150  Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on bicycles  2  401170  Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on agricultural or forestry vehicles and machines  2   401180  Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on construction, mining or industrial handling vehicles and machines   2     401190     Rubber; new pneumatic tyres, of a kind used on light commercial vehicles     2   401211  Retreaded tyres ; of a kind used on motor cars (including station wagons and racing cars)   5  Code    Dismantlemen 401212  Retreaded tyres; of a kind used on motor buses or lorries  5  401213  Retreaded tyres; of a kind used on aircraft  5   401219  Retreaded tyres; other than of a kind used on motor cars (including station wagons and racing cars), buses and lorries and aircraft   5  401220  Rubber; used pneumatic tyres  5  401290  Rubber; tyres n.e.s. in heading no. 4012  5   401310  Rubber; inner tubes, of a kind used on motorcars (including station wagons and racing cars), buses and lorries   3  401320  Rubber; inner tubes, of a kind used on bicycles  2   401390   Rubber; inner tubes, n.e.s. in heading no. 4013   3  401410  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), sheath contraceptives  1    401490  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), hygienic or pharmaceutical articles (excluding sheath contraceptives), with or without fittings of hard rubber    2  401511  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), surgical gloves  1  401519  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), gloves other than surgical gloves  3   401590  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), articles of apparel and clothing accessories (other than gloves)   5   401610  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), moulded rubber mats and mats of non-rectangular shape made by cutting from the piece, of cellular rubber   5    401691    Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), floor coverings and mats, of non-cellular rubber    5   401692  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), erasers, of non-cellular rubber   5   401693  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), gaskets, washers and other seals, of non-cellular rubber   5   401694  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), boat or dock fenders, whether or not inflatable, of non- cellular rubber   2    401695   Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), inflatable articles (other than boat or dock fenders), of non-cellular rubber    5   401699  Rubber; vulcanised (other than hard rubber), articles n.e.s. in heading no. 4016, of non-cellular rubber   5   401700  Rubber; ebonite and other hard rubbers in all forms, including waste and scrap, and articles of hard rubber   5  Code    Dismantlemen    410120   Hides and skins; raw, whole, of bovine or equine animals, of a weight per skin not exceeding 8kg when simply dried, 10kg when dry-salted or 14kg when fresh, wet-salted or otherwise preserved     2    410150   Hides and skins; raw, whole, of bovine or equine animals, of a weight per skin exceeding 16 kg    2      410190   Hides and skins; (not whole), but including butts, bends and bellies, of bovine (incl. buffalo) and equine animals, fresh, salted or preserved, but not tanned, parchment dressed or further prepared, whether or not dehaired or split      2     410210   Skins; raw, of sheep or lambs, fresh, or salted, dried, limed, pickled or otherwise preserved, (but not tanned, parchment-dressed or further prepared), with wool on     2   410221  Skins; raw, of sheep or lambs, pickled (but not tanned, parchment-dressed or further preserved), without wool on   2   410229  Skins; raw, of sheep or lambs, fresh or salted, dried, limed or otherwise preserved other than by pickling, (but not tanned, parchment-dressed or further preserved), without wool on   2   410320  Hides and skins; raw, of reptiles (fresh or salted, dried, limed, pickled or otherwise preserved, but not tanned, parchment-dressed or further prepared), whether or not dehaired or split   2   410330  Hides and skins; raw, of swine, (fresh or salted, dried, limed, pickled or otherwise preserved, but not tanned, parchment-dressed or further prepared), whether or not dehaired or split   2     410390   Hides and skins; raw, of animals n.e.s. in this chapter, fresh, salted, dried, limed, pickled or otherwise preserved, (but not tanned, parchment- dressed or further prepared), whether or not dehaired or split (not furskins)     2   410411  Tanned or crust hides and skins; without hair on, bovine or equine, in the wet state (including wet blue), full grains, unsplit; grain splits   2   410419  Tanned or crust hides and skins; bovine or equine, without hair on, in the wet state (including wet blue),excluding full grains, unsplit; grain splits   2   410441  Tanned or crust hides and skins; bovine or equine, without hair on, in the dry state (crust), full grains, unsplit; grain splits   2   410449  Tanned or crust hides and skins; bovine or equine, without hair on, in the dry state (crust), (other than full grains, unsplit; grain splits)   2  Code    Dismantlemen  410510  Tanned or crust skins of sheep and lambs, without wool on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the wet state ( including wet blue)   2   410530  Tanned or crust skins; of sheep or lambs, without wool on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the dry state (crust)   2   410621  Tanned or crust hides and skins; of goats or kids, without hair on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the wet state (including wet blue)   2   410622  Tanned or crust hides and skins; of goats or kids, without hair on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the dry state (crust)   2   410631  Tanned or crust hides and skins; of swine, without hair on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the wet state (including wet blue)   2   410632  Tanned or crust hides and skins; of swine, without hair on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the dry state (crust)   2  410640  Tanned or crust hides and skins; of reptiles, whether or not split, but not further prepared  2     410691   Tanned or crust hides and skins; of animals other than equine, ovine, bovine, goats or kids, swine and reptiles, without wool or hair on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the wet state (including wet blue)     2     410692  Tanned or crust hides and skins; of animals other than equine, ovine, bovine, goats or kids, swine and reptiles, without wool or hair on, whether or not split, but not further prepared, in the dry state (crust)     2    410711  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, of bovine (including buffalo) or equine animals, without hair on, other than leather of heading 41.14, whole hides and skins, full grain, unsplit    2    410712  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, of bovine (including buffalo) or equine animals, without hair on, other than leather of heading 41.14, whole hides and skins, grain splits    2    410719  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed, of bovine (including buffalo) or equine animals, without hair on, split or not, other than leather of heading 41.14, (other than grain splits and full grains, unsplit)    2    410791  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed, of bovine (including buffalo) or equine animals, without hair on, other than leather of heading 41.14, not whole hides and skins, but including sides, full grain, unsplit    2    410792  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed, of bovine (including buffalo) or equine animals, without hair on, other than leather of heading 41.14, not whole hides and skins, but including sides,grain splits    2  Code    Dismantlemen    410799  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, incl. parchment-dressed, of bovine (including buffalo) or equine animals, no hair, excluding leather of heading 41.14, and whole hides and skins, and sides, (full grains, unsplit and grain splits)     2   411200  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment dressed leather, of sheep or lamb, without wool on, whether or not split, other than leather of heading 41.14   2   411310  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, without hair on, whether or not split, other than leather of heading 41.14, of goats and kids   2   411320  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, without hair on, whether or not split, other than leather of heading 41.14, of swine   2   411330  Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, of reptiles, whether or not split, other than leather of heading 41.14   2      411390   Leather; further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, of animals (other than sheep and lambs, goats and kids, swine and reptiles), without wool or hair on, whether or not split, other than leather of heading 41.14      2   411410   Leather; chamois (including combination chamois)   2  411420  Leather; patent leather and laminated patent leather; metallised leather  2   411510  Leather; composition leather with a basis of leather or leather fibre, in slabs, sheets or strip, whether or not in rolls   2   411520  Leather; parings and other waste, of leather or composition leather; not suitable for the manufacture of leather articles; leather dust, powder and flour   2    420100   Saddlery and harness; for any animal (including traces, leads, knee pads, muzzles, saddle cloths, saddle bags, dog coats and the like), of any materials    3   420211  Cases and containers; trunks, suit-cases, vanity- cases, executive-cases, brief-cases, school satchels and similar containers, with outer surface of leather, of composition leather or of patent   3   420212  Cases and containers; trunks, suit-cases, vanity- cases, executive-cases, brief-cases, school satchels and similar containers, with outer surface of plastics or of textile materials   3    420219  Cases and containers; trunks, suit-cases, vanity- cases, executive-cases, brief-cases, school satchels and similar containers, with outer surface of vulcanised fibre or of paperboard    3   420221  Cases and containers; handbags (whether or not with shoulder strap and including those without handle), with outer surface of leather, of composition leather or of patent leather   3  Code    Dismantlemen  420222  Cases and containers; handbags (whether or not with shoulder strap and including those without handle), with outer surface of plastic sheeting or of textile materials   3   420229  Cases and containers; handbags (whether or not with shoulder strap and including those without handle), with outer surface of vulcanised fibre or of paperboard   3   420231  Cases and containers; of a kind normally carried in the pocket or in the handbag, with outer surface of leather or composition leather or of patent leather   3   420232  Cases and containers; of a kind normally carried in the pocket or in the handbag, with outer surface of plastic sheeting or of textile materials   3     420239   Cases and containers; of a kind normally carried in the pocket or in the handbag, with outer surface of vulcanised fibre or paperboard     3       420291      Cases and containers; with outer surface of leather, of composition leather or of patent leather, n.e.s. in heading no. 4202       3       420292      Cases and containers; with outer surface of plastic sheeting or of textile materials, n.e.s. in heading no. 4202       3       420299      Cases and containers; with outer surface of vulcanised fibre or paperboard, n.e.s. in heading no. 4202       3    420310   Apparel; articles of apparel, of leather or of composition leather    3   420321  Clothing accessories; gloves, mittens and mitts, specially designed for use in sports, of leather or composition leather, padded   3   420329  Clothing accessories; gloves, mittens and mitts, n.e.s. in heading no. 4203, of leather or composition leather, not specially designed for use in sports   3  Code    Dismantlemen 420330  Clothing accessories; belts and bandoliers, of leather or of composition leather  3     420340    Clothing accessories; of leather or of composition leather, n.e.s. in heading no. 4203     3      420500     Leather articles; n.e.s. in chapter 42, of leather or composition leather      3   420600   Articles of gut (other than silk-worm gut), of goldbeater's skin, of bladders or of tendons   3  430110  Furskins; raw, of mink, whole, with or without head, tail or paws  3   430130  Furskins; raw, of Astrakhan, Broadtail, Caracul, Persian and similar lamb, Indian, Chinese, Mongolian or Tibetan lamb, whole, with or without head, tail or paws   3  430160  Furskins; raw, of fox, whole, with or without head, tail or paws  3    430180  Furskins; raw, of animals n.e.s. in heading no. 4301, whole, with or without head, tail or paws (excluding goods of heading no. 4101, 4102 and 4103)    3   430190  Furskins; raw, heads, tails, paws and other pieces or cuttings, suitable for furrier's use, excluding goods of heading no. 4101, 4102 and 4103   3  430211  Furskins; tanned or dressed, of mink, whole, with or without head, tail or paws, not assembled  3    430219  Furskins; tanned or dressed, whole, with or without head, tail or paws, not assembled, n.e.s. in heading no. 4302, excluding goods or heading no. 4303    3   430220  Furskins; tanned or dressed, heads, tails, paws and other pieces or cuttings, not assembled, excluding goods of heading no. 4303   3   430230  Furskins; tanned or dressed, whole skins and pieces or cuttings thereof, assembled, excluding goods of heading no. 4303   3   430310   Furskin articles; apparel and clothing accessories   3   430390  Furskin articles; other than apparel and clothing accessories   3    430400    Fur, artificial; articles thereof    3   440111  Wood; for fuel, in logs, in billets, in twigs, in faggots or similar forms, whether or not agglomerated, coniferous   3  Code    Dismantlemen  440112  Wood; for fuel, in logs, in billets, in twigs, in faggots or similar forms, whether or not agglomerated, non-coniferous   3   440121   Wood; in chips or particles, coniferous   3   440122   Wood; in chips or particles, non-coniferous   3   440131  Wood; for fuel, sawdust and wood waste and scrap, whether or not agglomerated in logs, briquettes, pellets or similar forms; wood pellets   3   440139  Wood; for fuel, sawdust and wood waste and scrap, whether or not agglomerated in logs, briquettes, pellets or similar forms; other than wood pellets   3  440140  Wood; for fuel, sawdust and wood waste and scrap, not agglomerated  3   440210   Wood; charcoal of bamboo (including shell or nut charcoal), whether or not agglomerated   3   440290  Wood; charcoal of wood other than bamboo (including shell or nut charcoal), whether or not agglomerated   3     440311   Wood; coniferous species, in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared; treated with paint, stains, creosote or other preservatives     3     440312   Wood; non-coniferous species, in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared; treated with paint, stains, creosote or other preservatives     3     440321   Wood; coniferous species, of pine (Pinus spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross-sectional dimension is 15 cm or more     3      440322    Wood; coniferous species, of pine (Pinus spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross-sectional dimension is less than 15 cm      3     440323   Wood; coniferous species, of fir (Abies spp.) and spruce (Picea spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross-sectional dimension is 15 cm or more     3  Code    Dismantlemen     440324    Wood; coniferous species, of fir (Abies spp.) and spruce (Picea spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross-sectional dimension is less than 15 cm      3     440325   Wood; coniferous species n.e.c in headings 4403.21 or 4403.23, in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross-sectional dimension is 15 cm or more     3       440326    Wood; coniferous species n.e.c in headings 4403.22 or 4403.24, in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross-sectional dimension is less than 15 cm       3     440341   Wood, tropical; dark red meranti, light red meranti and meranti bakau, in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated     3      440349    Wood, tropical; (as specified in subheading note 1, chapter 44, customs tariff), n.e.s. in item no. 4403.41, in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated      3      440391     Wood; oak, in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated      3     440393   Wood; of beech (Fagus spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross- sectional dimension is 15 cm or more     3      440394    Wood; of beech (Fagus spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross- sectional dimension is less than 15 cm      3  Code    Dismantlemen    440395   Wood; of birch (Betula spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross- sectional dimension is 15 cm or more     3      440396    Wood; of birch (Betula spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, of which any cross- sectional dimension is less than 15 cm      3      440397    Wood; of poplar and aspen (Populus spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated      3      440398    Wood; of eucalyptus (Eucalyptus spp.), in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated      3      440399    Wood; in the rough, whether or not stripped of bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, untreated, n.e.s. in heading no. 4403      3      440410    Wood; coniferous, split poles, piles, pickets, stakes, pointed but not sawn lengthwise; sticks for umbrellas, tool handles etc, roughly trimmed but not turned or bent; chipwood etc, hoopwood      3      440420    Wood; non-coniferous, split poles, piles, pickets, stakes, pointed but not sawn lengthwise; sticks for umbrellas, tool handles etc, roughly trimmed but not turned or bent; chipwood etc, hoopwood      3   440500   Wood; wood wool and wood flour   3  440611  Wood; railway or tramway sleepers (cross-ties), not impregnated, coniferous  3  440612  Wood; railway or tramway sleepers (cross-ties), not impregnated, non-coniferous  3  440691  Wood; railway or tramway sleepers (cross-ties), impregnated, coniferous  3  440692  Wood; railway or tramway sleepers (cross-ties), impregnated, non-coniferous  3   Code    Dismantlemen  440711  Wood; coniferous species, of pine (Pinus spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed, of a thickness exceeding 6mm   3   440712  Wood; coniferous species, of fir (Abies spp.) and spruce (Picea spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed, of a thickness exceeding 6mm   3    440719  Wood; coniferous species, other than of pine (Pinus spp.) or fir (Abies spp.) or spruce (Picea spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger- jointed, of a thickness exceeding 6mm    3   440721  Wood; meranti, lauan, seraya, alan, keruing, ramin, kapur, jelutong, teak, jongkong, merbau, kempas; sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, thicker than 6mm   3   440722  Wood; okoume, obeche, sapelli, sipo, acajou d'afrique, makore, iroko, tiama, mansonia, ilomba, dibetou, limba, azobe; sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, thicker than 6mm   3   440725  Wood, tropical; dark red meranti, light red meranti and meranti bakau, sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed, thicker than 6mm   3   440726  Wood, tropical; white lauan, white meranti, white seraya, yellow meranti and alan, sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed, thicker than   3   440727  Wood, tropical; sapelli, sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed, thicker than 6mm   3   440728  Wood, tropical; iroko, sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed, thicker than 6mm   3     440729   Wood, tropical; (as specified in subheading note 1, chapter 44, customs tariff), n.e.s. in item no. 4407.2, sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger- jointed, thicker than 6mm     3   440791  Wood; oak, sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger- jointed, thicker than 6mm   3   440792  Wood; beech, sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger- jointed, thicker than 6mm   3   440793  Wood; maple (Acer spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed, thicker than 6mm   3   440794  Wood; cherry (Prunus spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed, thicker than 6mm   3   440795  Wood; ash (Fraxinus spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed, thicker than 6mm   3   440796  Wood; of birch (Betula spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, of a thickness exceeding 6mm, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed   3  Code    Dismantlemen  440797  Wood; of poplar and aspen (Populus spp.), sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, of a thickness exceeding 6mm, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed   3      440799    Wood; sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger- jointed, thicker than 6mm, n.e.s. in heading no. 4407      3     440810   Wood; coniferous, sheets for veneer or plywood, other wood sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed, not thicker than 6mm     3     440831   Wood, tropical; dark red meranti, light red meranti, meranti bakau, sheets for veneer or plywood, other wood sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger- jointed, not thicker than 6mm     3      440839   Wood, tropical; (as in subheading note 1, chapter 44, customs tariff), n.e.s. in item no. 4408.31, sheets for veneer or plywood, other wood sawn length wise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed, not thicker than 6mm      3     440890   Wood; n.e.s. in heading no. 4408, sheets for veneer or plywood, other wood sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed, not thicker than 6mm     3     440910   Wood; coniferous (including unassembled strips and friezes for parquet flooring), continuously shaped along any edge or face, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed     3     440921   Wood; bamboo (including unassembled strips and friezes for parquet flooring), continuously shaped along any edges, ends or faces, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed     3    440922   Wood; tropical (including unassembled strips and friezes for parquet flooring), continuously shaped along any edges, ends or faces, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed    3     440929   Wood; non-coniferous other than bamboo (including unassembled strips and friezes for parquet flooring), continuously shaped along any edges, ends or faces, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed     3  Code    Dismantlemen   441011  Wood; particle board and similar board of wood, whether or not agglomerated with resins or other organic binding substances, waferboard, including oriented strand board    5   441012  Oriented strand board (OSB) of wood, whether or not agglomerated with resins or other organic binding substances   3    441019  Wood; particle board and similar board of wood, whether or not agglomerated with resins or other organic binding substances, not waferboard or oriented strand board    5      441090    Particle board and similar board; of ligneous materials other than wood, whether or not agglomerated with resins or other organic binding substances      5  441112  Medium density fibreboard (MDF), of a thickness not exceeding 5 mm  5  441113  Medium density fibreboard (MDF), of a thickness exceeding 5 mm but not exceeding 9 mm  5  441114  Medium density fibreboard (MDF), of a thickness exceeding 9 mm  5      441192    Fibreboard (other than MDF) of a density exceeding 0.8g/cm3, of wood or other ligneous materials, bonded or not with resins or other organic substances      5      441193    Fibreboard (other than MDF) of a density exceeding 0.5g/cm3 but not 0.8g/cm3, of wood or other ligneous materials, bonded or not with resins or other organic substances      5      441194    Fibreboard (other than MDF) of a density not exceeding 0.5g/cm3, of wood or other ligneous materials, bonded or not with resins or other organic substances      5     441210     Plywood, veneered panels and similar laminated wood; of bamboo     5     441231   Plywood; consisting only of sheets of wood (not bamboo), each ply 6mm or thinner, with at least one outer ply of tropical wood, (as specified in subheading note 1, chapter 44, customs tariff)     5  Code    Dismantlemen      441233    Plywood; with sheets of wood only; not bamboo; each ply 6mm or less, with at least one outer ply of alder, ash, beech, birch, cherry, chestnut, elm, eucalyptus, hickory, horse chestnut, lime, maple, oak, plane, poplar, aspen, robinia, tulipwood or walnut       5        441234      Plywood; consisting only of sheets of wood (not bamboo), each ply 6mm or thinner, with at least one outer ply of non-coniferous wood not listed in subheading 4412.33        5      441239   Plywood; consisting only of sheets of wood (not bamboo), each ply 6mm or thinner, not containing an outer ply of non-coniferous or tropical wood (as specified in subheading note 1, chapter 44, customs tariff)      5     441294    Blockboard, laminboard and battenboard (not bamboo, and other than plywood consisting only of sheets of wood each ply 6mm or thinner)     5      441299    Plywood; not containing an outer layer of non- coniferous wood, not containing a layer of particle board      5  441300  Wood; densified wood, in blocks, plates, strips or profile shapes  5  441400  Wooden frames; for paintings, photographs, mirrors or similar objects  5  441510  Wood; cases, boxes, crates, drums, similar packings and cable-drums  5   441520   Wood; pallets, box pallets and other load boards   5   441600  Wood; casks, barrels, vats, tubs and other coopers' products and parts thereof, of wood, including staves   5    441700   Wood; tools, tool bodies, tool handles, broom or brush bodies and handles, boot and shoe lasts and trees, of wood    5  441810  Wood; windows, French-windows and their frames  5  Code    Dismantlemen 441820  Wood; doors and their frames and thresholds  5  441840  Wood; shuttering for concrete constructional work  5  441850  Wood; shingles and shakes  5  441860  Wood; posts and beams  5  441873  Wood; assembled flooring panels, of bamboo or with at least the top layer (wear layer) of bamboo  5   441874  Wood; assembled flooring panels, not of bamboo or with at least the top layer (wear layer) of bamboo, for mosaic floors   5   441875  Wood; assembled flooring panels, not of bamboo or with at least the top layer (wear layer) of bamboo, multilayer   5   441879  Wood; assembled flooring panels, other than multilayer or mosaic   5      441891     Wood; builders' joinery and carpentry of wood n.e.c. in heading no. 4418, of bamboo      5      441899     Wood; builders' joinery and carpentry of wood n.e.c. in heading no. 4418, other than of bamboo      5  441911  Tableware and kitchenware, of wood; of bamboo, bread boards, chopping boards and similar boards  5  441912  Tableware and kitchenware, of wood; of bamboo, chopsticks  5   441919  Tableware and kitchenware, of wood; of bamboo, n.e.c. in heading 4419   5     441990    Tableware and kitchenware, of wood; not of bamboo     5  442010  Wood; statuettes and other ornaments of wood  5     442090   Wood; marquetry and inlaid wood, caskets and cases for jewellery or cutlery and similar articles of wood, wooden articles of furniture not falling in chapter 94     5  442110  Wood; clothes hangers  5  442191  Wood; of bamboo, articles n.e.c. in heading no. 4414 to 4420 (excluding clothes hangers)  5  442199  Wood; not of bamboo, articles n.e.c. in heading no. 4414 to 4420 (excluding clothes hangers)  5  450110  Cork; natural cork, raw or simply prepared  1  450190  Cork; waste cork, crushed, granulated or ground cork  1   450200  Cork; natural cork, debacked or roughly squared, or in rectangular (including square) blocks, plates, sheets or strip, (including sharp-edged blanks for corks or stoppers)   1  Code    Dismantlemen 450310  Cork; corks and stoppers, of natural cork  2     450390     Cork; articles of natural cork other than corks and stoppers     2   450410  Cork; blocks, plates, sheets and strip, tiles of any shape, solid cylinders (including discs), of agglomerated cork (with or without a binding substance)   2      450490    Cork; articles of agglomerated cork (with or without a binding substance), n.e.s. in heading no. 4504      2   460121  Plaiting materials, plaits and similar products of plaiting materials; mats, matting and screens, of bamboo   3   460122  Plaiting materials, plaits and similar products of plaiting materials; mats, matting and screens, of rattan   3   460129  Plaiting materials, plaits and similar products of plaiting materials; mats, matting and screens, of vegetable materials other than bamboo or rattan   3     460192    Plaiting materials, plaits and similar products of plaiting materials; (not mats, matting or screens), of bamboo     3     460193   Plaiting materials, plaits and similar products of plaiting materials; (not mats, matting or screens), of rattan     3     460194   Plaiting materials, plaits and similar products of plaiting materials; (not mats, matting or screens), of vegetable materials other than bamboo or rattan     3   460199   Plaiting materials; products of non-vegetable materials n.e.s. in heading no. 4601   5      460211    Basketwork, wickerwork and other articles; of bamboo, made directly to shape from plaiting materials or made up from goods of heading no. 4601      3  Code    Dismantlemen     460212    Basketwork, wickerwork and other articles; of rattan, made directly to shape from plaiting materials or made up from goods of heading no. 4601      3      460219   Basketwork, wickerwork and other articles; of vegetable materials (not bamboo or rattan), made directly to shape from plaiting materials or made up from goods of heading no. 4601; articles of loofah      3      460290    Basketwork, wickerwork and other articles; of non- vegetable materials, made directly to shape from plaiting materials or made up from goods of heading no. 4601      3  470100  Wood pulp; mechanical wood pulp  1  470200  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, dissolving grades  1   470311  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, soda or sulphate, (other than dissolving grades), unbleached, of coniferous wood   1   470319  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, soda or sulphate, (other than dissolving grades), unbleached, of non- coniferous wood   1   470321  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, soda or sulphate, (other than dissolving grades), semi-bleached or bleached, of coniferous wood   1   470329  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, soda or sulphate, (other than dissolving grades), semi-bleached or bleached, of non-coniferous wood   1   470411  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, sulphite, (other than dissolving grades), unbleached, of coniferous wood   1   470419  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, sulphite, (other than dissolving grades), unbleached, of non- coniferous wood   1   470421  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, sulphite, (other than dissolving grades), semi-bleached or bleached, of coniferous wood   1   470429  Wood pulp; chemical wood pulp, sulphite, (other than dissolving grades), semi-bleached or bleached, of non-coniferous wood   1  470500  Wood pulp; semi-chemical  1  470610  Pulp; cotton linters pulp  1  470620  Pulp; of fibres derived from recovered (waste and scrap) paper or paperboard  1  470630  Pulp; of bamboo  1   470691   Pulp; of fibrous cellulosic material (other than wood or cotton linters pulp), mechanical   1   470692   Pulp; of fibrous cellulosic material (other than wood or cotton linters pulp), chemical   1  Code    Dismantlemen  470693   Pulp; of fibrous cellulosic material (other than wood or cotton linters pulp), semi-chemical   1   470710  Paper or paperboard; waste and scrap, of unbleached kraft paper or paperboard or of corrugated paper or paperboard   1   470720  Paper or paperboard; waste and scrap, of paper or paperboard made mainly of bleached chemical pulp, not coloured in the mass   2   470730  Paper or paperboard; waste and scrap, of paper or paperboard made mainly of mechanical pulp (eg newspapers, journals and similar printed matter)   2     470790    Paper or paperboard; waste and scrap, of paper or paperboard n.e.s. in heading no. 4707 and of unsorted waste and scrap     2   480100   Newsprint; in rolls or sheets   1  480210  Paper and paperboard; hand-made  1   480220  Paper and paperboard; uncoated, of a kind used as a base for photo-sensitive, heat-sensitive or electro-sensitive paper or paperboard, in rolls or sheets   2  480240  Paper and paperboard; wallpaper base, uncoated, in rolls or sheets  2      480254    Paper and paperboard; uncoated, for printing & writing, containing no, or not more than 10% by weight of total fibres obtained by mechanical or chemi-mechanical process, weighing less than 40g/m2, in rolls or sheets      1      480255   Paper and paperboard; uncoated, for printing & writing, containing no, or not more than 10% by weight of total fibres obtained by mechanical or chemi-mechanical process, weighing 40g/m2 to 150g/m2, in rolls      1      480256   Paper and paperboard; uncoated, for printing & writing, with no, or not more than 10% weight of all fibre got by mechanical/chemi-mechanical process, weight 40-150g/m2, one side not more than 435mm, other side not more than 297mm, unfolded, sheets      1  Code    Dismantlemen     480257   Paper & paperboard; uncoated, writing, printing, graphic, non-perforated punch-cards, punch tape paper, 0-10% wgt mechanical/chemi-mechanical process fibre, except paper of heading no. 4801 or 4803, rolls or sheets, weight between 40-150g/m2 (inclusive)      1      480258   Paper and paperboard; uncoated, containing 0% to 10% by weight mechanical or chemi-mechanical process fibres, weighing more than 150g/m2, strips or rolls over 15cm wide or sheets one side over 36cm, other side over 15cm, unfolded, strips, rolls or sheets      1     480261   Paper & paperboard; uncoated, over 10% by weight of the total fibre content obtained by mechanical or chemi-mechanical process fibres, rolls     1      480262    Paper & paperboard; uncoated, over 10% by weight of the total fibre content obtained by mechanical or chemi-mechanical process fibres, one side not over 435mm & other side not over 297mm unfolded, sheets      1     480269   Paper & paperboard; uncoated, over 10% by weight of the total fibre content obtained by mechanical or chemi-mechanical process fibres, other than rolls or sheets with one side not over 435mm & other side not over 297mm unfolded     1      480300   Tissue, towel, napkin stock or similar; for household or sanitary use, cellulose, wadding webs of cellulose fibres, in rolls exceeding 36cm in width or rectangular sheets with one side more than 36cm in unfolded state      3   480411  Kraft paper and paperboard; kraftliner, uncoated, unbleached, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803   2   480419  Kraft paper and paperboard; kraftliner, uncoated, bleached, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803   2   480421  Kraft paper and paperboard; sack kraft paper, uncoated, unbleached, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803   2   480429  Kraft paper and paperboard; sack kraft paper, uncoated, bleached, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803   2  Code    Dismantlemen    480431   Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, unbleached, weight 150g/m2 or less, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803     2      480439    Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, bleached, weight 150g/m2 or less, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803      1      480441    Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, unbleached, weight more than 150g/m2 but less than 225g/m2, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803      2       480442    Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, weight between 150 and 225g/m2, bleached uniformly throughout, more than 95% of total fibre content consists of chemically processed wood fibres, in rolls or sheets       2       480449     Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, weight more than 150g/m2 but less than 225g/m2, in rolls or sheets, n.e.s. in item no. 4804.4, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803       2     480451   Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, unbleached, weight 225g/m2 or more, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803     2       480452    Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, weight 225g/m2 or more, bleached uniformly throughout, more than 95% of total fibre content consists of chemically processed wood fibres, in rolls or sheets       2  Code    Dismantlemen      480459     Kraft paper and paperboard; uncoated, weight 225g/m2 or more, in rolls or sheets, n.e.s. in item no. 4804.5, other than that of heading no. 4802 or 4803       2  480511  Paper and paperboard; uncoated, semi-chemical fluting paper, rolls or sheets  2  480512  Paper and paperboard; uncoated, straw fluting paper, rolls or sheets  2    480519   Paper and paperboard; uncoated, fluting paper other than semi-chemical or straw, rolls or sheets    2    480524   Paper & paperboard; uncoated, testliner (recycled linerboard), weight 150g/m2, or less, in rolls or sheets    2    480525   Paper & paperboard; uncoated, testliner (recycled linerboard), weight over 150g/m2, in rolls or sheets    2   480530   Paper and paperboard; sulphite wrapping paper, uncoated, in rolls or sheets   2   480540   Paper and paperboard; filter paper and paperboard, uncoated, in rolls or sheets   2   480550   Paper and paperboard; felt paper and paperboard, uncoated, in rolls or sheets   2    480591   Paper and paperboard; uncoated, weight 150g/m2 or less, in rolls or sheets, n.e.c. in heading no.4805    2    480592   Paper and paperboard; uncoated, weight more than 150g/m2 but less than 225 g/m2, in rolls or sheets, n.e.c. in heading no. 4805    2    480593   Paper and paperboard; uncoated, weight 225/m2 or more, in rolls or sheets, n.e.c. in heading no. 4805    2   480610   Paper; vegetable parchment, in rolls or sheets   2   480620   Paper; greaseproof papers, in rolls or sheets   2  Code    Dismantlemen  480630   Paper; tracing papers, in rolls or sheets   2     480640    Paper; glassine and other glazed transparent or translucent papers, in rolls or sheets     2    480700  Paper and paperboard; composite (made by sticking layers together with an adhesive), not surface-coated or impregnated, whether or not internally reinforced, in rolls or sheets    2    480810  Paper and paperboard; corrugated (with or without glued flat surface sheets), whether or not perforated, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4803 or 4818    1   480840  Paper and paperboard; kraft paper, creped or crinkled, whether or not embossed or perforated, in rolls or sheets, other than paper of heading 4803   1     480890   Paper and paperboard; (other than kraft paper), whether or not embossed or perforated, in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading no. 4803 or 4818     1    480920  Paper; self-copy paper, whether or not printed, in rolls exceeding 36cm wide or in rectangular sheets with at least one side exceeding 36cm in unfolded state    1     480990  Paper; copying and transfer paper (including coated or impregnated paper for duplicator stencils or offset plates), whether or not printed, in rolls exceeding 36cm wide or rectangular sheets with a side exceeding 36cm     1      481013   Paper and paperboard; coated with kaolin or other inorganic substances, for printing & writing, graphics, containing no, or not more than 10% by weight of total fibres obtained by mechanical or chemi-mechanical process, in rolls      1      481014   Paper and paperboard; coated with kaolin or other inorganic substances, for printing/writing/graphics, having 10% or less by weight of total fibres got mechanical/chemi- mechanical process,sheets, sides 435mm or less by 297mm or less, unfolded,      1  Code    Dismantlemen      481019    Paper and paperboard; coated with kaolin or other inorganic substances, for printing/writing/graphics, having 10% or less by weight of total fibres got by mechanical/chemi- mechanical process, sides exceeding 435mm and 297mm, unfolded, sheets       1      481022   Paper and paperboard; coated with kaolin or other inorganic substances only, having more than 10% of mechanical or chemi-mechanical processed fibres, for writing, printing or other graphic purposes, light-weight coated paper, in rolls or sheets      2      481029    Paper and paperboard; coated with kaolin or other inorganic substances only, having more than 10% of mechanically processed fibres, (excluding light- weight paper), for writing, printing or other graphic purposes, in rolls or sheets      2      481031   Kraft paper and paperboard; uniformly bleached throughout, coated with inorganic substances, more than 95% of chemically processed wood fibres, weight 150g/m2 or less, for non-graphic purposes, in rolls or sheets      2      481032   Kraft paper and paperboard; uniformly bleached throughout, coated with inorganic substances, more than 95% of chemically processed wood fibres, weight more than 150g/m2, for non-graphic purposes, in rolls or sheets      2      481039    Kraft paper and paperboard; coated with kaolin or other inorganic substances only, for non-graphic purposes, n.e.s. in item no. 4810.31 and 4810.32, in rolls or sheets      2     481092   Paper and paperboard; multi-ply, coated with kaolin or other inorganic substances only, for non- graphic purposes, n.e.c. in heading no. 4810, in rolls or sheets     1      481099    Paper and paperboard; coated with inorganic substances only, whether or not surface-coloured, surface-decorated or printed, n.e.s. in heading no. 4810, in rolls or sheets      1  Code    Dismantlemen  481110  Paper and paperboard; tarred, bituminised or asphalted, in rolls or sheets, other than goods of heading no. 4803, 4809, 4810 or 4818   2   481141  Paper and paperboard; self-adhesive, in rolls or sheets, other than goods of heading no. 4803, 4809, 4810 or 4818   2    481149  Paper and paperboard; gummed or adhesive paper and paperboard (excluding self-adhesive), in rolls or sheets, other than goods of heading no. 4803, 4809, 4810 or 4818    2    481151  Paper and paperboard; coated, impregnated or covered with plastics (excluding adhesives), bleached, weighing more than 150g/m2, other than goods of heading no. 4803, 4809, 4810 or 4818    2     481159   Paper and paperboard; coated, impregnated or covered with plastics (excluding adhesives), other than bleached and weighing more than 150g/m2, not goods of heading no. 4803, 4809, 4810 or 4818     2    481160  Paper and paperboard; coated or impregnated with wax, paraffin wax, stearin, oil or glycerol, other than goods of heading no. 4803, 4809, 4810 or 4818    2     481190   Paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding and webs of soft cellulose fibres; coated, impregnated, covered, surface-decorated or surface-coloured, n.e.s. in chapter 48, in rolls or sheets     2  481200  Paper pulp; filter blocks, slabs and plates of paper pulp  2  481310  Paper, cigarette; in the form of booklets or tubes  2  481320  Paper, cigarette; in rolls of a width not exceeding 5cm  3   481390  Paper, cigarette; (other than in rolls of a width not exceeding 5cm, or in booklets or tubes)   2   481420  Wallpaper and similar wall coverings; coated or covered on the face side, with a grained, embossed, coloured, design-printed or otherwise decorated layer of plastics   3    481490   Wallpaper and similar wall coverings and window transparencies; of paper, n.e.s. in heading no. 4814    3    481620    Paper; self-copy paper (other than those of heading no. 4809), whether or not put up in boxes    3     481690    Paper; carbon paper and other copying or transfer papers (other than those of heading no. 4809), n.e.s. in item no. 4816.10, 4816.20 or 4816.30     3  481710  Paper and paperboard; envelopes  5  Code    Dismantlemen  481720  Paper and paperboard; letter cards, plain postcards and correspondence cards   3   481730  Paper and paperboard; boxes, pouches, wallets and writing compendiums containing an assortment of paper stationery   3  481810  Paper; toilet paper  5   481820  Paper articles; handkerchiefs, cleansing or facial tissues and towels   5  481830  Paper articles; tablecloths and serviettes, of paper, cellulose wadding or fibres  5     481850    Paper articles; apparel and clothing accessories of paper, cellulose wadding or fibres     5       481890       Paper articles; articles of paper, cellulose wadding or fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 4818       5  481910  Paper and paperboard; cartons, boxes and cases, of corrugated paper or paperboard  5  481920  Paper and paperboard; folding cartons, boxes and cases, of non-corrugated paper or paperboard  3   481930  Paper and paperboard; sacks and bags of paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding or fibres, having a base of a width of 40cm or more   3   481940  Paper and paperboard; sacks and bags, including cones, of paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding or fibres, having a base width less than 40cm   5     481950   Paper and paperboard; packing containers, including record sleeves, of paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding or fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 4819     5   481960  Paper and paperboard; box files, letter trays, storage boxes and similar articles, used in offices, shops or the like of paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding or webs of cellulose fibres   5   482010  Paper and paperboard; registers, account books, note books, order books, receipt books, letter pads, memorandum pads, diaries and similar articles   5  482020  Paper and paperboard; exercise books  5  482030  Paper and paperboard; binders, folders and file covers  5  482040  Paper and paperboard; manifold business forms and interleaved carbon sets  5  482050  Paper and paperboard; albums for samples or for collections  3  Code    Dismantlemen     482090     Paper or paperboard; stationery n.e.s. in heading no. 4820      3  482110  Paper and paperboard; labels or all kinds, printed  5  482190  Paper and paperboard; labels of all kinds, unprinted  5   482210  Paper pulp, paper or paperboard; bobbins, spools, cops and similar supports, of a kind used for winding textile yarn (whether or not perforated or hardened)   2   482290  Paper pulp, paper or paperboard; bobbins, spools, cops and similar supports, other than of a kind used for winding textile yarn (whether or not perforated or hardened)   2   482320   Paper and paperboard; filter paper and paperboard   3   482340   Paper and paperboard; rolls, sheets and dials, printed for self-recording apparatus   3  482361  Paper and paperboard; trays, dishes, plates, cups and the like, of bamboo paper or paperboard  5   482369  Paper and paperboard; trays, dishes, plates, cups and the like, of paper or paperboard other than of bamboo   5  482370  Paper pulp; moulded or pressed articles or paper pulp  5      482390     Paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding or fibres; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 4823      5   490110   Printed matter; in single sheets, whether or not folded   1  490191  Printed matter; dictionaries, encyclopaedias and serial instalments thereof  1    490199   Printed matter; books, brochures, leaflets and similar printed matter n.e.s. in item no. 4901.10 or 4901.91    1   490210  Newspapers, journals and periodicals; whether or not illustrated or containing advertising material, appearing at least four times a week   1   490290  Newspapers, journals and periodicals; whether or not illustrated or containing advertising material, appearing less frequently than four times a week   1  490300  Printed matter; children's picture, drawing or colouring books  1  490400  Music; printed or in manuscript, whether or not bound or illustrated  1  490510  Globes; printed  1  Code    Dismantlemen  490591  Maps and hydrographic or similar charts; printed in book form, including atlases, topographical plans and similar   1    490599   Maps and hydrographic or similar charts; (printed other than in book form), including wall maps, topographical plans and similar    1     490600   Plans and drawings; for architectural, engineering, industrial, commercial, topographical or similar, being originals drawn by hand; hand-written texts; photo- graphic reproductions; their carbon copies     2    490700  Unused postage, revenue or similar stamps of current or new issue in the country to which destined; stamp-impressed paper; cheque forms; banknotes, stock, share or bond certificates and the like    3  490810  Printed matter; transfers (decalcomanias), vitrifiable  3  490890  Printed matter; transfers (decalcomanias), other than vitrifiable  3   490900  Printed or illustrated postcards; printed cards bearing personal greetings, messages or announcements, whether or not illustrated, with or without envelopes or trimmings   3  491000  Calendars; printed, of any kind, including calendar blocks  5  491110  Printed matter; trade advertising material, commercial catalogues and the like  5  491191  Printed matter; pictures, designs and photographs, n.e.s. in item no. 4911.10  3  491199  Printed matter; n.e.s. in heading no. 4911  5  500100  Silk; silk-worm cocoons suitable for reeling  5  500200  Silk; raw silk (not thrown)  3  500300  Silk waste (including cocoons unsuitable for reeling, yarn waste and garneted stock)  5  500400  Silk; yarn (other than yarn spun from silk waste), not put up for retail sale  2  500500  Silk; yarn spun from silk waste, not put up for retail sale  2  500600  Silk yarn and yarn spun from silk waste; put up for retail sale, and silk-worm gut  3  500710  Silk; woven fabrics of noil silk  3  500720  Silk; woven fabrics, containing 85% or more by weight of silk or of silk waste other than noil silk  3   500790   Silk; woven fabrics n.e.s. in heading no. 5007   3  510111  Wool; (not carded or combed), greasy (including fleece-washed wool), shorn  2  510119  Wool; (other than shorn), greasy (including fleece- washed wool), not carded or combed  2  510121  Wool; (not carded or combed), degreased, (not carbonised), shorn  2  510129  Wool; (not carded or combed), degreased, (not carbonised), (other than shorn)  2  510130  Wool; (not carded or combed), carbonised  2  510211  Hair; fine animal hair, not carded or combed, of kashmir (cashmere) goats  1  510219  Hair; fine animal hair, not carded or combed, other than of kashmir (cashmere) goats  1   510220   Hair; coarse animal hair, not carded or combed   1  Code    Dismantlemen 510310  Wool and hair; noils of wool or of fine animal hair, including yarn waste, but excluding garnetted  1   510320  Wool and hair; waste of wool or of fine animal hair, including yarn waste, but excluding garnetted stock and noils of wool or of fine animal hair   1   510330  Wool and hair; waste of coarse animal hair, including yarn waste, but excluding garnetted stock   1  510400  Wool and hair; garnetted stock of wool or of fine or coarse animal hair  5  510510  Wool; carded  5  510521  Wool; wool tops and other combed wool, in fragments  5  510529  Wool; wool tops and other combed wool, other than in fragments  5  510531  Hair; fine animal hair, carded or combed, of kashmir (cashmere) goats  1  510539  Hair; fine animal hair, carded or combed, other than of kashmir (cashmere) goats  1  510540  Hair; coarse animal hair, carded or combed  1  510610  Yarn; of carded wool, containing 85% or more by weight of wool, not put up for retail sale  2  510620  Yarn; of carded wool, containing less than 85% by weight of wool, not put up for retail sale  1  510710  Yarn; of combed wool, containing 85% or more by weight of wool, not put up for retail sale  2   510720  Yarn; of combed wool, containing less than 85% by weight of wool, not put up for retail sale   2  510810  Yarn; of fine animal hair, carded, not put up for retail sale  2  510820  Yarn; of fine animal hair, combed, not put up for retail sale  2   510910  Yarn; of wool or of fine animal hair, containing 85% or more by weight of wool or fine animal hair, put up for retail sale   1   510990  Yarn; of wool or of fine animal hair, containing less than 85% by weight of wool or fine animal hair, put up for retail sale   1   511000  Yarn; of coarse animal hair or of horsehair (including gimped horsehair yarn), whether or not put up for retail sale   1   511111  Fabrics, woven; of carded wool or of carded fine animal hair, containing 85% or more by weight of wool or of fine animal hair, of a weight not exceeding 300g/m2   3   511119  Fabrics, woven; of carded wool or of carded fine animal hair, containing 85% or more by weight of wool or of fine animal hair, of a weight exceeding 300g/m2   5   511120  Fabrics, woven; of carded wool or carded fine animal hair, containing less than 85% by weight of wool or fine animal hair, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments   3    511130  Fabrics, woven; of carded wool or carded fine animal hair, containing less than 85% by weight of wool or fine animal hair, mixed mainly or solely with man-made staple fibres    3     511190   Fabrics, woven; of carded wool or carded fine animal hair, containing less than 85% by weight of wool or fine animal hair, mixed mainly or solely with fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 5111     3  Code    Dismantlemen  511211  Fabrics, woven; of combed wool or combed fine animal hair, containing 85% or more by weight of wool or fine animal hair, of a weight not exceeding 200g/m2   5   511219  Fabrics, woven; of combed wool or combed fine animal hair, containing 85% or more by weight of wool or fine animal hair, of a weight exceeding 200g/m2   3   511220  Fabrics, woven; of combed wool or combed fine animal hair, containing less than 85% by weight of wool or fine animal hair, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments   5    511230  Fabrics, woven; of combed wool or combed fine animal hair, containing less than 85% by weight of wool or fine animal hair, mixed mainly or solely with man-made staple fibres    3     511290   Fabrics, woven; of combed wool or combed fine animal hair, containing less than 85% by weight of wool or fine animal hair, mixed mainly or solely with fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 5112     5  511300  Fabrics, woven; of coarse animal hair or of horsehair  5  520100  Cotton; not carded or combed  2  520210  Cotton; yarn waste (including thread waste)  2  520291  Cotton; garnetted stock waste  2  520299  Cotton; waste other than garnetted stock and yarn (including thread) waste  2  520300  Cotton; carded or combed  2  520411  Cotton; sewing thread, containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, not put up for retail sale  5   520419  Cotton; sewing thread, containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, not put up for retail sale   5  520420  Cotton; sewing thread, put up for retail sale  5   520511  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, measuring 714.29 decitex or more, (not exceeding 14 metric number), not for retail sale   5    520512  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 714.29 but not less than 232.56 decitex (exceeding 14 but not exceeding 43 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520513  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 232.56 but not less than 192.31 decitex (exceeding 43 but not exceeding 52 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520514  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 192.31 but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 but not exceeding 80 metric number), not for retail sale    5   520515  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, measuring less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number), not for retail sale   5   520521  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, measuring 714.29 decitex or more, (not exceeding 14 metric number), not for retail sale   5  Code    Dismantlemen   520522  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 714.29 but not less than 232.56 decitex (exceeding 14 but not exceeding 43 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520523  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 232.56 but not less than 192.31 decitex (exceeding 43 but not exceeding 52 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520524  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 192.31 but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 but not exceeding 80 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520526  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 125 but not less than 106.38 decitex (over 80 but not over 94 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520527  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 106.38 but not less than 83.33 decitex (over 94 but not over 120 metric number), not for retail sale    5   520528  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, measuring less than 83.33 decitex (exceeding 120 metric number), not for retail sale   5    520531  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 714.29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520532  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 714.28 to 232.56 decitex (15 to 43 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520533  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 232.55 to 192.31 decitex (44 to 52 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520534   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 192.30 to 125 decitex (53 to 80 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520535  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number), per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520541  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 714.29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5  Code    Dismantlemen   520542   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 714.28 to 232.56 decitex (15 to 43 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5     520543   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 232.55 to 192.31 decitex (44 to 52 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale     5     520544   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 192.30 to 125 decitex (53 to 80 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale     5    520546   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 124 to 106.38 decitex (81 to 94 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520547   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, 106.37 to 83.33 decitex (95 to 120 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520548  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, 85% or more by weight of cotton, less than 83.33 decitex (exceeding 120 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520611  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, measuring 714.29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520612  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 714.29 but not less than 232.56 decitex (exceeding 14 but not exceeding 43 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520613  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 232.56 but not less than 192.31 decitex (exceeding 43 but not exceeding 52 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520614  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 192.31 but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 but not exceeding 80 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520615  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, measuring less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520621  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, measuring 714.29 decitex or more, (not exceeding 14 metric number), not for retail sale    5  Code    Dismantlemen   520622  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 714.29 but not less than 232.56 decitex (exceeding 14 but not exceeding 43 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520623  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 232.56 but not less than 192.31 decitex (exceeding 43 but not exceeding 52 metric number), not for retail sale    5    520624  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 192.31 but not less than 125 decitex (exceeding 52 but not exceeding 80 metric number), not for retail sale    5   520625  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, measuring less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number), not for retail sale   5    520631  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 714.29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520632  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 714.28 to 232.56 decitex (15 to 43 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5     520633  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 232.55 to 192.31 decitex (44 to 52 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale     5    520634   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 192.30 to 125 decitex (53 to 80 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520635  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of uncombed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520641  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 714.29 decitex or more (not exceeding 14 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520642   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 714.28 to 232.56 decitex (15 to 43 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5     520643   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 232.55 to 192.31 decitex (44 to 52 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale     5  Code    Dismantlemen   520644   Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, 192.30 to 125 decitex (53 to 80 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5    520645  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple or cabled, of combed fibres, less than 85% by weight of cotton, less than 125 decitex (exceeding 80 metric number) per single yarn, not for retail sale    5  520710  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, put up for retail sale  5   520790  Cotton yarn; (not sewing thread), containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, put up for retail sale   5   520811  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, unbleached, plain weave, weighing not more than 100g/m2   5   520812  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, unbleached, plain weave, weighing more than 100g/m2 but not more than 200g/m2   5   520813  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, unbleached, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520819  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, unbleached, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5208.1, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520821  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, bleached, plain weave, weighing not more than 100g/m2   5   520822  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, bleached, plain weave, weighing more than 100g/m2 but not more than 200g/m2   5   520823  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, bleached, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520829  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, bleached, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5208.2, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520831  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, dyed, plain weave, weighing not more than 100g/m2   5   520832  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, dyed, plain weave, weighing more than 100g/m2 but not more than 200g/m2   5   520833  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, dyed, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520839  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, dyed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5208.3 weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520841  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, plain weave, weighing not more than 100g/m2   5   520842  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, weighing more than 100g/m2 but not more than 200g/m2   5  Code    Dismantlement   520843  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520849  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5208.4, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520851  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, printed, plain weave, weighing not more than 100g/m2   5   520852  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, printed, plain weave, weighing more than 100g/m2 but not more than 200g/m2   5   520859  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, printed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5208.5, weighing not more than 200g/m2   5   520911  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, unbleached, plain weave, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520912  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, unbleached, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520919  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, unbleached, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5209.1, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520921  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, bleached, plain weave, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520922  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, bleached, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520929  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, bleached, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5209.2, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520931  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, dyed, plain weave, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520932  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, dyed, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520939  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, dyed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5209.3, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520941  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, plain weave, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520942  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, weighing more than 200g/m2, denim   5   520943  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing more than 200g/m2   5    520949  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, of yarns of different colours, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5209.4, weighing more than 200g/m2    5   520951  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, printed, plain weave, weighing more than 200g/m2   5  Code    Dismantlemen  520952  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, printed, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   520959  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, printed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5209.5, weighing more than 200g/m2   5   521011  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, unbleached, plain weave, weighing 200g/m2 or less   5    521019  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, unbleached, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5210.1, weighing 200g/m2 or less    5   521021  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, bleached, plain weave, weighing 200g/m2 or less   5    521029  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, bleached, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5210.2    5   521031  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, dyed, plain weave   5    521032  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, dyed, 3- thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill    5     521039   Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, dyed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5210.3     5    521041  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, of yarns of different colours, plain weave    5    521049  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, of yarns of different colours, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5210.4    5   521051  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, printed, plain weave   5    521059  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing 200g/m2 or less, printed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5210.5    5   521111  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, unbleached, plain weave, weighing more than 200g/m2   5  Code    Dismantlemen   521112  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, unbleached, 3- or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, weighing more than 200g/m2    5     521119   Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, unbleached, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5211.1, weighing more than 200g/m2     5   521120  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, bleached   5   521131  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, dyed, plain weave   5    521132  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, dyed, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill    5     521139   Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, dyed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5211.3     5    521141  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, of yarns of different colours, plain weave    5    521142  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, of yarns of different colours, denim    5    521143  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, of yarns of different colours, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill    5     521149   Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, of yarns of different colours, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5211.4     5   521151  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, printed, plain weave   5    521152  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, printed, 3-thread or 4-thread twill, including cross twill    5    521159   Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, mixed mainly or solely with man- made fibres, weighing more than 200g/m2, printed, of weaves n.e.s. in item no. 5211.5    5  Code    Dismantlemen  521211   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, unbleached, weighing not more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5   521212   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, bleached, weighing not more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5   521213   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, dyed, weighing not more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5    521214   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, of yarns of different colours, weighing not more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52    5   521215   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, printed, weighing not more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5   521221   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, unbleached, weighing more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5   521222   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, bleached, weighing more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5   521223   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, dyed, weighing more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5    521224   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, of yarns of different colours, weighing more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52    5   521225   Fabrics, woven; of cotton, printed, weighing more than 200g/m2, n.e.s. in chapter 52   5  530110  Flax; raw or retted, but not spun  3  530121  Flax; broken or scutched, but not spun  3  530129  Flax; hackled or otherwise processed, but not spun  3  530130  Flax; tow and waste, including yarn waste and garnetted stock  3  530210  Hemp (cannabis sativa L.); raw or retted, but not spun  5   530290  Hemp (cannabis sativa L.); processed (other than retted) (but not spun), true hemp tow and waste (including yarn waste and garnetted stock)   5   530310  Jute and other textile bast fibres; raw or retted, but not spun, (excluding flax, hemp (cannabis sativa L.), and ramie)   1   530390  Jute and other textile bast fibres; processed but not spun, tow and waste of these fibres, including yarn waste and garnetted stock (excluding flax, hemp (cannabis sativa L.), and ramie)   1    530500  Coconut, abaca (Manila hemp or Musa textilis Nee), ramie and other vegetable textile fibres n.e.c., raw or processed but not spun; tow, noils and waste of these fibres (including yarn waste and garnetted stock)    1  530610  Yarn; of flax, single  1  530620  Yarn; of flax, multiple (folded) or cabled  1  Code    Dismantlemen 530710  Yarn; of jute or of other textile bast fibres, single  1  530720  Yarn; of jute or of other textile bast fibres, multiple (folded) or cabled  1  530810  Yarn; of coir  1  530820  Yarn; of hemp (cannabis sativa L.)  1   530890  Yarn; of vegetable textile fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 5306, 5307 and 5308   1  530911  Fabrics, woven; of flax, containing 85% or more flax, unbleached or bleached  5  530919  Fabrics, woven; of flax, containing 85% or more flax, other than bleached or unbleached  3  530921  Fabrics, woven; of flax, containing less than 85% flax, unbleached or bleached  5   530929  Fabrics, woven; of flax, containing less than 85% flax, other than unbleached or bleached   3  531010  Fabrics, woven; of jute or of other textile bast fibres of heading no. 5303, unbleached  5   531090  Fabrics, woven; of jute or of other textile bast fibres of heading no. 5303, other than unbleached   5   531100  Fabrics, woven; of vegetable textile fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 5309 and 5310, woven fabrics of paper yarn   3  540110  Sewing thread; of synthetic filaments, whether or not put up for retail sale  2  540120  Sewing thread; of artificial filaments, whether or not put up for retail sale  2   540211  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), of high tenacity nylon or other polyamides, of aramids, not for retail sale, not sewing thread   2   540219  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), of high tenacity nylon or other polyamides, other than aramids, not for retail sale, not sewing thread   2   540220  Yarn; (not sewing thread), high tenacity yarn of polyesters (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not put up for retail sale   2    540231  Yarn; textured, (not sewing thread), of nylon or other polyamides, measuring per single yarn not more than 50 decitex (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not put up for retail sale    2   540232  Yarn; textured, (not sewing thread), of nylon or other polyamides, measuring per single yarn more than 50 decitex (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not put up for retail sale   2   540233  Yarn; textured, (not sewing thread), of polyesters (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not put up for retail sale   2   540234  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), textured, of polypropylene, not for retail sale, not sewing thread   2   540239  Yarn; textured, (not sewing thread), of synthetic filament yarn n.e.s. in item no. 5402.30 (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not put up for retail sale   2    540244  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), other than high tenacity or textured yarn, elastomeric, single, untwisted or twisted 50 turns or less per metre, not for retail sale, not sewing thread    2  Code    Dismantlemen   540245  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), of nylon or other polymides (not high tenacity or textured), single, untwisted or twisted 50 turns or less per metre, not for retail sale, not sewing thread    2    540246  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), of polyesters (not high tenacity or textured), partially oriented, single, untwisted or twisted 50 turns or less per metre, not for retail sale, not sewing thread    2    540247  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), polyesters (not high tenacity or textured), not partially oriented, single, untwisted or twisted 50 turns or less per metre, not for retail sale, not sewing thread    2    540248  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), of polypropylene (not high tenacity or textured), single, untwisted or twisted 50 turns or less per metre, not for retail sale, not sewing thread    2     540249   Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, synthetic filament yarn (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex) n.e.s. in item no. 5402.4, untwisted or twisted 50 turns or less per metre, not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity     2    540251  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of nylon or other polyamides (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), with a twist exceeding 50 turns per metre, not put up for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2    540252  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of polyesters (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), with a twist exceeding 50 turns per metre, not put up for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2   540253  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), of polypropylene (not high tenacity or textured), single, twisted more than 50 turns per metre, not for retail sale, not sewing thread   2    540259  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, synthetic filament yarn (including synthetic monofilament less than 67 decitex), n.e.s. in item no. 5402.5, with twist exceeding 50 turns per metre, not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2    540261  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled, of nylon or other polyamides (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not put up for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2   540262  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled, of polyesters (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not put up for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity   2   540263  Yarn, synthetic; filament, monofilament (less than 67 decitex), of polypropylene, other than high tenacity or textured yarn, multiple (folded) or cabled, not for retail sale, not sewing thread   2    540269  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled, of synthetic filament yarn (including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex) n.e.s. in item no. 5402.6, not put up for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2  Code    Dismantlemen  540310  Yarn; (not sewing thread), high tenacity yarn of viscose rayon, (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not for retail sale   2    540331  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of viscose rayon, (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex), untwisted or with a twist not exceeding 120 turns per metre, not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2    540332  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of viscose rayon, (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex), with a twist exceeding 120 turns per metre, not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2   540333  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of cellulose acetate, (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity   2    540339  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, artificial filament yarn (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex) n.e.s. in item no. 5403.3, not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2   540341  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled, of viscose rayon (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity   2   540342  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled, of cellulose acetate (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex), not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity   2    540349  Yarn, (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled, of artificial filament yarn (including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex), n.e.s. in item no. 5403.4, not for retail sale, not textured, not high tenacity    2   540411  Elastomeric monofilament; of 67 decitex or more and of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1mm   2   540412  Monofilament of polypropylene; of 67 decitex or more and of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1mm   2   540419  Monofilament n.e.c. in heading no 5404; of 67 decitex or more and of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1mm   2   540490  Filament, synthetic; strip and the like (eg artificial straw), of synthetic textile materials of an apparent width not exceeding 5mm   2    540500  Monofilament, synthetic; of 67 decitex or more and of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1mm, strip and the like (eg artificial straw), of synthetic textile materials with width not over 5mm    1  540600  Man-made filament yarn (other than sewing thread), put up for retail sale  2   540710  Fabrics, woven; from high tenacity yarn, of nylon, other polyamides or of polyesters   3  540720  Fabrics, woven; from strip or the like, of synthetic textile materials  3     540730    Fabrics, woven; from synthetic filament yarn, adhesive or thermal bonded     5  Code    Dismantlemen  540741  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of filaments of nylon or other polyamides, unbleached or bleached   5   540742   Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of filaments of nylon or other polyamides, dyed   5   540743  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of filaments of nylon or other polyamides, of yarns of different colours   5   540744   Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of filaments of nylon or other polyamides, printed   5   540751  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of textured polyester filaments, unbleached or bleached   5   540752   Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of textured polyester filaments, dyed   3   540753  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of textured polyester filaments, of yarns of different colours   5   540754   Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of textured polyester filaments, printed   5   540761  Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of non-textured polyester filaments   3   540769   Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of non-textured polyester filaments   3     540771   Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic filaments (excluding nylon or other polyamides and polyesters), unbleached or bleached     3     540772    Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic filaments (excluding nylon or other polyamides and polyesters), dyed     3     540773   Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic filaments (excluding nylon or other polyamides and polyesters), of yarns of different colours     3     540774    Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic filaments (excluding nylon or other polyamides and polyesters), printed     5  Code    Dismantlemen   540781  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic filaments, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, bleached or unbleached    5    540782   Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic filaments, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, dyed    5    540783  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic filaments, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, of yarns of different colours    5    540784   Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic filaments, printed    5     540791    Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, bleached or unbleached, n.e.s. in heading no. 5407     5    540792   Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, dyed, n.e.s. in heading 5407    3     540793    Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, of yarns of different colours, n.e.s. in heading no. 5407     3    540794   Fabrics, woven; of synthetic filament yarn, printed, n.e.s. in heading no. 5407    3   540810  Fabrics, woven; of viscose rayon, high tenacity, artificial filament yarn   3    540821   Fabrics, woven; of artificial filament yarn, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial filament, strip or the like, bleached or unbleached    5    540822   Fabrics, woven; of artificial filament yarn, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial filament, strip or the like, dyed    3    540823   Fabrics, woven; containing 85% or more by weight of artificial filament, strip or the like, of yarns of different colours    5    540824   Fabrics, woven; of artificial filament yarn, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial filament, strip or the like, printed    5  Code    Dismantlemen   540831   Fabrics, woven; of artificial filament yarn, of artificial monofilament, strip and the like, n.e.s. in heading no. 5408, unbleached or bleached    5    540832   Fabrics, woven; of artificial filament yarn, of artificial monofilament, strip and the like, n.e.s. in heading no. 5408, dyed    5     540833   Fabrics, woven; of artificial filament yarn, of artificial monofilament, strip and the like, n.e.s. in heading no. 5408, of yarns of different colours     5    540834   Fabrics, woven; of artificial filament yarn, of artificial monofilament, strip and the like, n.e.s. in heading no. 5408, printed    5  550110  Fibres; synthetic filament tow, of nylon or other polyamides  1  550120  Fibres; synthetic filament tow, of polyesters  1  550130  Fibres; synthetic filament tow, acrylic or modacrylic  1  550140  Fibres; synthetic filament tow, of polypropylene  1    550190   Fibres; synthetic filament tow, of synthetic materials n.e.s. in heading no. 5501    1  550210  Fibres; artificial filament tow of cellulose acetate  5   550290  Fibres; artificial filament tow, other than cellulose acetate   5   550311  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of aramids, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550319  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of nylon or other polyamides other than aramids, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550320  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of polyesters, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550330  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, acrylic or modacrylic, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550340  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of polypropylene, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1    550390   Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of synthetic materials n.e.s. in heading no. 5503, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning    1   550410  Fibres; artificial staple fibres, of viscose, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550490  Fibres; artificial staple fibres, other than of viscose, not carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1  Code    Dismantlemen 550510  Fibres; waste (including noils, yarn waste and garnetted stock), of synthetic fibres  3  550520  Fibres; waste (including noils, yarn waste and garnetted stock), of artificial fibres  5   550610  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of nylon or other polyamides, carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550620  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of polyesters, carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550630  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, acrylic or modacrylic, carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1   550640  Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, of polypropylene, carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning   1    550690   Fibres; synthetic staple fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 5506, carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning    1  550700  Fibres; artificial staple fibres, carded, combed or otherwise processed for spinning  1  550810  Sewing thread; of synthetic staple fibres, whether or not put up for retail sale  2  550820  Sewing thread; of artificial staple fibres, whether or not put up for retail sale  2   550911  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of nylon or other polyamides, not put up for retail sale   2   550912  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled yarn, of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of nylon or other polyamides, not put up for retail sale   2   550921  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of polyester, not put up for retail sale   2   550922  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled yarn, of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of polyester, not put up for retail sale   2   550931  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of acrylic or modacrylic, not put up for retail sale   2   550932  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled, of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of acrylic or modacrylic, not put up for retail sale   2    550941   Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic staple fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 5509, not put up for retail sale    2     550942   Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled yarn, containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic staple fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 5509, not put up for retail sale     2    550951   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with artificial staple fibres, not put up for retail sale    2  Code    Dismantlemen   550952   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair, not put up for retail sale    2    550953   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not put up for retail sale    2     550959   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with fibres n.e.s. in item no. 5509.5, not put up for retail sale     2     550961   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair, not put up for retail sale     2    550962   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not put up for retail sale    2    550969   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with fibres n.e.s. in item no. 5509.6, not put up for retail sale    2     550991   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of synthetic staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair, n.e.s. in heading no. 5509, not put up for retail sale     2     550992   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of synthetic staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, n.e.s. in heading no. 5509, not put up for retail sale     5     550999   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of synthetic staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with fibres (other than wool, fine animal hair or cotton), n.e.s. in heading no. 5509, not put up for retail sale     2   551011  Yarn; (not sewing thread), single, of artificial staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial staple fibres, not put up for retail sale   2   551012  Yarn; (not sewing thread), multiple (folded) or cabled yarn, of artificial staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial staple fibres, not put up for retail sale   2    551020   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair, not put up for retail sale    2  Code    Dismantlement    551030   Yarn; (not sewing thread), of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not put up for retail sale    5    551090  Yarn; (not sewing thread), of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with fibres (other than wool, fine animal hair or cotton), not put up for retail sale    2   551110  Yarn; (not sewing thread), of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic staple fibres, put up for retail sale   2   551120  Yarn; (not sewing thread), of synthetic staple fibres, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres, put up for retail sale   2  551130  Yarn; (not sewing thread), of artificial staple fibres, put up for retail sale  2   551211  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of polyester staple fibres, unbleached or bleached   5   551219  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of polyester staple fibres, other than unbleached or bleached   3   551221  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres, unbleached or bleached   5   551229  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres, other than unbleached or bleached   3   551291  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of such fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 5512, unbleached or bleached   5    551299  Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres, containing 85% or more by weight of such fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 5512, other than unbleached or bleached    3    551311  Fabrics, woven; plain weave, of polyester staple fibres, containing less than 85% by weight of such fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, of a weight not exceeding 170g/m2, unbleached or bleached    3    551312  Fabrics, woven; 3-thread or 4-thread twill, of polyester staple fibres, containing less than 85% by weight of such, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2, unbleached or bleached    5     551313   Fabrics, woven; of polyester staple fibres, containing less than 85% by weight of such fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2, unbleached or bleached     5    551319  Fabrics, woven; containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres (other than polyesters), mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2, unbleached or bleached    3   551321  Fabrics, woven; plain weave, dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2   5  Code    Dismantlement    551323   Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2    5    551329  Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres (other than polyesters), mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2    5    551331  Fabrics, woven; plain weave, of yarns of different colours, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2    5     551339   Fabrics, woven; of yarns of different colours, containing less than 85% of synthetic staple fibres (other than polyesters), mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2     5   551341  Fabrics, woven; plain weave, printed, of polyester staple fibres, containing less than 85% by weight of such fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2   5    551349  Fabrics, woven; printed, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres (other than polyesters), mixed mainly or solely with cotton, not exceeding 170g/m2    5    551411  Fabrics, woven; plain weave, unbleached or bleached, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2    5    551412  Fabrics, woven; 3- or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, unbleached or bleached, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, over 170g/m2    5     551419   Fabrics, woven; unbleached or bleached, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres (other than polyesters), mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2     5   551421  Fabrics, woven; plain weave, dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2   5    551422  Fabrics, woven; 3- or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2    5     551423   Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2, n.e.s. in heading no. 5514     5    551429  Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres (other than polyesters), mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2    5  Code    Dismantlement    551430  Fabrics, woven; of yarns of different colours, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2    5   551441  Fabrics, woven; plain weave, printed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2   5    551442  Fabrics, woven; 3- or 4-thread twill, including cross twill, printed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2    5     551443   Fabrics, woven; printed, containing less than 85% by weight of polyester staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton, weight exceeding 170g/m2, n.e.s. in heading no. 5514     5    551449  Fabrics, woven; printed, containing less than 85% by weight of synthetic staple fibres (other than polyesters), mixed mainly or solely with cotton, exceeding 170g/m2    5   551511  Fabrics, woven; of polyester staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with viscose rayon staple fibres   3   551512  Fabrics, woven; of polyester staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments   3   551513  Fabrics, woven; of polyester staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair   3     551519   Fabrics, woven; of polyester staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with fibres n.e.s. in item no. 5515.1     3   551521  Fabrics, woven; of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments   3   551522  Fabrics, woven; of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair   3    551529   Fabrics, woven; of acrylic or modacrylic staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with fibres n.e.s. in item no. 5515.2    3     551591   Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments     3  Code    Dismantlement    551599   Fabrics, woven; of synthetic staple fibres n.e.s. in chapter 55, mixed mainly or solely with fibres n.e.s. in heading no. 5515    3   551611  Fabrics, woven; unbleached or bleached, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial staple fibres   5  551612  Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial staple fibres  3   551613  Fabrics, woven; of yarns of different colours, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial staple fibres   3  551614  Fabrics, woven; printed, containing 85% or more by weight of artificial staple fibres  5   551621  Fabrics, woven; unbleached or bleached, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with manmade filaments   5   551622  Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments   5   551623  Fabrics, woven; of yarns of different colours, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with man- made filaments   3   551624  Fabrics, woven; printed, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with man-made filaments   5   551631  Fabrics, woven; unbleached or bleached, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair   5   551632  Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair   5   551633  Fabrics, woven; of yarns of different colours, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair   5   551634  Fabrics, woven; printed, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with wool or fine animal hair   5   551641  Fabrics, woven; unbleached or bleached, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton   5   551642  Fabrics, woven; dyed, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton   5   551643  Fabrics, woven; of yarns of different colours, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton   5   551644  Fabrics, woven; printed, containing less than 85% by weight of artificial staple fibres, mixed mainly or solely with cotton   5  Code    Dismantlemen   551691   Fabrics, woven; unbleached or bleached, of artificial staple fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 5516    5    551692   Fabrics, woven; dyed, of artificial staple fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 5516    5     551693    Fabrics, woven; of yarns of different colours, of artificial staple fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 5516     3    551694   Fabrics, woven; printed, of artificial staple fibres, n.e.s. in heading no. 5516    3      560121      Wadding; other articles thereof, of cotton      5      560122     Wadding; other articles thereof, of man-made fibres      3      560129     Wadding; other articles thereof, other than of cotton or man-made fibres      3  560130  Wadding; textile flock and dust and mill neps  3   560210  Felt; needleloom felt and stitch-bonded fibre fabrics, whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated   3   560221  Felt; of wool or fine animal hair (excluding needleloom felt or stitch-bonded fibre fabrics), not impregnated, coated, covered nor laminated   1   560229  Felt; of textile materials other than wool or fine animal hair (excluding needleloom felt and stitch- bonded fibre fabrics), not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated   3   560290  Felt; impregnated, coated, covered or laminated (excluding needleloom felt and stitch-bonded fibre fabrics)   1   560311  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, of man-made filaments, (weighing not more than 25g/m2)   3   560312  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, of man-made filaments, (weighing more than 25g/m2 but not more than 70g/m2)   1  Code    Dismantlemen  560313  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, of man-made filaments, (weighing more than 70g/m2 but not more than 150g/m2)   1   560314  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, of man-made filaments, (weighing more than 150g/m2)   1   560391  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, not of man-made filaments, (weighing not more than 25g/m2)   1   560392  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, not of man-made filaments, (weighing more than 25g/m2 but not more than 70g/m2)   1   560393  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, not of man-made filaments, (weighing more than 70g/m2 but not more than 150g/m2)   1   560394  Nonwovens; whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated, not of man-made filaments, (weighing more than 150g/m2)   1  560410  Rubber thread and cord; textile covered  1    560490  Yarn; textile yarn, strip, and the like of heading no. 5404 or 5405, impregnated, coated, covered, or sheathed with rubber or plastics, n.e.s. in heading no. 5604    1      560500    Yarn; metallised, whether or not gimped, of textile yarn, or strip or the like of heading no. 5404 or 5405, combined with metal in the form of thread, strip or powder or covered with metal      3     560600   Yarn and strip and the like of heading no. 5404 or 5405; gimped, (other than those of heading no. 5406 and gimped horsehair yarn); chenille yarn (including flock chenille yarn); loop wale-yarn     3  560721  Twine; binder or baler twine, of sisal or other textile fibres of the genus agave  1    560729  Twine, cordage, ropes, cables; of sisal or other textile fibres of the genus agave (excluding binder or baler twine), whether or not plaited, braided or rubber or plastic impregnated, coated, covered or sheathed    1  560741  Twine; binder or baler twine, of polyethylene or polypropylene  3   560749  Twine, cordage, ropes, cables; of polyethylene or polypropylene (excluding binder or baler twine), whether or not plaited, braided or rubber or plastic impregnated, coated, covered or sheathed   1    560750  Twine, cordage, ropes, cables; of synthetic fibres other than polyethylene or polypropylene, whether or not plaited, braided or impregnated, coated, covered or sheathed with rubber or plastics    1    560790  Twine, cordage, ropes, cables; of materials n.e.s. in heading no. 5607, whether or not plaited, braided or impregnated, coated, covered, or sheathed with rubber or plastics    1  Code    Dismantlemen  560811  Twine, cordage or rope; fishing nets, made up, of man made textile materials   1    560819    Twine, cordage or rope; knotted netting, for other than fishing, of man-made textile materials    3     560890     Twine, cordage or rope; knotted netting, of other than man-made textiles     3   560900  Yarn; articles of yarn, strip or the like of heading no. 5404 and 5405, twine, cordage, rope or cables n.e.s. or included   3   570110  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; knotted, of wool or fine animal hair, whether or not made up   3   570190  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; knotted, of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair), whether or not made up   3   570210  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), whether or not made up, including "kelem", "schumacks", "karamanie" and similar hand-woven rugs   3   570220  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), whether or not made up, of coconut fibres (coir)   5    570231  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of wool or fine animal hair, of pile construction, not made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20    3    570232  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of man-made textile materials, of pile construction, not made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20    3     570239  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of textile materials (other than man-made, wool or fine animal hair), of pile construction, not made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20     5    570241  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of wool or fine animal hair, of pile construction, made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20    3    570242  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of man-made textile materials, of pile construction, made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20    3     570249  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of textile materials (other than man-made, wool or fine animal hair), of pile construction, made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20     3  Code    Dismantlemen   570250   Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), not of pile construction, not made up, n.e.c. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20    3    570291  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of wool or fine animal hair, (not of pile construction), made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20    5    570292  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of man-made textile materials, (not of pile construction), made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20    3     570299  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; woven, (not tufted or flocked), of textile materials (other than man-made or wool or fine animal hair, not of pile construction), made up, n.e.s. in item no. 5702.10 or 5702.20     3  570310  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; tufted, of wool or fine animal hair, whether or not made up  3   570320  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; tufted, of nylon or other polyamides, whether or not made up   3   570330  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; tufted, of man-made textile materials (other than polyamides), whether or not made up   3   570390  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; tufted, of textile materials (other than man-made, wool or fine animal hair), whether or not made up   3   570410  Textile floor coverings; felt tiles, (not tufted or flocked), whether or not made up, having a maximum surface area of 0.3m2   5   570420  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; of felt, (not tufted or flocked), whether or not made up, having a maximum surface area exceeding 0.3 m2 but not exceeding 1 m2   3   570490  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; of felt, (not tufted or flocked), whether or not made up, other than tiles having a maximum surface area of 0.3m2   3   570500  Carpets and other textile floor coverings; n.e.s. in chapter 57, whether or not made up   3   580110   Fabrics; woven pile, of wool or fine animal hair, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580121  Fabrics; woven pile, of cotton, uncut weft pile fabrics, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580122   Fabrics; woven pile, of cotton, cut corduroy, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580123  Fabrics; woven pile, of cotton, weft pile fabrics other than uncut and corduroy, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580126  Fabrics; chenille, of cotton, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5  Code    Dismantlemen  580127   Fabrics; woven pile, of cotton, warp pile fabrics, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580131  Fabrics; woven pile, of man-made fibres, uncut weft pile fabrics, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580132  Fabrics; woven pile, of man-made fibres, cut corduroy, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   3   580133  Fabrics; woven pile, of man-made fibres, other weft pile fabrics, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580136   Fabrics; chenille, of man-made fibres, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5   580137  Fabrics; woven pile, of man-made fibres, warp pile fabrics, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806   5    580190   Fabrics; woven pile and chenille, of textile materials n.e.s. in heading no. 5801, other than fabrics of heading no. 5802 or 5806    5   580211  Fabrics; terry towelling and similar woven terry fabrics, of cotton, unbleached, excluding narrow fabrics of heading no. 5806   5   580219  Fabrics; terry towelling and similar woven terry fabrics, of cotton, bleached, excluding narrow fabrics of heading no. 5806   5   580220  Fabrics; terry towelling and similar woven terry fabrics, of textile materials, excluding cotton, excluding narrow fabrics of heading no. 5806   5  580230  Fabrics; tufted textile fabrics, excluding products of heading no. 5703  5  580300  Gauze; other than narrow fabrics of heading no. 5806  5   580410  Tulles and other net fabrics; excluding woven, knitted or crocheted fabrics, (other than fabrics of heading no. 6002)   3   580421  Lace; mechanically made, of man-made fibres in the piece, in strips or in motifs, (other than fabrics of heading no. 6002)   5   580429  Lace; mechanically made, of textile materials, (other than man-made fibres), in the piece, in strips or motifs, (other than fabrics of heading no. 6002)   5  580430  Lace; hand-made, in the piece, in strips or motifs, (other than fabrics of heading no. 6002)  5     580500   Tapestries; hand-woven, (gobelins, flanders, aubusson, beauvais and the like) and needle- worked tapestries (eg petit point, cross-stitch) whether or not made up     3   580610  Fabrics; woven pile (including terry towelling and similar terry fabrics) and chenille fabrics (excluding goods of heading no. 5807)   3  Code    Dismantlemen   580620   Fabrics; narrow (excluding pile fabrics), containing by weight 5% or more of elastomeric yarn or rubber thread    3   580631  Fabrics; narrow woven fabrics, n.e.s. in heading no. 5806, of cotton (excluding goods of heading no. 5807)   5   580632  Fabrics, narrow woven fabrics, n.e.s. in heading no. 5806, of man-made fibres (excluding goods of heading no. 5807)   3   580639  Fabrics; narrow woven fabrics, n.e.s. in heading no. 5806, of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 5806.3 (excluding goods of heading no. 5807)   3  580640  Fabrics; narrow woven, consisting of warp without weft, assembled by means of an adhesive  3   580710  Labels, badges and similar articles; woven, of textile materials, in the piece, in strips or cut to shape or size, not embroidered   3   580790  Labels, badges and similar articles; (other than woven), of textile materials, in the piece, in strips or cut to shape or size, not embroidered   3  580810  Braids; in the piece  3     580890   Ornamental trimmings; tassels, pompons and similar articles; ornamental trimmings in the piece, without embroidery, other than knitted or crocheted     3   580900  Fabrics, woven; of metal thread and metallised yarn of heading no. 5605, of a kind used in apparel, as furnishing fabrics or similar purposes; n.e.s. or included   3   581010  Embroidery; without visible ground, in the piece, in strips or in motifs   3   581091   Embroidery; with visible ground, of cotton, in the piece, in strips or in motifs   3   581092   Embroidery; with visible ground, of man-made fibres, in the piece, in strips or in motifs   3    581099   Embroidery; with visible ground, of textile materials (other than cotton and man-made fibres), in the piece, in strips or in motifs    3    581100   Quilted textile products; in the piece, composed of one or more layers of textile materials assembled with padding by stitching or otherwise (excluding embroidery of heading no. 5810)    3   590110  Textile fabrics; coated with gum or amylaceous substances, of a kind used for the outer covers of books or the like   5   590190  Textile fabrics; coated with gum or amylaceous substances, tracing cloth, prepared painting canvas, buckram and similar stiffened textile fabrics for hat foundations, (excluding book   3   590210   Textile fabrics; tyrecord of high tenacity yarn of nylon or other polyamides   3  Code    Dismantlement   590220   Textile fabrics; tyrecord of high tenacity yarn of polyester   3   590290   Textile fabrics; tyrecord of high tenacity yarn of viscose rayon   3     590310     Textile fabrics; impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with polyvinyl chloride     2     590320    Textile fabrics; impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with polyurethane     3       590390     Textile fabrics; impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with plastics, (excluding polyvinyl chloride, polyurethane and those of heading no. 5902)       3  590410  Linoleum, whether or not cut to shape  3   590490  Textiles floor coverings; consisting of a coating or covering applied on a textile backing, whether or not cut to shape, other than linoleum   5  590500  Textile wall coverings of fabrics impregnated, coated, covered or laminated  3    590610   Textile fabrics, rubberised; (excluding those of heading no. 5902), adhesive tape of a width not exceeding 20cm    3   590691  Textile fabrics, rubberised; (excluding those of heading no. 5902 and adhesive tape of a width not exceeding 20cm), knitted or crocheted   5    590699   Textile fabrics, rubberised; (excluding those of heading no. 5902 and adhesive tape of a width not exceeding 20cm), not knitted or crocheted    3   590700  Textile fabrics; otherwise impregnated, coated or covered, painted canvas being theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths or the like   3      590800    Textile wicks, woven, plaited or knitted; for lamps, stoves, lighters, candles or the like; incandescent gas mantles and tubular knitted gas mantle fabric therefor, whether or not impregnated      5   590900  Textile hosepiping and similar textile tubing; with or without lining, armour or accessories of other materials   1  Code    Dismantlement       591000      Textiles; transmission or conveyor belts or belting, of textile material, whether or not reinforced with metal or other material       1     591110   Textile fabric, felt and felt-lined woven fabrics, with one or more layers of rubber, leather or other material, of a kind used for card clothing, similar fabric for other technical uses     3  591120  Textile products and articles for technical uses; bolting cloth, whether or not made up  3   591131  Textiles; fabrics and felts, endless or fitted with linking devices, of a kind used in paper-making or similar machines, weighing less than 650g/m2   2   591132  Textiles; fabrics and felts, endless or fitted with linking devices, of a kind used in paper-making or similar machines, weighing 650g/m2 or more   2   591140  Textile products and articles for technical uses; straining cloth of a kind used in oil presses and the like, including that of human hair   3  591190  Textile products and articles for technical uses; n.e.s. in heading no. 5911  3  600110  Fabrics; "long pile" fabrics, knitted or crocheted  5  600121  Fabrics; looped pile fabrics, of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  600122  Fabrics; looped pile fabrics, of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   600129  Fabrics; looped pile fabrics, of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  600191  Fabrics; pile fabrics (excluding "long pile" and loop pile), of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  600192  Fabrics; pile fabrics (excluding "long pile" and loop pile), of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted  3   600199  Fabrics; pile fabrics (excluding "long pile" and loop pile), of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5     600240   Fabrics; knitted or crocheted, other than those of heading 60.01, of a width not exceeding 30 cm, containing by weight 5% or more of elastomeric yarn but not containing rubber thread     5      600290    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted, other than those of heading 60.01, of a width not exceeding 30 cm, containing by weight 5% or more of elastomeric yarn or rubber thread      5  Code    Dismantlement      600310    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of heading 60.01 and 60.02, of a width not exceeding 30 cm, of wool or fine animal hair      5     600320    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of heading 60.01 and 60.02, of a width not exceeding 30 cm, of cotton     5       600330      Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of heading 60.01 and 60.02, of a width not exceeding 30 cm, of synthetic fibres       5      600340     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of heading 60.01 and 60.02, of a width not exceeding 30 cm, of artificial fibres      5       600390     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of heading 60.01 and 60.02, of a width not exceeding 30 cm, other than of wool and fine animal hair, cotton, synthetic or artificial fibres       5     600410   Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics of a width exceeding 30 cm, other than those of heading 60.01, containing by weight 5% or more of elastomeric yarn but not containing rubber thread     3     600490   Fabrics; knitted or crocheted, other than those of heading 60.01, of a width exceeding 30 cm, containing by weight 5% or more of elastomeric yarn or rubber thread,     5      600521    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, unbleached or bleached      5  Code    Dismantlement      600522    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, dyed      5      600523    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, yarns of different colours      5      600524    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, printed      5   600535  Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres specified in Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter   5      600536    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, bleached or unbleached      3      600537    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, dyed      5      600538    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, yarns of different colours      5      600539    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, printed      5  Code    Dismantlement      600541    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, bleached or unbleached      5      600542    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, dyed      5      600543    Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, of yarns of different colours      5      600544     Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, printed      5      600590   Fabrics; warp knit (including those made on galloon knitting machines), other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, excluding those made from wool, fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic or artificial fibres      5      600610    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of wool or fine animal hair      5      600621    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, unbleached or bleached      5      600622     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, dyed      3  Code    Dismantlement      600623     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, of yarns of different colours      5      600624    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of cotton, printed      3      600631     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, unbleached or bleached      5      600632     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, dyed      3      600633     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, of yarns of different colours      5       600634      Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of synthetic fibres, printed       5       600641      Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, unbleached or bleached       5  Code    Dismantlement      600642    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, dyed      3       600643      Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, of yarns of different colours       5      600644    Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04, of artificial fibres, printed      5       600690     Fabrics; knitted or crocheted fabrics, other than those of headings 60.01 to 60.04,and other than those made of wool, fine animal hair, cotton, synthetic or artificial fibres       3   610120  Coats; men's or boys' overcoats, car-coats, capes, anoraks, wind-jackets and similar articles, of cotton, knitted or crocheted (excluding those of heading no. 6103)   3    610130  Coats; men's or boys' overcoats, car-coats, capes, anoraks, wind-jackets and similar articles, of man- made fibres, knitted or crocheted, (excluding those of heading no. 6103)    3    610190  Coats; men's or boys' overcoats, car-coats, capes, anoraks, wind-jackets and similar articles, of textile materials n.e.s. in heading no. 6101, knitted or crocheted (excluding those of heading no. 6103)    3   610210  Coats; women's or girls' overcoats, car-coats, capes, anoraks, wind-jackets and similar articles, of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted (excluding those of heading no. 6104)   3   610220  Coats; women's or girls' overcoats, car-coats, capes, anoraks, wind-jackets and similar articles, of cotton, knitted or crocheted (excluding those of heading no. 6104)   3    610230  Coats; women's or girls' overcoats, car-coats, capes, anoraks, wind-jackets and similar articles, of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted (excluding those of heading no. 6104)    3  Code    Dismantlement    610290   Coats; women's or girls' overcoats, car-coats, capes, anoraks, wind-jackets and similar articles, of textile materials n.e.s. in heading no. 6102, knitted or crocheted (excluding those of heading no. 6104)    3   610310   Suits; men's or boys', knitted or crocheted   5   610322  Ensembles; men's or boys', of cotton, knitted or crocheted   5   610323  Ensembles; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610329  Ensembles; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610331  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted  5  610332  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  610333  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   610339  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5   610341  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted   5   610342  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of cotton, knitted or crocheted   5   610343  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted   5    610349  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted    5   610413  Suits; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610419  Suits; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610422  Ensembles; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5   610423  Ensembles; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610429  Ensembles; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610431  Jackets; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted  5  610432  Jackets; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  Code    Dismantlement  610433  Jackets; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   610439  Jackets; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610441  Dresses; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted  5  610442  Dresses; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  610443  Dresses; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  5  610444  Dresses; women's or girls', of artificial fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   610449  Dresses; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton, synthetic or artificial fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610451  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted  5  610452  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  610453  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   610459  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5   610461  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted   5   610462  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted   5   610463  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted   5    610469  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted    5   610510  Shirts; men's or boys', of cotton, knitted or crocheted   5   610520   Shirts; men's or boys', of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610590  Shirts; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5   610610  Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted   5   610620   Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610690  Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than cotton or man- made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  Code    Dismantlemen 610711  Underpants and briefs; men's or boys', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  610712  Underpants and briefs; men's or boys', of man- made fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   610719  Underpants and briefs; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610721  Nightshirts and pyjamas; men's or boys', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5   610722  Nightshirts and pyjamas; men's or boys', of man- made fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610729  Nightshirts and pyjamas; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610791  Bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; men's or boys', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5   610799  Bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5   610811  Slips and petticoats; women's or girls', of man- made fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610819  Slips and petticoats; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  610821  Briefs and panties; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  610822  Briefs and panties; women's or girls', of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   610829  Briefs and panties; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5   610831  Nightdresses and pyjamas; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted   5   610832  Nightdresses and pyjamas; women's or girls', of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   610839  Nightdresses and pyjamas; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5    610891   Negligees, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; women's or girls', of cotton, knitted or crocheted    5     610892   Negligees, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; women's or girls', of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted     5     610899   Negligees, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted     5  610910  T-shirts, singlets and other vests; of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  610990  T-shirts, singlets and other vests; of textile materials (other than cotton), knitted or crocheted  5  Code    Dismantlemen  611011  Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats and similar articles; knitted or crocheted, of wool or fine animal hair   5   611012  Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats and similar articles; knitted or crocheted, of fibres from kashmir (cashmere) goats   5   611019  Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats and similar articles; knitted or crocheted, of fine animal hair other than that of kashmir (cashmere) goats   5  611020  Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats and similar articles; of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5   611030  Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats and similar articles; of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted   5   611090  Jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats and similar articles; of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  611120  Garments and clothing accessories; babies', of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  611130  Garments and clothing accessories; babies', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   611190  Garments and clothing accessories; babies', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  611211  Track suits; of cotton, knitted or crocheted  5  611212  Track suits; of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  3  611219  Track suits; of textile materials (other than cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted  3  611220  Ski suits; knitted or crocheted  5  611231  Swimwear; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   611239  Swimwear; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5  611241  Swimwear; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted  5   611249  Swimwear; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5   611300  Garments; made up of knitted or crocheted rubberised textile fabrics, or fabrics otherwise impregnated, coated, covered or laminated   5  611420  Garments; of cotton, knitted or crocheted, n.e.s. in chapter 61  5   611430  Garments; of man-made fibres, knitted or crocheted, n.e.s. in chapter 61   3   611490  Garments; of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or man-made fibres), knitted or crocheted, n.e.s. in chapter 61   5   611510  Graduated compression hosiery (for example, stockings for varicose veins), knitted or crocheted   5   611521  Hosiery; panty hose and tights (other than graduated compression hosiery), of synthetic fibres, measuring per single yarn less than 67 decitex, knitted or crocheted   5   611522  Hosiery; panty hose and tights (other than graduated compression hosiery), of synthetic fibres, measuring per single yarn 67 decitex or more, knitted or crocheted   5  Code    Dismantlemen  611529  Hosiery; panty hose and tights (other than graduated compression hosiery), of textile materials (other than synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted   5   611530  Hosiery; women's, full-length or knee-length (other than graduated compression hosiery), measuring per single yarn less than 67 decitex, knitted or crocheted   5    611594  Hosiery and footwear; without applied soles, of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted (excluding graduated compression hosiery, panty hose, tights, women's full or knee-length hosiery measuring per single yarn less than 67 decitex)    5    611595  Hosiery and footwear; without applied soles, of cotton, knitted or crocheted (excluding graduated compression hosiery, panty hose, tights, full or knee-length hosiery measuring per single yarn less than 67 decitex)    5    611596  Hosiery and footwear; without applied soles, of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted (excluding graduated compression hosiery, panty hose, tights, full or knee-length hosiery measuring per single yarn less than 67 decitex)    5    611599   Hosiery and footwear; without applied soles, of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6115.9, knitted or crocheted (excluding tights, full or knee-length hosiery of less than 67 decitex per single yarn)    5   611610  Gloves; knitted or crocheted, impregnated, coated or covered with plastics or rubber   5   611691  Gloves, mittens and mitts; of wool or fine animal hair, knitted or crocheted, (other than impregnated, coated or covered with plastics or rubber)   5   611692  Gloves, mittens and mitts; of cotton, knitted or crocheted, (other than impregnated, coated or covered with plastics or rubber)   5   611693  Gloves, mittens and mitts; of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted, (other than impregnated, coated or covered with plastics or rubber)   5    611699  Gloves, mittens and mitts; of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), knitted or crocheted, (other than impregnated, coated or covered with plastics or rubber)    5  611710  Shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like; knitted or crocheted  5   611780   Clothing accessories; knitted or crocheted, n.e.s. in heading no. 6117   5  611790  Clothing; parts, knitted or crocheted  5   620111  Coats; men's or boys', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of wool or fine animal hair, other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620112  Coats; men's or boys', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of cotton, other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)   5  Code    Dismantlemen  620113  Coats; men's or boys', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of man- made fibres, other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620119  Coats; men's or boys', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or man-made fibres), other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620191  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; men's or boys', of wool or fine animal hair, other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620192  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; men's or boys', of cotton, other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)    5    620193  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; men's or boys', of man-made fibres, other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)    5    620199  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or man-made fibres), other than those of heading no. 6203 (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620211  Coats; women's or girls', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of wool or fine animal hair, other than those of heading no. 6204 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620212  Coats; women's or girls', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of cotton, other than those of heading no. 6204 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620213  Coats; women's or girls', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of man- made fibres, other than those of heading no. 6204 (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620219  Coats; women's or girls', overcoats, raincoats, car- coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, of textile materials (other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or man-made fibres), other than those of heading no. 6204 (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620291  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair, other than those of heading no. 6204 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620292  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; women's or girls', of cotton, other than those of heading no. 6204 (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620293  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; women's or girls', of man-made fibres, other than those of heading no. 6204 (not knitted or crocheted)    5    620299  Anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6202.9, other than those of heading no. 6204, (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620311   Suits; men's or boys', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)   5  Code    Dismantlemen  620312   Suits; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620319   Suits; men's or boys', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6203.1 (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620322  Ensembles; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620323  Ensembles; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620329   Ensembles; men's or boys', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6203.2 (not knitted or crocheted)   5  620331  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)  5  620332  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5   620333  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620339  Jackets and blazers; men's or boys', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6203.3 (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620341   Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620342  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620343   Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)    5    620349  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; men's or boys', of textile materials (other than wool, fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620411  Suits; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620412  Suits; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620413  Suits; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620419   Suits; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6204.1 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620421  Ensembles; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)   5  620422  Ensembles; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5  Code    Dismantlemen  620423  Ensembles; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620429   Ensembles; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6204.2 (not knitted or crocheted)   5  620431  Jackets and blazers; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)  5  620432  Jackets and blazers; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5  620433  Jackets and blazers; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)  5   620439  Jackets and blazers; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6204.3 (not knitted or crocheted)   5  620441  Dresses; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)  5  620442  Dresses; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5   620443  Dresses; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5  620444  Dresses; women's or girls', of artificial fibres (not knitted or crocheted)  5   620449   Dresses; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6204.4 (not knitted or crocheted)   5  620451  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)  5  620452  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5  620453  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)  5   620459  Skirts and divided skirts; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6204.5 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620461  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620462  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620463  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620469  Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches and shorts; women's or girls', of textile materials (other than wool, fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres), (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620520  Shirts; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620530   Shirts; men's or boys', of man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5  Code    Dismantlemen  620590   Shirts; men's or boys', of textile materials n.e.s. in heading no. 6205 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620610   Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of silk or silk waste (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620620  Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620630  Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620640   Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620690   Blouses, shirts and shirt-blouses; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in heading no. 6206 (not knitted or crocheted)    5  620711  Underpants and briefs; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5   620719  Underpants and briefs; men's or boys', of textile materials other than cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620721  Nightshirts and pyjamas; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620722   Nightshirts and pyjamas; men's or boys', of man- made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620729  Nightshirts and pyjamas; men's or boys', of textile materials other than cotton or man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620791  Singlets and other vests, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620799  Singlets and other vests, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; men's or boys', of textile materials other than cotton or man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)    5   620811   Slips and petticoats; women's or girls', of man- made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620819  Slips and petticoats; women's or girls', of textile materials other than man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620821  Nightdresses and pyjamas; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620822   Nightdresses and pyjamas; women's or girls', of man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5  Code    Dismantlemen  620829  Nightdresses and pyjamas; women's or girls', of textile materials other than cotton or man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5     620891   Singlets and other vests, briefs, panties, negligees, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)     5     620892   Singlets and other vests, briefs, panties, negligees, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; women's or girls', of man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)     5     620899   Singlets and other vests, briefs, panties, negligees, bathrobes, dressing gowns and similar articles; women's or girls', of textile materials other than cotton or man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)     5   620920   Garments and clothing accessories; babies', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   620930   Garments and clothing accessories; babies', of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5    620990  Garments and clothing accessories; babies', of textile materials other than wool or fine animal hair, cotton or synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)    5   621010  Garments; of felt or non-wovens (not knitted or crocheted)   5   621020  Garments; overcoats, raincoats, car-coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, men's or boys', of the fabrics of heading no. 5602, 5603, 5903, 5906 or 5907 (not knitted or crocheted)   5   621030  Garments; overcoats, raincoats, car-coats, capes, cloaks and similar articles, women's or girls', of the fabrics of heading no. 5602, 5603, 5903, 5906 or 5907 (not knitted or crocheted)   5     621040    Garments; men's or boys', n.e.s. in item no. 6210.2, of the fabrics of heading no. 5602, 5603, 5903, 5906 or 5907 (not knitted or crocheted)     5     621050   Garments; women's or girls', n.e.s. in item no. 6210.3, of the fabrics of heading no. 5602, 5603, 5903, 5906 or 5907 (not knitted or crocheted)     5  621111  Swimwear; men's or boys', (not knitted or crocheted)  5  621112  Swimwear; women's or girls', (not knitted or crocheted)  5  621120  Ski suits; (not knitted or crocheted)  5  Code    Dismantlemen  621132  Track suits and other garments n.e.s.; men's or boys', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)   5   621133  Track suits and other garments n.e.s.; men's or boys', of man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   3   621139  Track suits and other garments n.e.s.; men's or boys', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6211.3 (not knitted or crocheted)   3  621142  Track suits and other garments n.e.s.; women's or girls', of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5   621143  Track suits and other garments n.e.s.; women's or girls', of man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   3    621149   Track suits and other garments n.e.s.; women's or girls', of textile materials n.e.s. in item no. 6211.4 (not knitted or crocheted)    3  621210  Brassieres; whether or not knitted or crocheted  5   621220   Girdles and panty-girdles; whether or not knitted or crocheted   5  621230  Corselettes; whether or not knitted or crocheted  5    621290   Braces, suspenders, garters and similar articles; whether or not knitted or crocheted, n.e.s. in heading no. 6212    5  621320  Handkerchiefs; of cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5  621390  Handkerchiefs; of textile materials other than silk or cotton (not knitted or crocheted)  5   621410  Shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like; of silk or silk waste (not knitted or crocheted)   5   621420  Shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like; of wool or fine animal hair (not knitted or crocheted)   5   621430  Shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like; of synthetic fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5   621440  Shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like; of artificial fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5    621490   Shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like; of textile materials n.e.s. in heading no. 6214 (not knitted or crocheted)    5  621510  Ties, bow ties and cravats; of silk or silk waste (not knitted or crocheted)  5  621520  Ties, bow ties and cravats; of man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)  5   621590  Ties, bow ties and cravats; of textile materials other than silk or man-made fibres (not knitted or crocheted)   5  621600  Gloves, mittens and mitts (not knitted or crocheted)  5  621710  Clothing accessories; other than those of heading no. 6212 (not knitted or crocheted)  5  Code    Dismantlemen  621790  Clothing; parts of garments or of clothing accessories, other than those of heading no. 6212 (not knitted or crocheted)   5  630110  Blankets; electric  5   630120   Blankets (other than electric blankets) and travelling rugs; of wool or fine animal hair   5   630130   Blankets (other than electric blankets) and travelling rugs; of cotton   5   630140   Blankets (other than electric blankets) and travelling rugs; of synthetic fibres   5    630190   Blankets and travelling rugs; n.e.s. in heading no. 6301    5  630210  Bed linen; knitted or crocheted  5  630221  Bed linen; of cotton, printed, not knitted or crocheted  5  630222  Bed linen; of man-made fibres, printed, not knitted or crocheted  5   630229  Bed linen; of textile materials (other than cotton or man-made fibres), printed, not knitted or crocheted   5  630231  Bed linen; of cotton (not printed, knitted or crocheted)  5  630232  Bed linen; of man-made fibres (not printed, knitted or crocheted)  5   630239  Bed linen; of textile materials other than cotton or man-made fibres (not printed, knitted or crocheted)   5  630240  Table linen; knitted or crocheted  5  630251  Table linen; of cotton, not knitted or crocheted  5  630253  Table linen; of man-made fibres, not knitted or crocheted  5  630259  Table linen; of textile materials (other than cotton, flax or man-made fibres), not knitted or crocheted  5   630260  Kitchen and toilet linen; of terry towelling or similar terry fabrics, of cotton   5   630291  Toilet and kitchen linen; of cotton, excluding terry towelling or similar terry fabrics   5   630293   Toilet and kitchen linen; of man-made fibres   5   630299   Toilet and kitchen linen; of textile materials (other than cotton, flax or man-made fibres)   5   630312  Curtains (including drapes) and interior blinds; curtain or bed valances, knitted or crocheted, of synthetic fibres   5   630319  Curtains (including drapes) and interior blinds; curtain or bed valances, knitted or crocheted, of textile materials other than cotton or synthetic fibres   5   630391  Curtains (including drapes) and interior blinds, curtain or bed valances; of cotton, not knitted or crocheted   5  Code    Dismantlemen  630392  Curtains (including drapes) and interior blinds, curtain or bed valances; of synthetic fibres, not knitted or crocheted   5   630399  Curtains (including drapes) and interior blinds, curtain or bed valances; of textile materials other than cotton or synthetic fibres, not knitted or crocheted   5  630411  Bedspreads; knitted or crocheted  5  630419  Bedspreads; not knitted or crocheted  5   630420  Furnishing articles; excluding those of heading no. 9404, bed nets, specified in Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter   5     630491    Furnishing articles; excluding those of heading no. 9404, knitted or crocheted (excluding bedspreads)     5     630492   Furnishing articles; of cotton, not knitted or crocheted (excluding bedspreads and articles of heading no. 9404)     5    630493   Furnishing articles; of synthetic fibres, not knitted or crocheted (excluding bedspreads and articles of heading no. 9404)    5     630499   Furnishing articles; of textile materials other than cotton or synthetic fibres, not knitted or crocheted (excluding bedspreads and articles of heading no. 9404)     5   630510  Sacks and bags; of a kind used for the packing of goods, of jute or of other textile bast fibres of heading no. 5303   2  630520  Sacks and bags; of a kind used for the packing of goods, of cotton  5   630532  Sacks and bags; of a kind used for the packing of goods, of man-made textile materials, flexible intermediate bulk containers   5   630533  Sacks and bags; of a kind used for the packing of goods, of man-made textile materials, of polyethylene or polypropylene strip or the like, not flexible intermediate bulk containers   5   630539  Sacks and bags; of a kind used for the packing of goods, of man-made textile materials, not of polyethylene or polypropylene strip or the like   5   630590  Sacks and bags; of a kind used for the packing of goods, of textile materials (other than jute, cotton or man-made textile materials)   5   630612  Tarpaulins, awnings and sunblinds; of synthetic fibres   5   630619  Tarpaulins, awnings and sunblinds; of textile materials other than cotton or synthetic fibres   5  630622  Tents; of synthetic fibres  5  Code    Dismantlemen 630629  Tents; of textile materials other than cotton or synthetic fibres  5  630630  Sails; of synthetic fibres or other textile materials  3  630640  Pneumatic mattresses; of cotton or other textile materials  3   630690   Camping goods; (of textile materials), n.e.c in heading no. 6306   3  630710  Cloths; floor cloths, dish-cloths, dusters and similar cleaning cloths  3  630720  Life-jackets and life-belts  3   630790  Textiles; made up articles (including dress patterns), n.e.s. in chapter 63, n.e.s. in heading no. 6307   3    630800   Fabrics, woven and yarn; in sets, whether or not with accessories, for making up into rugs, tapestries, embroidered table cloths or serviettes or similar textile articles, packaged for retail sale    3      630900      Clothing; worn, and other worn articles      5   631010  Rags; used or new, scrap twine, cordage, rope and cables and worn out articles of twine, cordage, rope or cables, of textile materials; sorted   3   631090  Rags; used or new, scrap twine, cordage, rope and cables and worn out articles of twine, cordage, rope or cables, of textile materials; other than sorted   3      640110    Footwear; waterproof with metal toe-cap, rubber or plastic outer soles and uppers (not assembled by stitch, rivet, nail, screw, plug or similar)      3      640192    Footwear; waterproof, covering the ankle (but not the knee), rubber or plastic outer soles and uppers (not assembled by stitch, rivet, nail, screw, plug or similar)      3      640199    Footwear; waterproof, n.e.s. in heading no. 6401, rubber or plastic outer soles and uppers (not assembled by stitch, rivet, nail, screw, plug or similar)      3  Code    Dismantlemen  640212  Sports footwear; with outer soles and uppers of rubber or plastics, ski-boots, cross-country ski footwear and snowboard boots   3    640219   Sports footwear; (other than ski-boots and cross- country ski footwear), with outer soles and uppers of rubber or plastics    3   640220  Footwear; with outer soles and uppers of rubber or plastics, upper straps or thongs assembled to the sole by plugs   3    640291   Footwear; n.e.s. in heading no. 6402, covering the ankle, with outer soles and uppers of rubber or plastics    3     640299   Footwear; n.e.s. in heading no. 6402, (other than just covering the ankle), with outer soles and uppers of rubber or plastics     3   640312  Sports footwear; with outer soles of rubber, plastics, leather or composition leather and uppers of leather, ski-boots, snowboard boots and cross- country ski footwear   3    640319  Sports footwear; (other than ski-boots or cross- country ski footwear), with outer soles of rubber, plastics, leather or composition leather and uppers of leather    3   640320  Footwear; with outer soles of leather, uppers consisting of leather straps across instep and around the big toe   5    640340   Footwear; with metal toe-cap, outer soles of rubber, plastics, leather or composition leather, uppers of leather    5   640351   Footwear; n.e.s. in heading no. 6403, with outer soles and uppers of leather, covering the ankle   3     640359    Footwear; n.e.s. in heading no. 6403, (not covering the ankle), outer soles and uppers of leather     5    640391   Footwear; n.e.s. in heading no. 6403, covering the ankle, outer soles of rubber, plastics or composition leather, uppers of leather    3    640399   Footwear; n.e.s. in heading no. 6403, (not covering the ankle), outer soles of rubber, plastics or composition leather, uppers of leather    3   640411  Sports footwear; tennis shoes, basketball shoes, gym shoes, training shoes and the like, with outer soles of rubber or plastics and uppers of textile materials   3  Code    Dismantlemen   640419   Footwear; (other than sportswear), with outer soles of rubber or plastics and uppers of textile materials    3   640420  Footwear; outer soles of leather or composition leather, uppers of textile materials   5    640510   Footwear; with uppers of leather or composition leather, n.e.s. in chapter 64    5   640520   Footwear; with uppers of textile materials, n.e.s. in chapter 64   5       640590       Footwear; n.e.s. in chapter 64       5  640610  Footwear; parts, uppers and parts thereof, other than stiffeners  2  640620  Footwear; parts, outer soles and heels, of rubber or plastics  2     640690     Footwear; parts, n.e.c. in heading 6406     2   650100  Hat-forms, hat bodies and hoods of felt, neither blocked to shape nor with made brims; plateaux and manchons (including slit manchons) of felt   3   650200  Hat-shapes; plaited or made by assembling strips of any material, neither blocked to shape, nor with made brims, nor lined, nor trimmed   3   650400  Hats and other headgear; plaited or made by assembling strips of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed   3     650500   Hats and other headgear; knitted or crocheted, or made up from lace, felt or other textile fabric, in the piece (but not in strips), whether or not lined or trimmed; hair-nets of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed     3  650610  Headgear; safety, whether or not lined or trimmed  3   650691   Headgear; (other than safety headgear), of rubber or plastics, whether or not lined or trimmed   3   650699  Headgear; (other than safety headgear), (of materials other than rubber, plastic or furskin), whether or not lined or trimmed   3  Code    Dismantlemen   650700   Head-bands, linings, covers, hat foundations, hat frames, peaks and chinstraps; for headgear    3  660110  Umbrellas and sun umbrellas; garden or similar umbrellas  3  660191  Umbrellas and sun umbrellas; having a telescopic shaft, (excluding garden or similar umbrellas)  5   660199   Umbrellas and sun umbrellas; n.e.s. in heading no. 6601 (including walking stick umbrellas)   3   660200  Walking-sticks, seat-sticks, whips, riding-crops and the like   3   660320  Umbrella frames; including frames mounted on shafts (sticks)   3    660390   Trimmings, accessories and parts of articles of heading no. 6601 or 6602; n.e.s. in heading no. 6603    3     670100   Skins and other parts of birds with their feathers or down; feathers, parts of feathers, down and articles thereof (other than goods of heading no. 0505 and worked quills and scapes)     3   670210  Flowers, foliage and fruit, artificial, and parts thereof; articles made of artificial flowers, foliage or fruit, of plastics   3   670290  Flowers, foliage and fruit, artificial, and parts thereof; articles made of artificial flowers, foliage or fruit, of materials other than plastics   3    670300  Human hair, dressed, thinned, bleached or otherwise worked; wool or other animal hair or other textile materials, prepared for use in making wigs or the like    3  670411  Wigs; complete, of synthetic textile materials  3  670419  False beards, eyebrows and eyelashes, switches and the like; of synthetic textile materials  3   670420  Wigs, false beards, eyebrows and eyelashes, switches and the like and other articles n.e.s.; of human hair   3   670490  Wigs, false beards, eyebrows and eyelashes, switches and the like and other articles n.e.s.; of animal hair or of textile materials other than synthetic   3  680100  Stone; setts, curbstones and flagstones, of natural stone (except slate)  5     680210  Tiles, cubes and similar articles; whether or not rectangular (including square), largest surface area of which is capable of being enclosed in square, side less than 7cm, coloured granules, chippings, powder     3    680221   Marble, travertine and alabaster; simply cut or sawn, with a flat or even surface    5  Code    Dismantlemen   680223   Granite; articles thereof, simply cut or sawn, with a flat or even surface    3      680229    Stone; monumental or building stone, n.e.s. in item no. 6802.2, articles thereof, simply cut or sawn, with a flat or even surface      3    680291   Marble, travertine and alabaster; articles thereof, (other than simply cut or sawn, with a flat or even surface)    5    680292   Stone; calcareous (excluding marble, travertine, alabaster) articles thereof, (other than simply cut or sawn, with a flat or even surface)    3   680293   Granite; articles thereof, (other than simply cut or sawn, with a flat or even surface)   3     680299   Stone; natural (excluding marble, travertine, alabaster, other calcareous stone or granite), monumental or building stone, (other than simply cut or sawn, with a flat or even surface)     3     680300    Slate, worked; and articles of slate or of agglomerated slate     3   680410  Millstones and grindstones; for milling, grinding or pulping   1    680421   Millstones, grindstones, grinding wheels and the like; of agglomerated synthetic or natural diamond    1     680422    Millstones, grindstones, grinding wheels and the like; of other agglomerated abrasives or of ceramics     1     680423    Millstones, grindstones, grinding wheels and the like; of natural stone     1   680430  Stones; hand sharpening or polishing stones, of natural stone, agglomerated natural or artificial abrasives or ceramics, with or without parts of other materials   1  Code    Dismantlemen  680510  Abrasive powder or grain; natural or artificial, on a base of woven textile fabric only, whether or not cut to shape or sewn or otherwise made up   1   680520  Abrasive powder or grain; natural or artificial, on a base of paper or paperboard only, whether or not cut to shape or sewn or otherwise made up   1   680530  Abrasive powder or grain; natural or artificial, on a base of materials n.e.s. in heading no. 6805, whether or not cut to shape or sewn or otherwise made up   1   680610  Slag wool, rock wool and similar mineral wools (including intermixtures thereof), in bulk, sheets or rolls   2   680620  Exfoliated vermiculite, expanded clays, foamed slag and similar expanded mineral materials (including intermixtures thereof)   2      680690    Minerals; mixtures and articles of heat-insulating, sound-insulating or sound-absorbing mineral materials, other than those of heading no. 6811 or 6812 or of chapter 69      2  680710  Asphalt or similar material; articles (eg petroleum bitumen or coal tar pitch) in rolls  3  680790  Asphalt or similar material; articles (eg petroleum bitumen or coal tar pitch) other than in rolls  3     680800   Panels, boards, tiles, blocks and the like; of vegetable fibre, of straw, shavings, chips, particles, sawdust or other waste, of wood, agglomerated with cement, plaster or other mineral binders     3     680911   Plaster, or plaster compositions; boards, sheets, panels, tiles and similar articles, faced or reinforced with paper or paperboard only, not ornamented     3     680919   Plaster, or plaster compositions; boards, sheets, panels, tiles and similar articles, (other than faced or reinforced with paper or paperboard only), not ornamented     3      680990     Plaster articles or articles of compositions based on plaster; n.e.s. in heading no. 6809      3  681011  Cement, concrete or artificial stone; building blocks or bricks, whether or not reinforced  3   681019  Cement, concrete or artificial stone; tiles, flagstones and similar, (excluding building blocks and bricks) whether or not reinforced   5   681091  Cement, concrete or artificial stone; prefabricated structural components for building or civil engineering, whether or not reinforced   3   681099  Cement, concrete or artificial stone; articles (other than prefabricated structural components for building or civil engineering), whether or not reinforced, n.e.s. in heading no. 6810   3  Code    Dismantlemen 681140  Asbestos-cement; articles thereof  5  681181  Cellulose fibre-cement articles or the like; corrugated sheets  5   681182  Cellulose fibre-cement articles or the like; sheets, panels, tiles and similar articles, other than corrugated sheets   5   681189   Cellulose fibre-cement articles or the like; articles n.e.c. in heading no. 6811   5      681280    Fabricated crocidolite (blue asbestos) fibres, mixtures with a basis of crocidolite (blue asbestos), articles of crocidolite (blue asbestos), whether or not reinforced, not goods of heading 6811 or 6813      3   681291  Asbestos or mixtures with a basis of asbestos (other than crocidolite); clothing, clothing accessories, footwear and headgear, whether or not reinforced, not goods of heading 6811 or 6813   3   681292  Asbestos or mixtures with a basis of asbestos (other than crocidolite); paper, millboard and felt, whether or not reinforced, not goods of heading 6811 or 6813   5   681293  Asbestos or mixtures with a basis of asbestos (other than crocidolite); compressed asbestos fibre jointing, in sheets or rolls, whether or not reinforced, not goods of heading 6811 or 6813   5       681299     Asbestos or mixtures with a basis of asbestos (other than crocidolite); fibres, mixtures or articles n.e.c. in heading no. 6812, whether or not reinforced, not goods of heading 6811 or 6813       5    681320  Friction material and articles thereof (e.g. sheets, rolls, strips, segments, discs, washers, pads) not mounted; for brakes, clutches or the like, with a basis of asbestos    3   681381   Brake linings and pads; with a basis of mineral substances or cellulose (other than asbestos)   3     681389   Friction material and articles thereof (e.g. sheets, rolls, strips, segments, discs, washers, pads) not mounted; for clutches or the like (not brake linings and pads), with a basis of mineral substances or cellulose (other than asbestos)     3   681410  Mica; plates, sheets and strips of agglomerated or reconstituted mica, whether or not on a support of paper, paperboard or other materials   3     681490   Mica; worked mica and articles of mica (excluding plates, sheets and strips) whether or not on a support of paper, paperboard or other materials     1  Code    Dismantlemen 681510  Stone articles and other mineral substances, non- electrical articles of graphite or other carbon  3  681520  Peat; articles of peat n.e.s. or included  3   681591  Stone articles and articles of other mineral substances; containing magnesite, dolomite or chromite   3   681599   Stone articles and articles of other mineral substances; n.e.s. or included in heading no. 6815   3   690100  Bricks, blocks, tiles and other ceramic goods of siliceous fossil meals (eg kieselguhr, tripolite or diatomite) or of similar siliceous earths   3    690210  Refractory bricks, blocks, tiles and similar refractory ceramic constructional goods; containing by weight, singly or together, more than 50% of the elements Mg, Ca or Cr, expressed as MgO, CaO or Cr2o3    3    690220  Refractory bricks, blocks, tiles and similar refractory ceramic constructional goods; containing by weight more than 50% of alumina (Al2o3), of silica (SiO2) or of a mixture or compound of these    2      690290    Refractory bricks, blocks, tiles and similar refractory ceramic constructional goods; n.e.s. in item no. 6902.1 or 6902.2      2     690310  Refractory ceramic goods; containing by weight more than 50% of graphite or other forms of carbon or of a mixture of these products, excluding those of siliceous fossil meals or similar earths     2     690320   Refractory ceramic goods; containing by weight more than 50% of alumina or of a mixture or compound of alumina and of silica, excluding those of siliceous fossil meals or similar earths     2      690390    Refractory ceramic goods; composition of which n.e.s. in heading no. 6903, other than those of siliceous fossil meals or similar earths      2   690410   Ceramic building bricks   3    690490    Ceramic flooring blocks, supports or filler tiles and the like (excluding building bricks)    3  690510  Ceramic roofing tiles  5  Code    Dismantlement     690590    Ceramic chimney-pots, cowls, chimney liners, architectural ornaments and other constructional goods (excluding roofing tiles)     5      690600      Ceramic pipes, conduits, guttering and pipe fittings      3    690721  Ceramic tiles; flags and paving, hearth or wall tiles other than those of subheadings 6907.30 and 6907.40, of a water absorption coefficient by weight not over 0.5%    3    690722  Ceramic tiles; flags and paving, hearth or wall tiles other than those of subheadings 6907.30 and 6907.40, of a water absorption coefficient by weight over 0.5% but not over 10%    3   690723  Ceramic tiles; flags and paving, hearth or wall tiles other than those of subheadings 6907.30 and 6907.40, of a water absorption coefficient by weight over 10%   3   690730   Mosaic cubes and the like, other than those of subheading 6907.40   3  690740  Finishing ceramics  3   690911   Ceramic wares; for laboratory, chemical or other technical uses, of porcelain or china   3    690912   Ceramic wares; for laboratory, chemical or other technical uses, articles having a hardness equivalent to 9 or more on the Mohs scale    3     690919     Ceramic wares; for laboratory, chemical or other technical uses, other than of porcelain or china     3    690990  Ceramic wares; pots, jars and similar articles of a kind used for the conveyance or packing of goods and ceramic troughs, tubs and similar receptacles used in agriculture    3    691010  Ceramic sinks, wash basins, wash basin pedestals, baths, bidets, water closet pans, flushing cisterns, urinals and similar sanitary fixtures; of porcelain or china    3     691090   Ceramic sinks, wash basins, wash basin pedestals, baths, bidets, water closet pans, flushing cisterns, urinals and similar sanitary fixtures; of other than porcelain or china     3  Code    Dismantlemen   691110    Tableware and kitchenware; of porcelain or china    3      691190     Household and toilet articles; n.e.s. in heading no. 6911, of porcelain or china      3      691200    Ceramic tableware, kitchenware, other household articles and toilet articles; other than of porcelain or china      3  691310  Ceramic statuettes and other ornamental ceramic articles, of porcelain or china  3  691390  Ceramic statuettes and other ornamental ceramic articles; other than of porcelain or china  3  691410  Ceramic articles n.e.s. in chapter 69; of porcelain or china  3  691490  Ceramic articles n.e.s. in chapter 69; other than of porcelain or china  3   700100  Glass; cullet and other waste and scrap of glass, glass in the mass   2   700210  Glass; unworked, in balls (other than microspheres of heading no. 7018)   3  700220  Glass; unworked, in rods  3  700231  Glass; unworked, in tubes, of fused quartz or other fused silica  3   700232  Glass; unworked, tubes, of glass having a linear coefficient of expansion not exceeding 5 x 10-6 per kelvin within a temperature range of 0-300 degrees C   3    700239  Glass; unworked, in tubes, other than of glass having a linear coefficient of expansion not exceeding 5 x 10-6 per kelvin within a temperature range of 0-300 degrees C, not fused quartz or other fused silica    3   700312  Glass; cast glass and rolled glass, non-wired sheets, coloured through the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or having an absorbent, reflecting or non-reflecting layer   3   700319  Glass; cast glass and rolled glass, non-wired sheets, (excluding those coloured throughout the mass (body tinted) opacified, flashed or having an absorbent or reflecting layer)   3   700320  Glass; cast glass and rolled glass, wired sheets, whether or not having an absorbent or reflecting layer but not otherwise worked   3  700330  Glass; cast glass and rolled glass, profiles, not otherwise worked  3   700420  Glass; drawn and blown, in sheets, coloured throughout the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or having an absorbent, reflecting or non- reflecting layer, but not otherwise worked   3  Code    Dismantlemen  700490  Glass; drawn and blown, in sheets, (other than glass coloured throughout the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or having an absorbent or reflecting layer)   3   700510  Glass; float glass and surface ground or polished glass, in sheets, non-wired, having an absorbent or reflecting layer   3    700521  Glass; float glass and surface ground or polished glass, in sheets, non-wired, coloured throughout the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or merely surface ground    3    700529  Glass; float glass and surface ground or polished glass, in sheets, non-wired, (other than coloured throughout the mass (body tinted), opacified, flashed or merely surface ground)    3   700530  Glass; float glass and surface ground or polished glass, in sheets, wired glass, whether or not having an absorbent or reflecting layer   3     700600   Glass of heading no. 7003, 7004 or 7005; bent, edge-worked, engraved, drilled, enamelled or otherwise worked, but not framed or fitted with other materials     3   700711  Glass; safety glass, toughened (tempered), of size and shape suitable for incorporation in vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels   2   700719  Glass; safety glass, toughened (tempered), (not of a size and shape suitable for incorporation in vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels)   2   700721  Glass; safety glass, laminated, of size and shape suitable for incorporation in vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels   2    700729   Glass; safety glass, laminated, (not of a size and shape suitable for incorporation in vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels)    2  700800  Glass; multiple-walled insulating units of glass  3  700910  Glass; rear-view mirrors for vehicles  3   700991  Glass mirrors; unframed, excluding rear-view mirrors for vehicles   3  700992  Glass mirrors; framed, excluding rear-view mirrors for vehicles  3  701010  Glass; ampoules, of a kind used for the conveyance or packing of goods  2  701020  Glass; stoppers, lids and other closures  2     701090    Glass; carboys, bottles, flasks, jars, pots, phials and other containers of glass used for the conveyance or packing of goods     2   701110  Glass envelopes (including bulbs and tubes); open, and glass parts thereof, without fittings, for electric lighting   3  Code    Dismantlemen  701120  Glass envelopes (including bulbs and tubes); open, and glass parts thereof, without fittings, for cathode-ray tubes   3    701190   Glass envelopes (including bulbs and tubes); open, and glass parts thereof, without fittings, other than for electric lighting and cathode-ray tubes    3     701310   Glassware; of a kind used for table, kitchen, toilet, office, indoor decoration or similar purposes (other than of heading no. 7010 or 7018), of glass- ceramics     3  701322  Stemware drinking glasses, of lead crystal  3  701328  Stemware drinking glasses, other than of lead crystal or glass-ceramics  3  701333  Glassware; drinking glasses (not stemware), of lead crystal  3  701337  Glassware; drinking glasses (not stemware), other than of lead crystal or glass-ceramics  3    701341   Glassware of a kind used for table or kitchen purposes (not drinking glasses), of lead crystal    3      701342   Glassware of a kind used for table or kitchen purposes (not drinking glasses), of glass having a linear coefficient of expansion not exceeding 5 x 10^(-6) per Kelvin within a temperature range of 0- 300 degrees C      3      701349    Glassware of a kind used for table or kitchen purposes (not drinking glasses or of glass- ceramics), of glass n.e.c. in item no. 7013.4      3     701391     Glassware; n.e.s. in heading no. 7013, of lead crystal     3     701399     Glassware; n.e.s. in heading no. 7013, other than of lead crystal     3     701400     Glassware; signalling, (not optically worked)     3   701510  Glasses for corrective spectacles; curved, bent, hollowed or the like, not optically worked   1  Code    Dismantlemen    701590   Glasses; clock or watch and similar, glasses for non- corrective spectacles, curved, bent, hollowed etc, (not optically worked), hollow glass spheres and segments, for the manufacture of such glasses     3   701610  Glass cubes and other glass smallwares; whether or not on a backing, for mosaics or similar decorative purposes   3      701690    Multicellular or foam glass; in blocks, panels, plates, shells or similar forms; paving blocks, slabs, bricks and other articles of pressed or moulded glass      3     701710   Glassware; laboratory, hygienic or pharmaceutical, whether or not graduated or calibrated, of fused quartz or other fused silica     1     701720   Glassware; laboratory, hygienic or pharmaceutical, whether or not graduated or calibrated, having a linear co-efficient of expansion not over 5 x 10-6 per kelvin with a temperature of 0-300 degrees C     1     701790    Glassware; laboratory, hygienic or pharmaceutical, whether or not graduated or calibrated, of glass n.e.s. in heading no. 7017     1   701810  Glass; beads, imitation pearls, imitation precious or semi-precious stones and similar glass smallwares   3  701820  Glass microspheres; not exceeding 1mm in diameter  3     701890   Glass; articles thereof, statuettes and other ornaments of lamp worked glass, other than imitation jewellery     3  701911  Glass fibres; (including glass wool), chopped strands, of a length of not more than 50mm  2  701912  Glass fibres; (including glass wool), rovings  2  701919  Glass fibres; (including glass wool), slivers, yarns and threads  1  701931  Glass fibres; non-woven products, mats  1  701932  Glass fibres; non-woven products, thin sheets (voiles)  1   701939  Glass fibres; webs, mattresses, boards and similar non-woven products excluding mats and thin sheets   3  701940  Glass fibres; woven fabrics of rovings  3  701951  Glass fibres; woven fabrics (other than of rovings), of a width not exceeding 30cm  5  Code    Dismantlemen  701952  Glass fibres; woven fabrics (other than of rovings), of a width exceeding 30cm, plain weave, weighing less than 250g/m2, of filaments measuring per single yarn not more than 136 tex   3   701959   Glass fibres; woven fabrics (other than of rovings), n.e.s. in item no. 7019.5   3      701990      Glass fibres; n.e.s. in heading no. 7019      3  702000  Glass; articles n.e.s. in chapter 70  3   710110  Pearls; natural, whether or not worked or graded (but not strung, mounted or set), ungraded and temporarily strung for convenience of transport   3   710121  Pearls; cultured, unworked, whether or not graded (but not strung, mounted or set), ungraded and temporarily strung for convenience of transport   3   710122  Pearls; cultured, worked, whether or not graded (but not strung, mounted or set), ungraded and temporarily strung for convenience of transport   3  710210  Diamonds; whether or not worked, but not mounted or set, unsorted  3  710221  Diamonds; industrial, unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or bruted, but not mounted or set  3     710229   Diamonds; industrial, (other than unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or bruted), but not mounted or set     3  710231  Diamonds; non-industrial, unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or bruted, but not mounted or set  3   710239  Diamonds; non-industrial, (other than unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or bruted), but not mounted or set   3   710310  Stones; precious (other than diamonds) and semi- precious stones, unworked or simply sawn or roughly shaped, not strung, mounted or set   3     710391   Stones; rubies, sapphires and emeralds, worked (other than simply sawn or roughly shaped), not strung, mounted or set     3     710399   Stones; precious (other than diamonds) and semi- precious stones, (other than rubies, sapphires and emeralds), worked other than simply sawn or roughly shaped, not strung, mounted or set     3   710410  Stones; precious or semi-precious, synthetic or reconstructed, piezo-electric quartz, whether or not worked or graded (but not strung, mounted or set), temporarily strung for transport convenience   3  Code    Dismantlemen   710420  Stones; precious or semi-precious, synthetic or reconstructed, (not piezo-electric quartz), unworked or simply sawn, roughly shaped, (not strung, mounted or set), temporarily strung for transport convenience    3     710490   Stones; precious or semi-precious, synthetic or reconstructed, (not piezo-electric quartz), worked or graded or not, (but not strung, mounted or set), temporarily strung for transport convenience, n.e.s. in item no. 7104.20     3  710510  Stones; precious and semi-precious, dust and powder, of diamonds  3   710590  Stones; precious and semi-precious, dust and powder, of natural or synthetic precious or semi- precious stones, excluding diamonds   3  710610  Metals; silver powder  3  710691  Metals; silver, unwrought, (but not powder)  3  710692  Metals; silver, semi-manufactured  3  710700  Base metals clad with silver; not further worked than semi-manufactured  3  710811  Metals; gold, non-monetary, powder  3  710812  Metals; gold, non-monetary, unwrought (but not powder)  3  710813  Metals; gold, semi-manufactured  5  710820  Gold, monetary  3  710900  Base metals or silver; clad with gold, not further worked than semi-manufactured  3  711011  Metals; platinum, unwrought or in powder form  3  711019  Metals; platinum, semi-manufactured  3  711021  Metals; palladium, unwrought or in powder form  3  711029  Metals; palladium, semi-manufactured  3  711031  Metals; rhodium, unwrought or in powder form  3  711039  Metals; rhodium, semi-manufactured  3  711041  Metals; iridium, osmium, ruthenium, unwrought or in powder form  3  711049  Metals; iridium, osmium, ruthenium, semi- manufactured  3  711100  Base metals, silver or gold, clad with platinum; not further worked than semi-manufactured  3   711230  Waste and scrap of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal; ash containing precious metal or precious metal compounds   3      711291    Waste and scrap of precious metals; of gold, including metal clad with gold but excluding sweepings containing other precious metals      3      711292    Waste and scrap of precious metals; of platinum, including metal clad with platinum but excluding sweepings containing other precious metals      3  Code    Dismantlemen    711299   Waste and scrap of precious metals; waste and scrap of precious metals including metal clad with precious metals, other than that of gold and platinum and excluding ash which contains precious metal or precious metal compounds     3   711311  Jewellery; of silver, whether or not plated or clad with other precious metal, and parts thereof   5   711319  Jewellery; of precious metal (excluding silver) whether or not plated or clad with precious metal, and parts thereof   5   711320  Jewellery; of base metal clad with precious metal, and parts thereof   5     711411    Silversmiths' wares; and parts thereof, of silver, whether or not plated or clad with other precious metal     5     711419    Goldsmiths' wares; articles of and parts thereof, of precious metal (excluding silver) whether or not plated or clad with precious metal     5     711420    Goldsmiths' and silversmiths' wares; articles of and parts thereof, of base metal clad with precious metal     5  711510  Metal; catalysts in the form of wire cloth or grill, of platinum  3  711590  Metal; precious or metal clad with precious metal, other than that of item no. 7115.10  5  711610  Pearls; articles of natural or cultured pearls  5  711620  Stones; precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed) articles of  5  711711  Jewellery; imitation, cuff links and studs, of base metal, whether or not plated with precious metal  5   711719  Jewellery; imitation, (excluding cuff links and studs), of base metal, whether or not plated with precious metal   5  711790  Jewellery; imitation, of other than base metal, whether or not plated with precious metal  5    711810    Coin (other than gold coin), not being legal tender    3   711890   Coin; other than coin of item no. 7118.10   3   720110  Iron; non-alloy pig iron containing by weight 0.5% or less of phosphorus, in pigs, blocks or other primary forms   1   720120  Iron; non-alloy pig iron containing by weight more than 0.5% of phosphorus, in pigs, blocks or other primary forms   1  Code    Dismantlemen 720150  Iron; alloy pig iron, spiegeleisen, in pigs, blocks or other primary forms  1  720211  Ferro-alloys; ferro-manganese, containing by weight more than 2% of carbon  1  720219  Ferro-alloys; ferro-manganese, containing by weight 2% or less of carbon  1  720221  Ferro-alloys; ferro-silicon, containing by weight more than 55% of silicon  1  720229  Ferro-alloys; ferro-silicon, containing by weight 55% or less of silicon  1  720230  Ferro-alloys; ferro-silico-manganese  1  720241  Ferro-alloys; ferro-chromium, containing by weight more than 4% of carbon  1  720249  Ferro-alloys; ferro-chromium, containing by weight 4% or less of carbon  1  720250  Ferro-alloys; ferro-silico-chromium  1  720260  Ferro-alloys; ferro-nickel  1  720270  Ferro-alloys; ferro-molybdenum  1  720280  Ferro-alloys; ferro-tungsten and ferro-silico- tungsten  1  720291  Ferro-alloys; ferro-titanium and ferro-silico- titanium  1  720292  Ferro-alloys; ferro-vanadium  1  720293  Ferro-alloys; ferro-niobium  1    720299    Ferro-alloys; n.e.s. in heading no. 7202    1  720310  Ferrous products; obtained by direct reduction of iron ore, in lumps, pellets or similar forms  2   720390  Ferrous products; spongy ferrous products and iron having a minimum purity by weight of 99.94%, in lumps, pellets or similar forms   2  720410  Ferrous waste and scrap; of cast iron  2   720421   Ferrous waste and scrap; of stainless steel   2   720429   Ferrous waste and scrap; of alloy steel (excluding stainless)   2   720430   Ferrous waste and scrap; of tinned iron or steel   2   720441  Ferrous waste and scrap; turnings, shavings, chips, milling waste, sawdust, fillings, trimmings and stampings, whether or not in bundles   2      720449      Ferrous waste and scrap; n.e.s. in heading no. 7204      2   720450   Ferrous products; remelting scrap ingots   2   720510   Iron or steel, pig iron, spiegeleisen; granules thereof   1  Code    Dismantlement  720521  Alloy steel powders  1   720529  Iron or steel, pig iron, spiegeleisen; powders (excluding alloy steel)   1   720610  Iron or non-alloy steel; ingots (excluding iron of heading no. 7203)   1   720690   Iron or non-alloy steel; primary forms (excluding ingots and iron of heading no. 7203)   1    720711  Iron or non-alloy steel; semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel; containing by weight less than 0.25% of carbon, of rectangular (including square) cross-section, width less than twice thickness    2   720712  Iron or non-alloy steel; semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel; containing by weight less than 0.25% of carbon, of rectangular (other than square) cross-section   2   720719  Iron or non-alloy steel; semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel, containing by weight less than 0.25% of carbon, other than rectangular or square cross-section   2   720720  Iron or non-alloy steel; semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel, containing by weight 0.25% or more of carbon   2   720810  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, with patterns in relief   3   720825  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, without patterns in relief, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, pickled, of a thickness of 4.75mm or more   3   720826  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, without patterns in relief, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, pickled, of a thickness of 3mm or more but less than 4.75mm   3   720827  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, without patterns in relief, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, pickled, of a thickness of less than 3mm   3   720836  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, without patterns in relief, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, of a thickness exceeding 10mm   3   720837  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, without patterns in relief, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, of a thickness of 4.75mm or more but not exceeding 10mm   3   720838  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, without patterns in relief, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, of a thickness of 3mm or more but less than 4.75mm   3   720839  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, without patterns in relief, flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, of a thickness of less than 3mm   3   720840  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, with patterns in relief   3  Code    Dismantlemen  720851  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, without patterns in relief, of a thickness exceeding 10mm   3   720852  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, without patterns in relief, of a thickness of 4.75mm or more but not exceeding 10mm   3   720853  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, without patterns in relief, of a thickness of 3mm or more but less than 4.75mm   3   720854  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, without patterns in relief, of a thickness of less than 3mm   3   720890   Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, hot-rolled, of a width 600mm or more, n.e.s. in heading no. 7208   3   720915  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of 3mm or more   3   720916  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness exceeding 1mm but less than 3mm   3   720917  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of 0.5mm or more but not exceeding 1mm   3   720918  Iron or non-alloy steel; in coils, flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of less than 0.5mm   3   720925  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of 3mm or more   3   720926  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness exceeding 1mm but less than 3mm   3   720927  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of 0.5mm or more but not exceeding 1mm   3   720928  Iron or non-alloy steel; (not in coils), flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of less than 0.5mm   3   720990   Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, n.e.s. in heading no. 7209   3   721011  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, plated or coated with tin, thickness of 0.5mm or more   3   721012  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, plated or coated with tin, thickness of less than 0.5mm   3   721020  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, plated or coated with lead, including terne- plate   3   721030  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, electrolytically plated or coated with zinc   3  Code    Dismantlement   721041  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, corrugated, plated or coated with zinc (not electrolytically)   3   721049  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, (not corrugated), plated or coated with zinc (not electrolytically)   3   721050  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, plated or coated with chromium oxides or with chromium and chromium oxides   3   721061  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, plated or coated with aluminium zinc-alloys   3   721069  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, plated or coated with aluminium, other than plated or coated with aluminium zinc-alloys   3   721070  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, painted, varnished or coated with plastics   3    721090   Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, plated or coated with materials n.e.s. in heading no. 7210    3    721113  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, hot-rolled, rolled on four faces or in a closed box pass, of a width more than 150mm but less than 600mm, 4mm thick or more, not in coils, without patterns in relief    3   721114  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, hot-rolled, of a width less than 600mm, 4.75mm thick or more, excluding those of item no. 7211.13   3   721119  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, hot-rolled, width less than 600mm, excluding those of item no. 7211.11 and 7211.12   3   721123  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, cold-rolled, of a width less than 600mm, containing by weight less than 0.25% of carbon   3   721129  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, hot-rolled, width less than 600mm, other than of item no. 7211.21 and 7211.22   3   721190   Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, n.e.s. in heading no. 7211, width less than 600mm   3  721210  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, plated or coated with tin  3   721220  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, of a width less than 600mm, electrolytically plated or coated with zinc   3   721230  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, plated or coated with zinc (not electrolytically)   3   721240  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, painted, varnished or coated with plastics   3   721250  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, plated or coated, (excluding tin, zinc or plastic)   3  721260  Iron or non-alloy steel; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, clad  3  Code    Dismantlement   721310  Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, containing indentations, ribs, grooves or other deformations produced during the rolling process   2   721320   Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, of free-cutting steel   2    721391  Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, n.e.s. in heading no. 7213, of circular cross-section measuring less than 14mm in diameter    1    721399  Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, n.e.s. in heading no. 7213, of circular cross-section measuring 14mm or more in diameter    2   721410  Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, forged, hot- rolled, hot-drawn or hot-extruded, but including those twisted after rolling   3    721420  Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, hot-drawn or hot-extruded, containing indentations, ribs, grooves or other deformations produced during the rolling process or twisted after rolling    3    721430   Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, hot-drawn or hot-extruded, including those twisted after rolling, of free-cutting steel    3     721491   Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, hot-drawn or hot-extruded, n.e.s. in heading no. 7214, of rectangular (other than square) cross- section     3     721499   Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, hot-rolled, hot-drawn or hot-extruded, n.e.s. in heading no. 7214, other than of rectangular cross-section     3   721510  Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, of free- cutting steel, cold-formed or cold-finished, n.e.s. in chapter 72   3   721550  Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, n.e.s. in chapter 72, cold-formed or cold-finished, (not free- cutting)   3   721590   Iron or non-alloy steel; bars and rods, n.e.s. in chapter 72, n.e.s. in heading no. 7215   3   721610  Iron or non-alloy steel; U, I or H sections, hot- rolled, hot-drawn or extruded, of a height of less than 80mm   3  721621  Iron or non-alloy steel; L sections, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded, of a height of less than 80mm  3  721622  Iron or non-alloy steel; T sections, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded, of a height less than 80mm  3  721631  Iron or non-alloy steel; U sections, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded, of a height of 80mm or more  3  721632  Iron or non-alloy steel; I sections, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded, of a height of 80mm or more  3  721633  Iron or non-alloy steel; H sections, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded, of a height of 80mm or more  3  Code    Dismantlemen  721640  Iron or non-alloy steel; L or T sections, hot-rolled, hot-drawn or extruded, of a height of 80mm or more   3   721650  Iron or non-alloy steel; angles, shapes and sections, n.e.s. in heading no. 7216, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded   3   721661  Iron or non-alloy steel; angles, shapes and sections, cold-formed or cold-finished, obtained from flat-rolled products   3   721669  Iron or non-alloy steel; angles, shapes and sections, cold-formed or cold-finished, (not obtained from flat-rolled products)   3   721691  Iron or non-alloy steel; angles, shapes and sections, n.e.s. in heading no. 7216, cold-formed or cold-finished, from flat-rolled products   3     721699    Iron or non-alloy steel; angles, shapes and sections, n.e.s. in heading no. 7216     3  721710  Iron or non-alloy steel; wire, (not plated or coated), whether or not polished  2  721720  Iron or non-alloy steel; wire, plated or coated with zinc  2   721730  Iron or non-alloy steel; wire, plated or coated with base metals (other than zinc)   2  721790  Iron or non-alloy steel; wire, n.e.s. in heading no. 7217  2  721810  Steel, stainless; ingots and other primary forms  3  721891  Steel, stainless; semi-finished products, of rectangular (other than square) cross-section  3  721899  Steel, stainless; semi-finished products, other than of rectangular cross-section  3   721911  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, in coils, of a thickness exceeding 10mm   3   721912  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, in coils, of a thickness of 4.75mm or more but not exceeding 10mm   3   721913  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, in coils, of a thickness of 3mm or more but less than 4.75mm   3   721914  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, in coils, of a thickness of less than 3mm   3   721921  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, (not in coils), of a thickness exceeding 10mm   3   721922  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, (not in coils), of a thickness of 4.75mm or more but not exceeding 10mm   3   721923  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, (not in coils), of a thickness of 3mm or more but less than 4.75mm   3   721924  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot-rolled, (not in coils), of a thickness of less than 3mm   3   721931  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled or cold-reduced, of a thickness of 4.75mm or more   3   721932  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of 3mm or more but less than 4.75mm   3  Code    Dismantlemen  721933  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness exceeding 1mm but less than 3mm   3   721934  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of 0.5mm or more but not exceeding 1mm   3  721935  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold-rolled, of a thickness of less than 0.5mm  3   721990  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, n.e.s. in heading no. 7219   3  722011  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, hot-rolled, of a thickness of 4.75mm or more  3  722012  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, hot-rolled, of a thickness of less than 4.75mm  3  722020  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, cold-rolled  3   722090  Steel, stainless; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, nes in heading no 7220   3  722100  Steel, stainless; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils  2  722211  Steel, stainless; bars and rods, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded, of circular cross-section  3   722219  Steel, stainless; bars and rods, hot-rolled, hot- drawn or extruded, other than of circular cross- section   3  722220  Steel, stainless; bars and rods, cold-formed or cold- finished  3    722230   Steel, stainless; bars and rods, n.e.s. in heading no. 7222    3  722240  Steel, stainless; angles, shapes and sections  3  722300  Steel, stainless; wire  3   722410   Steel, alloy; ingots and other primary forms   3  722490  Steel, alloy; semi-finished products  3  722511  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, of silicon-electrical steel, grain-oriented  3  722519  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, of silicon-electrical steel, (other than grain-oriented)  3   722530   Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, in coils   3   722540   Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, hot- rolled, not in coils   3   722550  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, cold rolled   3   722591  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, n.e.s. in heading no. 7225, electrolytically plated or coated with zinc   3    722592   Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, n.e.s. in heading no. 7225, plated or coated with zinc (other than electrolytically)    3  Code    Dismantlemen  722599  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width 600mm or more, n.e.s. in heading no. 7225, (other than plated or coated with zinc)   3   722611  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, of silicon-electrical steel, grain-oriented   3   722619  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, of silicon-electrical steel, other than grain-oriented   3  722620  Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, of high speed steel  3   722691   Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, n.e.s. in heading no. 7226, hot-rolled   3   722692   Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, n.e.s. in heading no. 7226, cold-rolled   3   722699   Steel, alloy; flat-rolled, width less than 600mm, n.e.s. in item no. 7226.9   3  722710  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, of high speed steel  2  722720  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, of silico-manganese steel  2   722790  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, n.e.s. in heading no. 7227   2  722810  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, of high speed steel  3  722820  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, of silico-manganese steel  3   722830  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, hot-rolled, hot-drawn or extruded   3  722840  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, forged  3   722850  Steel, alloy; bars and rods, cold-formed or cold- finished   3   722860   Steel, alloy; bars and rods n.e.s. in heading no. 7228   3  722870  Steel, alloy; angles, shapes and sections  3  722880  Steel, alloy or non-alloy; hollow drill bars and rods  3  722920  Steel, alloy; wire, of silico-manganese steel  3   722990  Steel, alloy; wire, of materials other than high speed or silico-manganese steel   3  730110  Iron or steel; sheet piling, whether or not drilled, punched or made from assembled elements  2  730120  Iron or steel; angles, shapes and sections, welded  2  730210  Iron or steel, railway or tramway track construction material; rails  1   730230  Iron or steel, railway or tramway track construction material; switch blades, crossing frogs, point rods and other crossing pieces   1  730240  Iron or steel, railway or tramway track construction material; fish-plates and sole plates  1  Code    Dismantlemen     730290     Iron or steel, railway or tramway track construction material; n.e.s. in heading no. 7302      1  730300  Cast iron; tubes, pipes and hollow profiles  3   730411  Iron or steel (excluding cast iron); seamless, line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines, of stainless steel   2   730419  Iron or steel (excluding cast iron or stainless steel); seamless, line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines   2  730422  Steel, stainless; seamless, drill pipe, of a kind used in drilling for oil or gas  2   730423  Iron or steel (excluding cast iron or stainless steel); seamless, drill pipe, of a kind used in drilling for oil or gas   2   730424  Steel, stainless; seamless, casing and tubing, of a kind used in drilling for oil or gas   2   730429  Iron or steel; casing and tubing, of a kind used in drilling for oil or gas   2    730431   Iron or non-alloy steel; cold-drawn or cold-rolled, tubes and pipes of circular cross-section    2     730439   Iron or non-alloy steel; (excluding cold-drawn or cold-rolled), tubes and pipes of circular cross- section     2    730441   Steel, stainless; cold-drawn or cold-rolled, tubes and pipes of circular cross-section    2    730449   Steel, stainless; (excluding cold-drawn or cold- rolled), tubes and pipes of circular cross-section    3    730451   Steel, alloy n.e.s. in heading no. 7304; cold-drawn or cold-rolled, tubes and pipes of circular cross- section    2    730459   Steel, alloy n.e.s. in heading no. 7304; (excluding cold-drawn or cold-rolled), tubes and pipes of circular cross-section    2  730490  Iron or steel; tubes, pipes and hollow profiles, seamless, n.e.s. in heading no. 7304  2   730511  Iron or steel; line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines, longitudinally submerged arc welded, external diameter exceeds 406.4mm   2  Code    Dismantlemen  730512  Iron or steel; line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines, longitudinally welded external diameter exceeds 406.4mm   2   730519  Iron or steel; line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines, (other than longitudinally welded), external diameter exceeds 406.4mm   2   730520   Iron or steel; casing of a kind used in drilling for oil or gas, external diameter exceeds 406.4mm   2    730531  Iron or steel; tubes and pipes (other than line pipe or casing of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines), longitudinally welded, external diameter exceeds 406.4mm    2    730539  Iron or steel; tubes and pipes (other than line pipe or casing of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines), (other than longitudinally welded), external diameter exceeds 406.4mm    2    730590   Iron or steel; tubes and pipes, n.e.s. in heading no. 7305, external diameter exceeds 406.4mm    2   730611  Steel; stainless; line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines n.e.c. in chapter 73, welded, (not seamless)   2   730619  Iron or steel (excluding cast iron); line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines (other than of stainless steel or seamless), n.e.c. in chapter 73   2   730621  Steel, stainless; casing and tubing of a kind used in drilling for oil and gas, n.e.c. in chapter 73, welded, (not seamless)   2    730629  Iron or steel (excluding cast iron); casing and tubing of a kind used in drilling for oil and gas (other than stainless steel or seamless), n.e.c. in chapter 73    2     730630    Iron or non-alloy steel; tubes and pipes, welded, of circular cross-section     3    730640    Steel, stainless; tubes and pipes, welded, of circular cross-section    2     730650    Steel, alloy; n.e.s. in heading no. 7306, tubes and pipes, welded, of circular cross-section     2   730661  Iron or steel (excluding cast iron); tubes, pipes and hollow profiles (not seamless), welded, of square or rectangular cross-section, n.e.c. in chapter 73   2  Code    Dismantlemen    730669   Iron or steel (excluding cast iron); tubes, pipes and hollow profiles (not seamless), n.e.c. in chapter 73, welded, of non-circular cross-section (not square or rectangular cross-section)     2    730690   Iron or steel; tubes, pipes and hollow profiles n.e.s. in heading no. 7306    2  730711  Cast iron; cast fittings, of non-malleable cast iron  2  730719  Iron or steel; cast fittings, other than of non- malleable cast iron  3  730721  Steel, stainless; tube or pipe fittings, flanges, of stainless steel  2  730722  Steel, stainless; tube or pipe fittings, threaded elbows, bends and sleeves  2  730723  Steel, stainless; tube or pipe fittings, butt welding fittings  2   730729  Steel, stainless; tube or pipe fittings, n.e.s. in item no. 7307.2   2  730791  Iron or steel; tube or pipe fittings, flanges, other than stainless steel  3   730792  Iron or steel; tube or pipe fittings, threaded elbows, bends and sleeves, other than stainless steel   2   730793  Iron or steel; tube or pipe fittings, butt welding fittings, other than stainless steel   3   730799   Iron or steel; tube or pipe fittings, n.e.s. in item no. 7307.9, other than stainless steel   3  730810  Iron or steel; structures and parts thereof; bridges and bridge-sections  1  730820  Iron or steel; structures and parts thereof, towers and lattice masts  1  730830  Iron or steel; structures and parts thereof, doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for  2   730840  Iron or steel; structures and parts thereof, props and similar equipment for scaffolding, shuttering or pit-propping   2    730890   Iron or steel; structures and parts thereof, n.e.s. in heading no. 7308    3      730900    Reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers; for any material (excluding compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, capacity exceeding 300l, whether or not lined or heat insulated      3    731010  Tanks, casks, drums, cans, boxes and similar containers, for any material (excluding compressed or liquefied gas), 50l or more capacity but not exceeding 300l    3  Code    Dismantlemen  731021  Cans; which are to be closed by soldering or crimping, for any material (excluding compressed or liquefied gas), less than 50l capacity, of iron or steel   3    731029  Tanks, casks, drums, boxes and similar containers for any material (excluding compressed or liquefied gas) less than 50l capacity, n.e.s. in item no. 7310.2, of iron or steel    3   731100   Containers for compressed or liquefied gas, of iron or steel   2   731210  Iron or steel; stranded wire, ropes and cables, not electrically insulated   3  731290  Iron or steel; plaited bands, slings and the like, not electrically insulated  3   731300  Iron of steel; barbed wire, twisted hoop or single flat wire and loosely twisted double wire, used for fencing   3  731412  Iron or steel; woven cloth, endless bands for machinery, of stainless steel  3    731414   Iron or steel; woven cloth, of stainless steel, (other than endless bands for machinery)    3    731419   Iron or steel; wire cloth (including endless bands), woven products, other than of stainless steel    3   731420  Iron or steel wire; grill, netting and fencing, welded at intersections, of wire with a maximum cross- sectional dimension of 3mm or more and mesh size 100cm2 or more   3   731431  Iron or steel wire; grill, netting and fencing, welded at the intersection, n.e.s. in item no. 7314.20, plated or coated with zinc   3   731439  Iron or steel wire; grill, netting and fencing, welded at the intersection, n.e.s. in item no. 7314.20, (other than plated or coated with zinc)   3  731441  Iron or steel wire; grill, netting and fencing, plated or coated with zinc  3  731442  Iron or steel wire; grill, netting and fencing, coated with plastic  3   731449   Iron or steel wire; grill, netting and fencing, coated with materials other than zinc or plastic   3  731450  Iron or steel; expanded metal  3  731511  Chain; articulated link, roller, of iron or steel  2  731512  Chain; articulated link, (other than roller), of iron or steel  2  731519  Chain; articulated link parts, of iron or steel  3  731520  Chain; skid, articulated link chain and parts thereof, of iron or steel  3  731581  Chain; stud-link chain, of iron or steel  3   731582   Chain; welded link chain, of iron or steel   3  Code    Dismantlemen     731589      Chain; n.e.s. in heading no. 7315, of iron or steel      3   731590   Chain; parts n.e.s. in heading no. 7315, of iron or steel   3  731600  Iron or steel; anchors, grapnels and parts thereof  3    731700  Iron or steel; nails, tacks, drawing pins, corrugated nails, staples (not those of heading no. 8305) and the like, with heads of other material or not, but excluding articles with heads of copper    5  731811  Iron or steel; threaded coach screws  2  731812  Iron or steel; threaded wood screws other than coach screws  2  731813  Iron or steel; threaded screw hooks and screw  2  731814  Iron or steel; threaded self-tapping screws  2    731815   Iron or steel; threaded screws and bolts n.e.s. in item no. 7318.1, whether or not with their nuts or washers    3  731816  Iron or steel; threaded nuts  2  731819  Iron or steel; threaded screws, bolts and nuts n.e.s. in item no. 7318.1  2  731821  Iron or steel; non-threaded spring washers and other lock washers  2  731822  Iron or steel; non-threaded washers, excluding spring and lock  2  731823  Iron or steel; non-threaded rivets  2  731824  Iron or steel; non-threaded cotters and cotter-pins  2  731829  Iron or steel; non-threaded articles, n.e.s. in item no. 7318.2  2  731940  Safety pins and other pins; of iron or steel  3   731990  Iron or steel; knitting needles, bodkins, crochet hooks and similar articles, for use in the hand, n.e.s. in heading no. 7319   3   732010   Iron or steel; leaf-springs and leaves therefor   2   732020   Iron or steel; helical springs and leaves for springs   2     732090     Iron or steel; springs n.e.s. in heading no. 7320     2    732111   Cooking appliances and plate warmers; for gas fuel or for both gas and other fuels, of iron or steel    3  Code    Dismantlement    732112   Cooking appliances and plate warmers; for liquid fuel, of iron or steel    3     732119    Cooking appliances and plate warmers; for solid fuel and fuels other than gas or liquid, of iron or steel     3      732181    Domestic appliances; non-electric, (other than cookers and plate warmers), for gas fuel or for both gas and other fuels, of iron or steel      3     732182    Domestic appliances; non-electric, (other than cookers and plate warmers), for liquid fuel, of iron or steel     3      732189    Domestic appliances; non-electric, (other than cookers and plate warmers), for solid fuel and fuels other than gas or liquid, of iron or steel      3  732190  Domestic appliances; non-electric, parts thereof, of iron or steel  2   732211   Radiators and parts thereof; for central heating, (not electrically heated), of cast iron   3   732219  Radiators and parts thereof; for central heating, (not electrically heated), of iron or steel other than cast iron   3    732290   Air heaters and hot air distributors, (not electrically heated), incorporating a motor-driven fan or blower and parts thereof, of iron or steel    3   732310  Iron or steel; wool, pot scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like   3     732391    Cast iron; table, kitchen and other household articles and parts thereof, of cast iron, not enamelled     3     732392     Cast iron; table, kitchen and other household articles and parts thereof, of cast iron, enamelled     3  Code    Dismantlemen    732393    Steel, stainless; table, kitchen and other household articles and parts thereof     3     732394    Iron (excluding cast) or steel; table, kitchen and other household articles and parts thereof, enamelled     3      732399    Iron or steel; table, kitchen and other household articles and parts thereof, of iron or steel n.e.s. in heading no. 7323      3  732410  Steel; sinks and wash basins, of stainless steel  3  732421  Cast iron, baths, whether or not enamelled  3  732429  Iron (other than cast) or steel; baths  3     732490     Iron or steel; sanitary ware and parts thereof, excluding sinks, wash basins and baths     3  732510  Iron; articles of non-malleable cast iron  2  732591  Iron; grinding balls and similar articles for mills, other than of non-malleable cast iron  2   732599  Iron or steel; cast articles, excluding grinding balls and similar articles for mills, other than of non- malleable cast iron   2  732611  Iron or steel; grinding balls and similar articles for mills, forged or stamped, but not further worked  2   732619  Iron or steel; articles n.e.s. in item no. 7326.11, forged or stamped, but not further worked   2  732620  Iron or steel; wire articles  2   732690   Iron or steel; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 7326   3  740100  Copper mattes; cement copper (precipitated copper)  2  740200  Copper; unrefined, copper anodes for electrolytic refining  2  740311  Copper; refined, unwrought, cathodes and sections of cathodes  2  740312  Copper; refined, unwrought, wire-bars  2  740313  Copper; refined, unwrought, billets  2  740319  Copper; refined, unwrought, n.e.s. in item no. 7403.1  2  740321  Copper; copper-zinc base alloys (brass) unwrought  2  740322  Copper; copper-tin base alloys (bronze) unwrought  2  740329  Copper; copper alloys n.e.s. in heading no. 7403 (other than master alloys of heading no. 7405)  2    740400    Copper; waste and scrap    2  Code    Dismantlemen  740500   Copper; master alloys of copper   2  740610  Copper; powders of non-lamellar structure  2   740620   Copper; powders of lamellar structure, flakes   2  740710  Copper; bars, rods and profiles, of refined copper  2  740721  Copper; bars, rods and profiles, of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)  2   740729  Copper; bars, rods and profiles, of copper alloys, (other than copper-zinc base alloys, copper-nickel base alloys or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys)   2  740811  Copper; wire, of refined copper, of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6mm  2  740819  Copper; wire, of refined copper, of which the maximum cross-sectional dimension is 6mm or  2  740821  Copper; wire, of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)  2   740822  Copper; wire, of copper-nickel base alloys (cupro- nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel silver)   2   740829  Copper; wire, of copper alloys (other than copper- zinc base alloys, copper-nickel base alloys or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys)   1   740911  Copper; strip, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of refined copper, in coils   2   740919  Copper; plates and sheets, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of refined copper, not in coils   2   740921   Copper; strip, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of copper-zinc base alloys (brass), in coils   2   740929  Copper; plates and sheets, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of copper-zinc base alloys (brass), not in coils   2   740931   Copper; strip, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of copper-tin base alloys (bronze), in coils   2   740939  Copper; plates and sheets, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of copper-tin base alloys, not in coils   2   740940  Copper; plates, sheets and strip, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of copper-nickel base alloys (cupro-nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel silver)   2    740990  Copper; plates, sheets and strip, of a thickness exceeding 0.15mm, of copper alloys (other than copper-zinc base alloys, copper-tin base alloys, copper-nickel base alloys or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys)    2    741011   Copper; foil, not backed, of a thickness not exceeding 0.15mm, of refined copper    2    741012   Copper; foil, not backed, of a thickness not exceeding 0.15mm, of copper alloys    2  Code    Dismantlement    741021  Copper; foil, backed with paper, paperboard, plastics or similar backing material, of a thickness (excluding any backing) not exceeding 0.15mm, of refined copper    2    741022  Copper; foil, backed with paper, paperboard, plastics or similar backing material, of a thickness (excluding any backing) not exceeding 0.15mm, of copper alloys    2  741110  Copper; tubes and pipes, of refined copper  2  741121  Copper; tubes and pipes, of copper-zinc base alloys (brass)  2   741122  Copper; tubes and pipes, of copper-nickel base alloys (cupro-nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel silver)   2   741129  Copper; tubes and pipes, of copper alloys (other than copper-zinc, copper-nickel base alloys (cupro- nickel) or copper-nickel-zinc base alloys (nickel- silver))   2  741210  Copper; tube or pipe fittings (eg couplings, elbows, sleeves) of refined copper  2  741220  Copper; tube or pipe fittings (eg couplings, elbows, sleeves) of copper alloys  2  741300  Copper; stranded wire, cables, plaited bands and the like, not electrically insulated  2   741510   Copper; nails and tacks, drawing pins, staples and similar articles of copper or with heads of copper   3  741521  Copper; washers, (including spring washers), not threaded  3   741529  Copper; rivets, cotters, cotter-pins and similar articles, not threaded   3   741533   Copper; screws, bolts and nuts, threaded   2   741539   Copper; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 7415   2     741810    Copper; table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof, pot scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like     3   741820   Copper; sanitary ware and parts thereof   3  741910  Copper; chain and parts thereof  3  741991  Copper; cast, moulded, stamped or forged, but not further worked  3  741999  Copper; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 7419  3  750110  Nickel; nickel mattes  2  750120  Nickel; oxide sinters and other intermediate products of nickel metallurgy  2  750210  Nickel; unwrought, not alloyed  2  750220  Nickel; unwrought, alloys  2  Code    Dismantlement    750300    Nickel; waste and scrap    2  750400  Nickel; powders and flakes  2  750511  Nickel; bars, rods and profiles, not alloyed  2  750512  Nickel; bars, rods and profiles, of nickel alloys  2  750521  Nickel; wire, not alloyed  2  750522  Nickel; wire, of nickel alloys  2  750610  Nickel; plates, sheets, strip and foil, not alloyed  2  750620  Nickel; plates, sheets, strip and foil, of nickel alloys  2  750711  Nickel; tubes and pipes, not alloyed  2  750712  Nickel; tubes and pipes, of nickel alloys  2  750720  Nickel; tube and pipe fittings  2  750810  Nickel; other articles thereof n.e.s., cloth, grill and netting, of nickel wire  2  750890  Nickel; other articles thereof n.e.s., (other than cloth, grill and netting, of nickel wire)  3  760110  Aluminium; unwrought, (not alloyed)  3  760120  Aluminium; unwrought, alloys  3     760200     Aluminium; waste and scrap     3  760310  Aluminium; powders of non-lamellar structure  3   760320   Aluminium; powders of lamellar structure, flakes   3  760410  Aluminium; (not alloyed), bars, rods and profiles  3  760421  Aluminium; alloys, hollow profiles  3  760429  Aluminium; alloys, bars, rods and profiles, other than hollow  3   760511   Aluminium; (not alloyed), wire, maximum cross- sectional dimension exceeds 7mm   3    760519   Aluminium; (not alloyed), wire, maximum cross- sectional dimension is 7mm or less    3   760521   Aluminium; alloys, wire, maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding 7mm   3    760529   Aluminium; alloys, wire, maximum cross-sectional dimension is 7mm or less    3   760611  Aluminium; plates, sheets and strip, thickness exceeding 0.2mm, (not alloyed), rectangular (including square)   5   760612  Aluminium; plates, sheets and strip, thickness exceeding 0.2mm, alloys, rectangular (including square)   5  Code    Dismantlemen  760691  Aluminium; plates, sheets and strip, thickness exceeding 0.2mm, not alloyed, (not rectangular or square)   5   760692  Aluminium; plates, sheets and strip, thickness exceeding 0.2mm, alloys, (not rectangular or square)   5   760711  Aluminium; foil, (not backed), rolled (but not further worked), of a thickness not exceeding 0.2mm   2    760719   Aluminium; foil, (not backed), of a thickness not exceeding 0.2mm, not rolled    3   760720  Aluminium; foil, backed with paper, paperboard, plastics or similar backing materials, of a thickness (excluding any backing) not exceeding 0.2mm   3  760810  Aluminium; tubes and pipes, not alloyed  5  760820  Aluminium; tubes and pipes, alloys  5  760900  Aluminium; tube or pipe fittings (eg couplings, elbows, sleeves)  5   761010  Aluminium; structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of heading no. 9406) and parts of structures, doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors   5    761090  Aluminium; structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of heading no. 9406) and parts of structures, n.e.s. in heading no. 7610, plates, rods, profiles, tubes and the like    3     761100  Aluminium; reservoirs, tanks, vats and similar containers, for material (not compressed or liquefied gas), of a capacity over 300l, whether or not lined, not fitted with mechanical/thermal equipment     2   761210  Aluminium; collapsible tubular containers, for any material, (not compressed or liquefied gas), 300l capacity or less, whether or not lined, not fitted with mechanical/thermal equipment   3   761290  Aluminium; casks, drums, cans, boxes and the like for any material (not compressed or liquefied gas), 300l capacity or less, whether or not lined or heat- insulated, no mechanical or thermal equipment   2  761300  Aluminium; containers for compressed or liquefied gas  3   761410  Aluminium; stranded wire, cables, plaited bands and the like, (not electrically insulated), with steel core   5   761490  Aluminium; stranded wire, cables, plaited bands and the like, (not electrically insulated), other than steel core   3      761510    Aluminium; table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof, pot scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like      5   761520   Aluminium; sanitary ware and parts thereof   5  Code    Dismantlemen   761610  Aluminium; nails, tacks, staples (other than those of heading no. 8305) screws, bolts, nuts, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter-pins, washers and similar articles    5    761691   Aluminium; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 7616, cloth, grill, netting and fencing, of aluminium wire    5  761699  Aluminium; n.e.s. in heading no. 7616  5  780110  Lead; unwrought, refined  2  780191  Lead; unwrought, unrefined, containing by weight antimony as the principal other element  2   780199  Lead; unwrought, unrefined, not containing by weight antimony as the principal other element   2     780200     Lead; waste and scrap     2  780411  Lead; sheets, strip and foil, of a thickness (excluding any backing) not exceeding 0.2mm  2  780419  Lead; plates, sheets, strip and foil, of a thickness (excluding any backing) exceeding 0.2mm  2  780420  Lead; powders and flakes  2  780600  Lead; articles n.e.s. in chapter 78  2  790111  Zinc; unwrought, (not alloyed), containing by weight 99.99% or more of zinc  2  790112  Zinc; unwrought, (not alloyed), containing by weight less than 99.99% of zinc  2  790120  Zinc; unwrought, alloys  2     790200     Zinc; waste and scrap     2  790310  Zinc dust  2   790390   Zinc; powders and flakes   2  790400  Zinc; bars, rods, profiles and wire  2  790500  Zinc; plates, sheets, strip and foil  2  790700  Zinc; articles n.e.s. in chapter 79  5  800110  Tin; unwrought, not alloyed  2  800120  Tin; unwrought, alloys  2    800200    Tin; waste and scrap    2  800300  Tin; bars, rods, profiles and wire  2  800700  Tin; articles n.e.s. in chapter 80  3  810110  Tungsten (wolfram); articles thereof, including waste and scrap, powders  2  810194  Tungsten (wolfram); unwrought, including bars and rods obtained simply by sintering  3  810196  Tungsten (wolfram); wire  3  810197  Tungsten (wolfram); waste and scrap  3  810199  Tungsten (wolfram); articles n.e.s. in heading no. 8101  3  Code    Dismantlemen 810210  Molybdenum; articles thereof, including waste and scrap, powders  2  810294  Molybdenum; unwrought, including bars and rods obtained simply by sintering  3   810295  Molybdenum; bars and rods, other than those obtained simply by sintering, profiles, plates, sheets, strip and foil   3  810296  Molybdenum; wire  3  810297  Molybdenum; waste and scrap  3  810299  Molybdenum; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 8102  3  810320  Tantalum; unwrought, including bars and rods obtained simply by sintering, powders  3  810330  Tantalum; waste and scrap  3  810390  Tantalum; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 8103  3  810411  Magnesium; unwrought, containing at least 99.8% by weight of magnesium  2  810419  Magnesium; unwrought, containing less than 99.8% by weight of magnesium  2   810420   Magnesium; waste and scrap   2  810430  Magnesium; raspings, turnings and granules, graded according to size, powders  2  810490  Magnesium; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 8104  3   810520  Cobalt; mattes and other intermediate products of cobalt metallurgy, unwrought cobalt, powders   2  810530  Cobalt; waste and scrap  2  810590  Cobalt; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 8105  2  810600  Bismuth; articles thereof, including waste and scrap  2  810720  Cadmium; unwrought, powders  2  810730  Cadmium; waste and scrap  2  810790  Cadmium; other than unwrought, n.e.s. in heading no. 8107  2  810820  Titanium; unwrought, powders  2  810830  Titanium; waste and scrap  2  810890  Titanium; other than unwrought, n.e.s. in heading no. 8108  2  810920  Zirconium; unwrought, powders  2  810930  Zirconium; waste and scrap  2  810990  Zirconium; other than unwrought, n.e.s. in heading no. 8109  2  811010  Antimony and articles thereof; unwrought antimony, powders  2  811020  Antimony; waste and scrap  2  811090  Antimony and articles thereof; wrought, other than waste and scrap  2   811100  Manganese; articles thereof, including waste and scrap   2  811212  Beryllium and articles thereof; unwrought beryllium, powders  2  811213  Beryllium; waste and scrap  2  811219  Beryllium; n.e.s. in item no. 8112.11  2  811221  Chromium and articles thereof; unwrought chromium, powders  2  Code    Dismantlement   811222   Chromium; waste and scrap   2  811229  Chromium and articles thereof; wrought other than waste and scrap  2  811251  Thallium and articles thereof; unwrought thallium, powders  2  811252  Thallium; waste and scrap  2  811259  Thallium and articles thereof; other than unwrought thallium, (powders) or waste and scrap  2   811292  Gallium, hafnium, indium, niobium (columbium) and rhenium; articles thereof, unwrought, including waste and scrap, powders   2   811299  Gallium, hafnium, indium, niobium (columbium), rhenium and thallium; other than unwrought, including articles n.e.s. in item no. 8112.91   2  811300  Cermets; articles thereof, including waste and scrap  2  820110  Tools, hand; spades and shovels  5  820130  Tools, hand; mattocks, picks, hoes and rakes  5   820140  Tools, hand; axes, bill hooks and similar hewing tools, of a kind used in agriculture, horticulture or forestry   5  820150  Tools, hand; one-handed secateurs (including poultry shears)  3  820160  Tools, hand; hedge shears, two-handed pruning shears and similar two-handed shears  3     820190     Tools, hand; n.e.s. in heading no. 8201, of a kind used in agriculture, horticulture or forestry     3  820210  Tools, hand; hand saws  3  820220  Tools, hand; band saw blades  2  820231  Tools, hand; circular saw blades (including slitting or slotting saw blades), with working part of steel  2   820239  Tools, hand; circular saw blades (including slitting or slotting saw blades), with working part of materials (other than steel)   2  820240  Tools, hand; chain saw blades  2  820291  Tools, hand; straight saw blades, for working metal  2    820299    Tools, hand; saw blades n.e.s. in heading no. 8202    2  820310  Tools, hand; files, rasps and similar tools  2  820320  Tools, hand; pliers (including cutting pliers), pincers, tweezers and similar tools  2  820330  Tools, hand; metal cutting shears and similar tools  2  820340  Tools, hand; pipe-cutters, bolt croppers, perforating punches and similar tools  2   820411  Tools, hand; hand-operated spanners and wrenches (including torque meter wrenches but not including tap wrenches), non-adjustable   2   820412  Tools, hand; hand-operated spanners and wrenches (including torque meter wrenches but not including tap wrenches), adjustable   2  Code    Dismantlement  820420  Tools, hand; interchangeable spanner sockets, with or without handles  2  820510  Tools, hand; drilling, threading or tapping tools  2  820520  Tools, hand; hammers and sledge hammers  2  820530  Tools, hand; planes, chisels, gauges and similar cutting tools for working wood  2  820540  Tools, hand; screwdrivers  2  820551  Tools, hand; household  2  820559  Tools, hand; other than household tools  2  820560  Tools, hand; blow lamps  2   820570   Tools, hand; vices, clamps and the like   2   820590  Tools, hand; sets, of articles of two or more of the foregoing items   2  820600  Tools, hand; two or more of heading no. 8202 to 8205, put up in sets for retail sale  2   820713  Tools, interchangeable; rock drilling or earth boring tools, with working part of cermets, whether or not power operated   2   820719  Tools, interchangeable; rock drilling or earth boring tools, with working part (other than of cermets), whether or not power operated,   2   820720  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), dies for drawing or extruding metal   2   820730  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), tools for pressing, stamping or punching   2   820740  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), tools for tapping or threading   2   820750  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), tools for drilling (other than rock)   2   820760  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), for boring or broaching   2  820770  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), for milling  2  820780  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), for turning  2   820790  Tools, interchangeable; (for machine or hand tools, whether or not power-operated), for screw-driving or uses n.e.s. in heading no. 8207   2   820810  Tools; knives and cutting blades, for machines or for mechanical appliances, for metal working   2   820820  Tools; knives and cutting blades, for wood working machines or mechanical appliances   2   820830  Tools; knives and cutting blades, for kitchen appliances or for machines used by the food industry   2   820840  Tools; knives and cutting blades, for agricultural, horticultural or forestry machines or mechanical appliances   2  Code    Dismantlemen   820890   Tools; knives and cutting blades, for machines or mechanical appliances, n.e.s. in heading no. 8208    2   820900  Tools; plates, sticks, tips and the like for tools, unmounted, of sintered metal carbides or cermets   2   821000  Tools; hand-operated mechanical appliances, weighing 10kg or less, used in the preparation, conditioning or serving of food or drink   3   821110  Knives; with cutting blades, serrated or not (including pruning knives), sets of assorted articles, excluding knives and blades of heading no. 8208   3   821191  Knives; table knives, having fixed cutting blades, serrated or not, excluding knives and blades of heading no. 8208   3    821192   Knives; having fixed cutting blades, (other than table knives), serrated or not, excluding knives and blades of heading no. 8208    3   821193  Knives; with cutting blades, (having other than fixed blades), serrated or not, excluding knives and blades of heading no. 8208   3   821194  Blades; cutting, serrated or not, excluding those of heading no. 8208   3  821195  Knives; with handles of base metal  3  821210  Razors  3  821220  Razors; safety razor blades, including razor blade blanks in strips  3   821290   Razors; parts n.e.s. in heading no. 8212   3    821300   Scissors; tailors' shears, similar shears and blades therefor    3   821410  Cutlery; paper knives, letter openers, erasing knives, pencil sharpeners and blades therefor   3   821420  Manicure or pedicure sets and instruments; (including nail files)   3  821490  Cutlery; hair clippers and mincing knives  3   821510  Cutlery; sets of assorted articles (eg spoons, forks, ladles, skimmers, cake-servers, fish-knives, butter- knives, sugar tongs and similar), with at least one article plated with precious metal   3    821520  Cutlery; sets of assorted articles (eg spoons, forks, ladles, skimmers, cake-servers, fish-knives, butter knives, sugar tongs and similar), not plated with precious metal    3    821591   Cutlery; (eg spoons, forks, ladles, skimmers, cake- servers, fish-knives, butter-knives, sugar tongs and similar), plated with precious metal, not in sets    3  Code    Dismantlemen   821599    Cutlery; other than plated with precious metal    3  830110  Padlocks; (key, combination or electrically operated), of base metal  3   830120  Locks; of a kind used for motor vehicles (key, combination or electrically operated), of base metal   3   830130  Locks; of a kind used for furniture (key, combination or electrically operated), of base metal   3   830140  Locks; (other than those for motor vehicles or furniture), (key, combination or electrically operated), of base metal   3  830150  Clasps and frames with clasps; incorporating locks, of base metal  3   830160  Locks; parts of padlocks, locks, clasps and frames with clasps incorporating locks, of base metal   2   830170   Keys; presented separately, of base metal   3   830210  Hinges; suitable for furniture, doors, staircases, windows, blinds, coachwork, saddlery, trunks, chests, caskets or the like, of base metal   3  830220  Castors; with mountings, of base metal  3  830230  Mountings, fittings and similar articles; for motor vehicles, of base metal  3   830241  Mountings, fittings and similar articles; of base metal, suitable for buildings   3   830242  Mountings, fittings and similar articles; suitable for furniture of base metal   3     830249    Mountings, fittings and similar articles; suitable for other than buildings or furniture, of base metal     3  830250  Hat-racks, hat-pegs, brackets and similar fixtures, of base metal  3  830260  Automatic door closures; of base metal  3   830300  Safes; armoured or reinforced, strong-boxes, doors and safe deposit lockers for strong-rooms, cash or deed boxes and the like, of base metal   3    830400  Office equipment; filing cabinets, card-index cabinets, paper trays, paper rests, pen trays, office- stamp stands and similar office or desk equipment, of base metal, other than office furniture of heading no. 9403    3   830510  Stationery; fittings for loose-leaf binders or files, of base metal   3  830520  Stationery; staples in strips, (eg for offices, upholstery, packaging), of base metal  3     830590    Stationery; letter clips, letter corners, paper clips, indexing tags and similar office articles, including parts, of base metal     3  830610  Bells, gongs and the like; non-electric, of base metal  3  Code    Dismantlement   830621  Statuettes and other ornaments; of base metal plated with precious metal   3   830629  Statuettes and other ornaments; of base metal other than plated with precious metal   5   830630  Photograph, picture or similar frames, mirrors; of base metal   3  830710  Tubing; flexible, with or without fittings, of iron or steel  2  830790  Tubing; flexible, with or without fittings of base metal, other than those of iron or steel  2   830810  Hooks, eyes and eyelets; of base metal, of a kind used for clothing, footwear, awnings, handbags, travel goods or other made up articles   2  830820  Rivets; tubular or bifurcated, of base metal  2     830890   Clasps, frames with clasps, buckles, buckle clasps; of base metal, of a kind used for clothing, footwear, awnings, handbags, travel goods or other made up articles, including parts     2  830910  Stoppers; corks, of base metal  2    830990    Stoppers; caps and lids, of base metal    3     831000    Sign plates, name-plates, address-plates and similar plates, numbers, letters and other symbols; of base metal, excluding those of heading no. 9405     3  831110  Electrodes; coated, of base metal, for electric arc- welding  3  831120  Wire; cored, of base metal, for electric arc-welding  3    831130   Rods and wire; coated rods and cored wire, of base metal, for soldering, brazing or welding by flame    3     831190    Tubes, plates and similar products; of agglomerated base metal powder, other, including parts     3  840110  Nuclear reactors  1  840120  Machinery and apparatus; for isotopic separation, and parts thereof  1   840130   Fuel elements (cartridges); non-irradiated   1  840140  Nuclear reactors; parts thereof  1  840211  Boilers; watertube boilers with a steam production exceeding 45t per hour  1   840212   Boilers; watertube boilers with a steam production not exceeding 45t per hour   1  Code    Dismantlemen  840219   Boilers; vapour generating boilers, including hybrid boilers n.e.s. in heading no. 8402   1  840220  Boilers; super-heated water boilers  1  840290  Boilers; parts of steam or other vapour generating boilers  1   840310  Boilers; central heating boilers (excluding those of heading no. 8402)   1  840390  Boilers; parts of central heating boilers (excluding those of heading no. 8402)  1   840410  Boilers; auxiliary plant, for use with boilers of heading no. 8402 or 8403 (eg economisers, super- heaters, soot removers, gas recoverers)   1  840420  Boilers; condensers, for steam or other vapour power units  1   840490  Boilers; parts of auxiliary plant, for use with boilers of heading no. 8402 and 8403 and parts of condensers for steam or other vapour power units   1    840510   Generators; producer gas, water gas, acetylene gas and similar water process gas generators, with or without their purifiers    1   840590  Generators; parts of producer gas, water gas, acetylene gas and similar water process gas generators, with or without their purifiers   1  840610  Turbines; steam and other vapour turbines, for marine propulsion  1   840681  Turbines; steam and other vapour turbines, (for other than marine propulsion), of an output exceeding 40MW   1   840682  Turbines; steam and other vapour turbines, (for other than marine propulsion), of an output not exceeding 40MW   1  840690  Turbines; parts of steam and other vapour  1  840710  Engines; for aircraft, spark-ignition reciprocating or rotary internal combustion piston engines  1   840721  Engines; outboard motors for marine propulsion, spark-ignition reciprocating or rotary internal combustion piston engines   1   840729  Engines; for marine propulsion, (other than outboard motors), spark-ignition reciprocating or rotary internal combustion piston engines   1   840731  Engines; reciprocating piston engines, of a kind used for the propulsion of vehicles of chapter 87, of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50cc   2   840732  Engines; reciprocating piston engines, of a kind used for the propulsion of vehicles of chapter 87, of a cylinder capacity exceeding 50cc but not exceeding 250cc   2   840733  Engines; reciprocating piston engines, of a kind used for the propulsion of vehicles of chapter 87, of a cylinder capacity exceeding 250cc but not exceeding 1000cc   2   840734  Engines; reciprocating piston engines, of a kind used for the propulsion of vehicles of chapter 87, of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1000cc   2     840790   Engines; rotary internal combustion piston engines, for other than aircraft or marine propulsion     3  Code    Dismantlement   840810  Engines; for marine propulsion, compression- ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi-diesel engines)   2   840820  Engines; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi-diesel engines), of a kind used for the propulsion of vehicles of chapter 87   2   840890  Engines; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi-diesel engines), of a kind used for other than marine propulsion or the vehicles of chapter 87   3   840910  Engines; parts of aircraft engines (spark-ignition reciprocating or rotary internal combustion piston engines)   1   840991  Engines; parts, suitable for use solely or principally with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engines (for other than aircraft)   3   840999   Engines; parts for internal combustion piston engines (excluding spark-ignition)   3  841011  Turbines; hydraulic turbines and water wheels, of a power not exceeding 1000kW  1   841012  Turbines; hydraulic turbines and water wheels, of a power exceeding 1000kW but not exceeding 10000kW   1  841013  Turbines; hydraulic turbines and water wheels, of a power exceeding 10000kW  1  841090  Turbines; parts of hydraulic turbines and water wheels, including regulators  3  841111  Turbo-jets; of a thrust not exceeding 25kN  1  841112  Turbo-jets; of a thrust exceeding 25kN  1  841121  Turbo-propellers; of a power not exceeding 1100kW  1  841122  Turbo-propellers; of a power exceeding 1100kW  1   841181  Turbines; gas-turbines (excluding turbo-jets and turbo-propellers), of a power not exceeding 5000kW   1  841182  Turbines; gas-turbines (excluding turbo-jets and turbo-propellers), of a power exceeding 5000kW  1  841191  Turbines; parts of turbo-jets and turbo-propellers  1  841199  Turbines; parts of gas turbines (excluding turbo- jets and turbo-propellers)  1  841210  Engines; reaction engines, other than turbo-jets  1  841221  Engines; hydraulic power engines and motors, linear acting (cylinders)  1   841229   Engines; hydraulic power engines and motors, other than linear acting (cylinders)   1  841231  Engines; pneumatic power engines and motors, linear acting (cylinders)  1  841239  Engines; pneumatic power engines and motors, other than linear acting (cylinders)  1    841280   Engines; pneumatic power engines and motors, n.e.s. in heading no. 8412    1  841290  Engines; parts, for engines and motors of heading no. 8412  2   841311  Pumps; fitted or designed to be fitted with a measuring device, for dispensing fuel or lubricants, of the type used in filling-stations or in garages   2  Code    Dismantlemen  841319  Pumps; for liquids, fitted or designed to be fitted with a measuring device, other than pumps for dispensing fuel or lubricants   2   841320  Pumps; hand, fitted or designed to be fitted with a measuring device, for liquids, other than those of item no. 8413.11 or 8413.19   2  841330  Pumps; fuel, lubricating or cooling medium pumps for internal combustion piston engines  3  841340  Pumps; concrete pumps  2     841350    Pumps; reciprocating positive displacement pumps, n.e.s. in heading no. 8413, for liquids     2    841360   Pumps; rotary positive displacement pumps, n.e.s. in heading no. 8413, for liquids    3     841370    Pumps; centrifugal, n.e.s. in heading no. 8413, for liquids     3     841381     Pumps and liquid elevators; n.e.s. in heading no. 8413     3  841382  Liquid elevators  2  841391  Pumps; parts thereof  3  841392  Liquid elevators; parts thereof  1  841410  Pumps; vacuum  2  841420  Pumps; hand or foot-operated air pumps  2  841430  Compressors; of a kind used in refrigerating equipment  2  841440  Compressors; air compressors mounted on a wheeled chassis for towing  2   841451  Fans; table, floor, wall, window, ceiling or roof fans, with a self-contained electric motor of an output not exceeding 125W   3   841459   Fans; n.e.s. in item no. 8414.51   3   841460  Hoods; ventilating or recycling hoods incorporating a fan, whether or not fitted with filters, having a maximum horizontal side not exceeding 120cm   3     841480    Pumps and compressors; for air, vacuum or gas, n.e.s. in heading no. 8414     3   841490  Pumps and compressors; parts, of air or vacuum pumps, air or other gas compressors and fans, ventilating or recycling hoods incorporating a fan   2  Code    Dismantlement   841510  Air conditioning machines; comprising a motor- driven fan and elements for changing the temperature and humidity, window or wall types, self-contained   3   841520  Air conditioning machines; comprising a motor driven fan and elements for changing the temperature and humidity, of a kind used for persons, in motor vehicles   3      841581    Air conditioning machines; incorporating a refrigerating unit and a valve for reversal of the cooling or heat cycle      3      841582    Air conditioning machines; incorporating a refrigerating unit but not a valve for reversal of the cooling or heat cycle, other than window or wall type      2      841583      Air conditioning machines; n.e.s. in heading no. 8415 and not incorporating a refrigerating unit      2   841590  Air conditioning machines; with motor driven fan and elements for temperature control, parts thereof   1  841610  Furnaces; furnace burners, for liquid fuel  2  841620  Furnaces; furnace burners, for pulverized solid fuel or gas, including combination burners  2   841630  Furnace accessories; mechanical stokers, mechanical grates, mechanical ash dischargers and similar appliances   2   841690  Furnaces; parts of furnace burners, for liquid fuel, pulverized solid fuel or gas, mechanical stokers, grates, ash dischargers and the like   2   841710  Furnaces and ovens; non-electric, for the roasting, melting or other heat-treatment of ores, pyrites or of metals, for industrial or laboratory use   2  841720  Ovens; non-electric, bakery ovens, including biscuit ovens  2     841780   Furnaces and ovens; including incinerators, non- electric, for industrial or laboratory use, n.e.s. in heading no. 8417     2   841790  Furnaces and ovens; parts of non-electric furnaces and ovens (including incinerators), of industrial or laboratory use   1   841810  Refrigerators and freezers; combined refrigerator- freezers, fitted with separate external doors, electric or other   3  841821  Refrigerators; for household use, compression- type, electric or other  3  Code    Dismantlement  841829  Refrigerators; household, electric or not, other than compression or absorption-type  3  841830  Freezers; of the chest type, not exceeding 800l capacity  3  841840  Freezers; of the upright type, not exceeding 900l capacity  3     841850     Refrigerating or freezing equipment; display counters, cabinets, show-cases and the like     3  841861  Refrigerating or freezing equipment; compression type units whose condensers are heat exchangers  2   841869  Refrigerating or freezing equipment; heat pumps, other than compression type units whose condensers are heat exchangers   2   841891  Refrigerating or freezing equipment; parts, furniture designed to receive refrigerating or freezing equipment   2   841899   Refrigerating or freezing equipment; parts thereof, other than furniture   3  841911  Heaters; instantaneous gas water heaters, for domestic or other purposes  3   841919   Heaters; instantaneous or storage water heaters, non-electric, other than gas   2  841920  Sterilizers; for medical, surgical or laboratory use, not used for domestic purposes  1  841931  Dryers; for agricultural products, not used for domestic purposes  1  841932  Dryers; for wood, paper pulp, paper or paperboard, not used for domestic purposes  1   841939   Dryers; for products n.e.s. in heading no. 8419, not used for domestic purposes   1  841940  Distilling or rectifying plant; not used for domestic purposes  1  841950  Heat exchange units; not used for domestic purposes  1  841960  Machinery; for liquefying air or gas, not used for domestic purposes  1   841981  Machinery, plant and equipment; for making hot drinks, for cooking or heating food   3      841989    Machinery, plant and laboratory equipment; for treating materials by change of temperature, other than for making hot drinks or cooking or heating food      2    841990   Machinery, plant and laboratory equipment; parts of equipment for treating materials by a process involving a change of temperature    1  842010  Machines; calendering or other rolling machines, for other than metal or glass  2  842091  Machines; parts, cylinders for calendering or other rolling machines, for other than metal or glass  2  Code    Dismantlemen  842099  Machines; parts, (other than cylinders), for calendering or other rolling machines, for other than metal or glass   1  842111  Centrifuges; cream separators  2  842112  Centrifuges; clothes-dryers  2   842119  Centrifuges; n.e.s. in heading no. 8421, including centrifugal dryers (but not clothes-dryers)   2  842121  Machinery; for filtering or purifying water  2  842122  Machinery; for filtering or purifying beverages other than water  2   842123  Machinery; filtering or purifying machinery, oil or petrol filters for internal combustion engines   2   842129   Machinery; for filtering or purifying liquids, n.e.s. in item no. 8421.2   2  842131  Machinery; intake air filters for internal combustion engines  2   842139  Machinery; for filtering or purifying gases, other than intake air filters for internal combustion engines   2  842191  Centrifuges; parts thereof, including parts for centrifugal dryers  1  842199  Machinery; parts for filtering or purifying liquids or gases  2  842211  Dish washing machines; of the household type  3  842219  Dish washing machines; of other than household type  3   842220  Machinery; for cleaning or drying bottles or other containers   2    842230   Machinery; for filling, closing, sealing, capsuling or labelling bottles, cans, bags or other containers, machinery for aerating beverages    2     842240     Machinery; for packing or wrapping     2   842290  Machinery; parts of machinery of heading no. 8422   2  842310  Weighing machines; personal (including baby scales) and household scales  3  842320  Weighing machines; scales for continuous weighing of goods on conveyors  2   842330  Weighing machines; constant weight scales and scales for discharging a predetermined weight of material into a bag or container, including hopper scales   2    842381   Weighing machines; having a maximum weighing capacity not exceeding 30kg (excluding balances of a sensitivity of 5cg or better)    2    842382   Weighing machines; having a maximum weighing capacity exceeding 30kg but not exceeding 5000kg    2  Code    Dismantlement  842389  Weighing machines; having a maximum weighing capacity exceeding 5000kg  2  842390  Weighing machines; weights of all kinds, parts of weighing machinery  3  842410  Fire extinguishers; whether or not charged  1    842420    Spray guns and similar appliances    1    842430   Mechanical appliances; steam or sand blasting machines and similar jet projecting machines    1  842441  Mechanical appliances; agricultural or horticultural sprayers; portable sprayers  1  842449  Mechanical appliances; agricultural or horticultural sprayers; other than portable sprayers  1   842482   Mechanical appliances; agricultural or horticultural, n.e.c. in heading 8424   1   842489  Mechanical appliances; for projecting, dispersing or spraying liquids or powders, for other than agricultural or horticultural use, whether or not hand-operated   1    842490   Mechanical appliances; parts of machines projecting, dispersing or spraying liquids or powders, whether or not hand-operated    1   842511  Pulley tackle and hoists; powered by an electric motor (excluding skip hoists or hoists of a kind used for raising vehicles)   2   842519  Pulley tackle and hoists; not powered by an electric motor (excluding skip hoists or hoists of a kind used for raising vehicles)   2  842531  Winches and capstans; powered by an electric motor  2  842539  Winches and capstans; not powered by an electric motor  2  842541  Jacks; built-in jacking systems of a type used in garages, for raising vehicles  2  842542  Jacks and hoists; hydraulic, of a kind used for raising vehicles  2  842549  Jacks and hoists; (other than hydraulic), of a kind used for raising vehicles  3  842611  Cranes; overhead travelling cranes on fixed  1  842612  Cranes; mobile lifting frames on tyres and straddle carriers  1    842619    Cranes; transporter, gantry and bridge cranes    1  842620  Cranes; tower cranes  1  842630  Cranes; portal or pedestal jib cranes  1   842641   Cranes; self-propelled derricks and cranes, on tyres, n.e.s. in heading no. 8426   1  842649  Cranes; self-propelled derricks and cranes, not on tyres, n.e.s. in heading no. 8426  1  842691  Cranes and derricks; designed for mounting on road vehicles  1  Code    Dismantlement    842699   Cranes and derricks; for other than mounting on road vehicles, n.e.s in heading no. 8426    1   842710  Fork-lift and other works trucks; fitted with lifting or handling equipment, self-propelled by electric motor   3   842720  Fork-lift and other works trucks; fitted with lifting or handling equipment, self-propelled by other than electric motor   3  842790  Fork-lift and other works trucks; fitted with lifting or handling equipment, not self-propelled  3  842810  Lifts and skip hoists; for lifting, handling, loading or unloading  2  842820  Elevators and conveyors; pneumatic, for lifting, handling, loading or unloading  2    842831   Elevators and conveyors; continuous-action, specially designed for underground use, for goods and materials, n.e.s. in heading no. 8428    2   842832   Elevators and conveyors; continuous-action, bucket type, for goods or materials   2   842833   Elevators and conveyors; continuous-action, belt type, for goods or materials   2    842839   Elevators and conveyors; continuous action, n.e.s. in heading no. 8428, for goods or materials    2  842840  Escalators and moving walkways  2  842860  Lifting machinery; teleferics, chair-lifts, ski- draglines and traction mechanisms for funiculars  2  842890  Lifting machinery; handling, loading or unloading machinery n.e.s. in heading no. 8428  2  842911  Bulldozers and angledozers; self-propelled, track laying  3  842919  Bulldozers and angledozers; self-propelled, other than track laying  3  842920  Graders and levellers  3  842930  Scrapers; self-propelled  3  842940  Tamping machines and road rollers; self-propelled  3  842951  Front-end shovel loaders  3  842952  Mechanical shovels, excavators and shovel loaders; with a 360 degree revolving super  3   842959   Mechanical shovels, excavators and shovel loaders; n.e.s. in item no. 8429.50   3   843010   Pile-drivers and pile-extractors   2  843020  Snow-ploughs and snow-blowers  1   843031  Coal or rock cutters and tunnelling machinery; self- propelled   2  Code    Dismantlement   843039   Coal or rock cutters and tunnelling machinery; not self-propelled   2     843041    Boring or sinking machinery; self-propelled, n.e.s. in heading no. 8430     2    843049    Boring and sinking machinery; not self-propelled    2   843050   Machinery; for handling earth, minerals or ores, self-propelled, n.e.s. in heading no. 8430   2  843061  Machinery; for tamping or compacting, not self- propelled  2   843069   Machinery; for handling earth, minerals or ores, not self-propelled, n.e.s. in item no. 8430.6   2  843110  Machinery; parts of the machinery of heading no. 8425  1  843120  Machinery; parts of the machinery of heading no. 8427  1  843131  Lifts, skip hoists or escalators; parts thereof  1  843139  Machinery; parts of the machinery of heading no. 8428, (other than lifts, skip hoists or escalators)  1  843141  Machinery parts; buckets, shovels, grabs and grips, for the machinery of heading no. 8426 and 8430  1  843142  Machinery parts; bulldozer or angledozer blades  1  843143  Boring or sinking machinery; parts of the machinery of item no. 8430.41 or 8430.41  3  843149  Machinery; parts of machines handling earth, minerals or ores and n.e.s. in heading no. 8431  3  843210  Ploughs; for soil preparation  1  843221  Harrows; disc harrows  1   843229  Harrows; (excluding disc), scarifiers, cultivators, weeders and hoes   1  843231  Seeders, planters and transplanters; no-till direct seeders, planters and transplanters  1  843239  Seeders, planters and transplanters; other than no- till direct seeders, planters and transplanters  1   843241  Spreaders and distributors; for manure and fertilizers, for agricultural, horticultural or forestry use; manure spreaders   1   843242  Spreaders and distributors; for manure and fertilizers, for agricultural, horticultural or forestry use; fertiliser distributors   1      843280      Rollers; for lawns or sports-grounds      1  Code    Dismantlemen  843290  Machinery; parts of machinery for soil preparation or cultivation or for rollers for lawns or sports- grounds   1   843311  Mowers; lawn, parks or sports-grounds, powered, with the cutting device rotating in a horizontal plane   3   843319  Mowers; for lawns, parks or sports-grounds, other than with the cutting device rotating in a horizontal plane   3  843320  Mowers; n.e.s. in item no. 8433.1 (including cutter bars for tractor mounting)  1  843330  Haymaking machinery  1  843340  Balers; straw or fodder balers, including pick-up balers  1  843351  Combine harvester-threshers  1  843352  Threshing machinery; other than combine harvester-threshers  1  843353  Harvesting machinery; for roots or tubers  1     843359     Harvesting machinery; n.e.s. in heading no. 8433     1   843360   Machines; for cleaning, sorting or grading eggs, fruit or other agricultural produce   1   843390  Harvesting machinery; parts, including parts of threshing machinery, straw or fodder balers and grass or hay mowers   1  843410  Milking machines  1    843420    Dairy machinery    1  843490  Milking machines and dairy machinery; parts thereof  1     843510   Presses, crushers and similar machinery; used in the manufacture of wine, cider, fruit juices or similar beverages     2   843590  Presses, crushers and similar machinery; parts, used in the manufacture of wine, cider, fruit juices or similar beverages   1    843610    Machinery; for preparing animal feeding stuffs    1  843621  Poultry incubators and brooders  1   843629  Poultry-keeping machinery; other than incubators and brooders   1  843680  Machinery; for agricultural, horticultural or forestry use and n.e.s. in heading no. 8436  1  843691  Machinery; parts of poultry-keeping machinery or poultry incubators and brooders  1   843699  Machinery; parts of that machinery for agricultural, horticultural or forestry use n.e.s. in heading no. 8436   1  Code    Dismantlement  843710  Machines; for cleaning, sorting or grading seed, grain or dried leguminous vegetables  1     843780   Machinery; for use in the milling industry or for the working of cereals or dried leguminous vegetables, other than farm-type machinery     1   843790  Machines; parts of those for cleaning, sorting or grading seed, grain or dried leguminous vegetables or for milling or working cereals or dried leguminous vegetables (not farm-type machinery)   1    843810   Machinery; industrial, for bakery and for the manufacture of macaroni, spaghetti or similar products    2    843820   Machinery; industrial, for the manufacture of confectionery, cocoa or chocolate    2   843830   Machinery; industrial, for sugar manufacture   2   843840   Machinery; industrial, brewery machinery   2   843850   Machinery; industrial, for the preparation of meat or poultry   2    843860   Machinery; industrial, for the preparation of fruits, nuts or vegetables    2   843880  Machinery; used in the industrial preparation or manufacture of food or drink, n.e.s. in heading no. 8438   2   843890  Machinery; parts of those machines used in the industrial preparation or manufacture of food or drink   2   843910  Machinery; for making pulp of fibrous cellulosic material   2   843920   Machinery; for making paper or paperboard   2  843930  Machinery; for finishing paper or paperboard  2  843991  Machinery; parts of machinery for making pulp of fibrous cellulosic material  1  843999  Machinery; parts of machinery for making or finishing paper or paperboard  1     844010    Book-binding machinery; including book-sewing machines     2  844090  Book-binding machinery; including book-sewing machines, parts thereof  1  Code    Dismantlement   844110  Machines; cutting, of all kinds, for making up paper pulp, paper or paperboard   2   844120  Machines; for making bags, sacks or envelopes of paper pulp, paper or paperboard   2   844130  Machines; for making cartons, boxes, cases, tubes, drums or similar containers (other than by moulding), of paper pulp, paper or paperboard   2  844140  Machines; for moulding articles, in paper pulp, paper or paperboard  2  844180  Machinery; n.e.s. in heading no. 8441, for making up paper pulp, paper or paperboard  2   844190  Machinery; parts of machinery for making up paper pulp, paper or paperboard, including cutting machines of all kinds   1   844230  Machinery; apparatus and equipment, for preparing or making printing blocks, plates, cylinders or other printing components   2   844240  Machinery; parts of that involved in type-founding or setting, for preparing or making printing blocks, plates, cylinders or other printing components, not machine- tools of heading no. 8456 to 8465   1   844250  Printing components; type, blocks, plates, cylinders and the like; blocks, plates, cylinders and lithographic stones prepared for printing purposes   1  844311  Printing machinery; offset, reel fed  2   844312  Printing machinery; offset, sheet fed, office type (sheet size not exceeding 22 x 36cm)   2   844313   Printing machinery; offset, n.e.c. in item no. 8443.1   2  844314  Printing machinery; letterpress, reel-fed, excluding flexographic printing  2   844315   Printing machinery; letterpress, other than reel- fed, excluding flexographic printing   2  844316  Printing machinery; flexographic  2  844317  Printing machinery; gravure  2      844319     Printing machinery; offset, (excluding reel or sheet fed)      2    844331  Printing, copying, and facsimile machines; machines which perform two or more of the functions of printing, copying or facsimile transmission, capable of connecting to an automatic data processing machine or to a    1   844332  Printing, copying, and facsimile machines; single- function printing, copying or facsimile machines, capable of connecting to an automatic data processing machine or to a network   1  Code    Dismantlement    844339   Printing, copying, and facsimile machines; single- function printing, copying or facsimile machines, not capable of connecting to an automatic data processing machine or to a network    1   844391  Printing machinery used for printing by means of plates, cylinders and other printing components of heading 8442; parts and accessories   1    844399   Printing machinery; parts and accessories, n.e.c. in item no. 8443.91    1   844400  Textile machinery; for extruding, drawing, texturing or cutting man-made textile materials   2  844511  Textile machinery; carding machines for preparing textile fibres  2  844512  Textile machinery; combing machines for preparing textile fibres  1  844513  Textile machinery; drawing or roving machines for preparing textile fibres  1  844519  Textile machinery; n.e.s. in heading no. 8445, for preparing textile fibres  1  844520  Textile machinery; spinning machines  1  844530  Textile machinery; doubling or twisting machines  1  844540  Textile machinery; winding (including weft- winding) or reeling machines  1     844590    Textile machinery; involved in textile fibre or textile yarn preparation and n.e.s. in heading no. 8445     1  844610  Weaving machines (looms); for weaving fabrics of a width 30cm or less  1  844621  Weaving machines (looms); for weaving fabrics of a width exceeding 30cm, shuttle type, power  1   844629  Weaving machines (looms); for weaving fabrics of a width exceeding 30cm, shuttle type, other than power looms   1  844630  Weaving machines (looms); for weaving fabrics of a width exceeding 30cm, shuttleless type  1  844711  Knitting machines; circular, with cylinder diameter not exceeding 165mm  1  844712  Knitting machines; circular, with cylinder diameter exceeding 165mm  1  844720  Knitting machines; flat, stitch-bonding machines  1   844790  Machines; for making gimped yarn, tulle, lace, embroidery, trimmings, braid or net and machines for tufting   1   844811  Machinery, auxiliary; dobbies and jacquards, card reducing, copying, punching or assembling machines for use therewith   1    844819   Machinery, auxiliary; for machines of heading no. 8444, 8445, 8446 or 8447, n.e.s. in item no. 8448.11    1  Code    Dismantlemen  844820   Machines; parts and accessories of machines or auxiliary machinery of heading no. 8444   1  844831  Machines, card clothing; parts and accessories  1   844832  Machines; parts and accessories of machines or auxiliary machinery for preparing textile fibres, other than card clothing   1   844833  Machines; parts and accessories of machines or auxiliary machinery, spindles, spindle flyers, spinning rings and ring travellers   1   844839  Machines; parts and accessories of machines or auxiliary machinery of heading no. 8445, n.e.s. in item no. 8448.3   1   844842  Weaving machines (looms); parts including their auxiliary machinery, and accessories thereof, reeds for looms, healds and heald-frames   1   844849  Weaving machines (looms); parts including their auxiliary machinery, and accessories thereof n.e.s. in item no. 8448.4   1   844851  Machines; parts and accessories of machines of heading no. 8447 or auxiliary machinery, sinkers, needles and other articles used in forming stitches   1   844859  Machines; parts and accessories of machines or auxiliary machinery of heading no. 8447, other than sinkers, needles and other articles used in forming stitches   1    844900   Machinery; for manufacture or finishing felt or non wovens in the piece or in shapes, including machinery for making felt hats, blocks for making hats    2   845011  Washing machines; household or laundry-type, fully-automatic, (of a dry linen capacity not exceeding 10kg)   3   845012  Washing machines; household or laundry-type, with built-in centrifugal drier, (not fully- automatic), of a dry linen capacity not exceeding   3   845019  Washing machines; household or laundry-type, not fully-automatic, without built-in centrifugal drier, of a dry linen capacity not exceeding 10kg   3  845020  Washing machines; household or laundry-type, of a dry linen capacity exceeding 10kg  2  845090  Washing machines; parts for household or laundry- type  1  845110  Dry-cleaning machines  3  845121  Drying machines; of a dry linen capacity not exceeding 10kg  2   845129   Drying machines; of a dry linen capacity exceeding 10kg   2  845130  Ironing machines and presses (including fusing presses)  2   845140   Machines; for washing, bleaching or dyeing   2  845150  Machines; for reeling, unreeling, folding, cutting or pinking textile fabrics  2  Code    Dismantlemen    845180   Machinery; for wringing, dressing, finishing, coating or impregnating textile yarns, fabrics or made up textile articles; for applying paste to base fabric used in manufacture of floor coverings     2     845190     Machinery; parts, of the machinery of heading no. 8451     1  845210  Sewing machines; of the household type  3  845221  Sewing machines; (not household type), automatic units  1  845229  Sewing machines; not household or automatic unit type  1  845230  Sewing machine needles  1  845290  Sewing machines; parts n.e.s. in item no. 8452.4  1   845310  Machinery; for preparing, tanning or working hides, skins or leather, other than sewing machines   1   845320  Machinery; for making or repairing footwear, other than sewing machines   1   845380  Machinery; for making or repairing articles of hides, skins or leather, other than sewing machines   1   845390  Machinery; parts of those for preparing, tanning or working hides, skins or leather, for making or repairing footwear or other articles of hides, skin or leather, other than sewing machines   1  845410  Converters; of a type used in metallurgy or in metal foundries  1  845420  Ingot moulds and ladles; of a kind used in metallurgy or in metal foundries  1  845430  Casting machines; of a kind used in metallurgy or in metal foundries  1   845490  Machines; parts of converters, ladles, ingot moulds and casting machines, of a kind used in metallurgy or in metal foundries   1  845510  Metal-rolling mills; tube mills  1  845521  Metal-rolling mills; hot or combination hot and cold rolling mills  1  845522  Metal-rolling mills; cold  1  845530  Metal-rolling mills; rolls thereof  1  845590  Metal-rolling mills; parts thereof  1     845611    Machine-tools; for working any material by removal of material; operated by laser     1      845612    Machine-tools; for working any material by removal of material; operated by other light or photon beam processes (not laser)      1  Code    Dismantlement   845620   Machine-tools; operated by ultrasonic processes   1  845630  Machine-tools; operated by electro-discharge processes  1  845640  Machine tools; for working any material by removal of material; operated by plasma arc  1  845650  Machine tools; for working any material by removal of material; operated by water-jet cutting  1     845690     Machine-tools; operated by processes n.e.s. in heading no. 8456     1  845710  Machining centres; for working metal  1  845720  Machines; unit construction machines (single station), for working metal  1  845730  Metal machines; multi-station transfer machines, for working metal  1  845811  Lathes; for removing metal, horizontal, numerically controlled  1  845819  Lathes; for removing metal, horizontal, other than numerically controlled  1   845891  Lathes; for removing metal, numerically controlled, other than horizontal lathes   1   845899  Lathes; for removing metal, other than horizontal or numerically controlled lathes   1   845910  Machine-tools; way-type unit head machines, for drilling, boring, milling, threading or tapping by removing metal, other than lathes of heading no. 8458   1  845921  Machine-tools; for drilling by removing metal, numerically controlled  1   845929  Machine-tools; for drilling by removing metal, other than numerically controlled   1   845931  Machine-tools; for boring-milling by removing metal, numerically controlled   1   845939  Machine-tools; for boring-milling by removing metal, other than numerically controlled   1   845941  Machine-tools; for boring by removing metal, numerically controlled boring machines, n.e.c. in heading 8459   1   845949  Machine-tools; for boring by removing metal, not numerically controlled boring machines, n.e.c. in heading 8459   1  845951  Machine-tools; for milling by removing metal, knee type, numerically controlled  1  845959  Machine-tools; for milling by removing metal, knee type, other than numerically controlled  1    845961   Machine-tools; for milling by removing metal, (not knee-type), numerically controlled    1    845969   Machine-tools; for milling by removing metal, not knee-type, other than numerically controlled    1  Code    Dismantlement  845970  Machine-tools; for threading or tapping by removing metal  1  846012  Machine-tools; flat-surface grinding machines, numerically controlled  1   846019  Machine-tools; flat-surface grinding machines, in which positioning in any one axis can be set up to an accuracy of 0.01mm or better, other than numerically controlled   1   846022  Machine-tools; grinding machines (excluding flat- surface), centreless, numerically controlled   1   846023  Machine-tools; cylindrical grinding machines (excluding flat-surface and centreless), numerically controlled   1   846024  Machine-tools; grinding machines (excluding flat- surface, cylindrical and centreless), numerically controlled   1   846029  Machine-tools; grinding machines (other than flat- surface), in which positioning in any one axis can be set up to at least an accuracy of 0.01mm, other than numerically controlled   1  846031  Machine-tools; sharpening (tool or cutter grinding) machines, numerically controlled  1  846039  Machine-tools; sharpening (tool or cutter grinding) machines, other than numerically controlled  1  846040  Machine-tools; for honing or lapping  1    846090  Machine-tools; for deburring, polishing or otherwise finishing metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets by means of grinding stones, abrasives or polishing products, n.e.s. in heading no. 8460    1   846120  Machine-tools; shaping or slotting machines, working by removing metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets   1  846130  Machine-tools; broaching machines, working by removing metal, sintered metal carbides or  1   846140  Machine-tools; gear cutting, gear grinding or gear finishing machines, working by removing metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets   1   846150  Machine-tools; sawing or cutting-off machines, working by removing metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets   1   846190  Machine-tools; working by removing metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets, n.e.s. in heading no. 8461   1   846210  Machine-tools; forging or die-stamping machines (including presses) and hammers, for working metal   1   846221  Machine-tools; bending, folding, straightening or flattening machines (including presses), numerically controlled, for working metal   1   846229  Machine-tools; bending, folding, straightening or flattening machines (including presses), (other than numerically controlled), for working metal   1   846231  Machine-tools; shearing machines (including presses), (other than combined punching and shearing machines), numerically controlled, for working metal   1   846239  Machine-tools; shearing machines (including presses), (other than combined punching and shearing machines, other than numerically controlled), for working metal   1  Code    Dismantlement   846241  Machine-tools; punching or notching machines (including presses), including combined punching and shearing machines, numerically controlled, for working metal   1   846249  Machine-tools; punching or notching machines (including presses), including combined punching and shearing machines, (not numerically controlled), for working metal   1   846291  Machine-tools; presses for working metal or metal carbides, n.e.s. in heading no. 8462, hydraulic presses   1   846299  Machine-tools; presses for working metal or metal carbides, n.e.s. in heading no. 8462, other than hydraulic presses   1   846310  Machine-tools; for working metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets, without removing material, draw-benches for bars, tubes, profiles, wire or the like   1   846320  Machine-tools; for working metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets, without removing material, thread rolling machines   1   846330   Machine-tools; machines for working wire, without removing material   1      846390    Machine-tools; for working metal, sintered metal carbides or cermets, without removing material, n.e.s. in heading no. 8463      1   846410  Machine-tools; sawing machines, for working stone, ceramics, concrete, asbestos-cement or like mineral materials or for cold working glass   1    846420  Machine-tools; grinding or polishing machines, for working stone, ceramics, concrete, asbestos- cement or like mineral materials or for cold working glass    1     846490   Machine-tools; for working stone, ceramics, concrete, asbestos-cement or like mineral materials or for cold working glass, (other than sawing, grinding or polishing machines)     1   846510  Machine-tools; which can carry out different types of machining operations without tool change between such operations, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar   1    846520   Machine-tools; for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials; machining centres    1   846591  Machine-tools; sawing machines, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials   1     846592   Machine-tools; planing, milling or moulding (by cutting) machines, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials     1  Code    Dismantlement    846593   Machine-tools; grinding, sanding or polishing machines, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials    1    846594   Machine-tools; bending or assembling machines, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials    1    846595   Machine-tools; drilling or morticing machines, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials    1   846596  Machine-tools; splitting, slicing or paring machines, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials   1      846599    Machine-tools; n.e.s. in heading no. 8465, for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics or similar hard materials      1  846610  Machine-tools; parts and accessories, tool holders and self-opening dieheads  1  846620  Machine-tools; parts and accessories, work  1   846630  Machine-tools; parts and accessories, dividing heads and other special attachments for machine- tools   1   846691  Machine-tools; parts and accessories, for the machines of heading no. 8464   1  846692  Machine-tools; parts and accessories, for the machines of heading no. 8465  2  846693  Machine-tools; parts and accessories, for the machines of heading no. 8456 to 8461  2  846694  Machine-tools; parts and accessories, of the machines of heading no. 8462 or 8463  2  846711  Tools; for working in the hand, pneumatic, rotary type (including combined rotary-percussion)  1  846719  Tools; for working in the hand, pneumatic, other than rotary type  1  846721  Tools; for working in the hand, with self-contained electric motor; drills of all kinds  1  846722  Tools; for working in the hand, with self-contained electric motor; saws  1  846729  Tools; for working in the hand, with self-contained electric motor; other than saws and drills  1  846781  Tools; for working in the hand, chain saws with self contained non-electric motor  1   846789  Tools; for working in the hand, (other than chain saws), with self-contained non-electric motor   1  846791  Tools; for working in the hand, parts of chain saws, with self-contained non-electric motor  1  846792  Tools; for working in the hand, parts of pneumatic tools  1  846799  Tools; for working in the hand, parts n.e.s. in item no. 8467.9  1   846810  Machinery and apparatus; hand-held blow pipes for soldering, brazing or welding, whether or not capable of cutting   1  Code    Dismantlement   846820  Machinery and apparatus; gas operated machinery and apparatus n.e.s. in item no. 8468.10, for soldering, brazing or welding, whether or not capable of cutting   1   846880  Machinery and apparatus; for soldering, brazing or welding, whether or not capable of cutting, n.e.s. in heading no. 8468   1   846890  Machinery and apparatus; parts, soldering, brazing or welding, whether or not capable of cutting, parts thereof   1    847010   Calculators; electronic, capable of operation without an external source of electric power    1   847021  Calculating machines; electronic, incorporating a printing device, needing an external source of power   1   847029  Calculating machines; electronic, (not incorporating a printing device), needing an external power source   1  847030  Calculating machines; non-electronic  1  847050  Cash registers  1   847090   Postage-franking machines, ticket-issuing machines which print tickets   1   847130  Data processing machines; portable, digital and automatic, weighing not more than 10kg, consisting of at least a central processing unit, a keyboard and a display   1     847141   Data processing machines; digital, automatic, (not portable, analogue or hybrid), comprising in the same housing at least a central processing unit, an input and output unit, whether or not combined     1    847149   Data processing machines; digital, automatic, (not portable, analogue or hybrid), presented in the form of systems, n.e.s. in item no. 8471.41    1     847150  Digital processing units; other than those of subheadings 8471.41 and 8471.49, whether or not containing in the same housing one or two of the following types of unit: storage units, input units or output units     1   847160  Data processing machines; input or output units, whether or not containing storage units in the same housing   1  847170  Data processing machines; storage units  1   847180  Data processing machines; automatic, units thereof n.e.s. in heading no. 8471   1   847190  Data processing machines; n.e.s. in heading no. 8471   1   847210   Duplicating machines   1  Code    Dismantlement   847230  Machines; for sorting or folding mail or for inserting mail in envelopes or bands, for opening, closing or sealing mail, for affixing or cancelling postage stamps   1   847290  Office machines; automatic banknote dispensers, coin-sorting machines, coin-counting or wrapping machines, pencil-sharpening machines, perforating or stapling machines   1  847321  Calculating machines; parts and accessories of item no. 8470.10, 8470.21 or 8470.29  1   847329   Machines; parts and accessories of heading no. 8470, (not of 8470.10, 8470.21 or 8470.29)   1   847330  Machines; parts and accessories of automatic data processing, magnetic or optical readers, digital processing units   1  847340  Machines; parts and accessories, of heading no. 8472  1   847350  Machines; parts and accessories equally suitable for use with machines of two or more of heading no. 8469 to 8472   2   847410  Machines; for sorting, screening, separating or washing earth, stone, ores or other mineral substances   2  847420  Machines; for crushing or grinding earth, stone, ores or other mineral substances  2   847431   Machines; concrete or mortar mixers   2  847432  Machines; for mixing mineral substances with bitumen  2    847439  Machines; for mixing or kneading mineral substances, excluding concrete mixers and machines for mixing mineral substances with bitumen    2    847480  Machines; for agglomerating, shaping or moulding solid mineral fuels, ceramic paste, unhardened cements, plastering materials in powder or paste form, machines for forming foundry moulds of sand    2    847490  Machines, for sorting, screening, separating, washing, crushing etc mineral substances, for agglomerating, shaping or moulding solid fuels, ceramic pastes etc, for forming foundry moulds of sand; parts    1   847510  Machines; for assembling electric or electronic lamps, tubes, valves or flashbulbs, in glass envelopes   1   847521  Machines; for manufacturing or hot working glass or glassware, for making optical fibres and preforms thereof   1    847529   Machines; for manufacturing or hot working glass or glassware, not for making optical fibres and preforms thereof    1     847590   Machines; parts, of those for assembling electric or electronic lamps, tubes, valves or flashbulbs, in glass envelopes and manufacturing or hot working glass or glassware     1  Code    Dismantlement  847621  Machines; automatic beverage-vending machines, incorporating heating or refrigerating devices  3  847629  Machines; automatic beverage-vending machines, not incorporating heating or refrigerating devices  3   847681  Machines; automatic goods-vending machines, (eg postage stamp, cigarette, food or money-changing machines, excluding beverage-vending machines), incorporating heating or refrigerating devices   3   847689  Machines; automatic goods-vending machines, (eg postage stamp, cigarette, food or money-changing machines, excluding beverage-vending machines), not incorporating heating or refrigerating devices   3  847690  Machines; parts of automatic goods-vending machines  1   847710  Machinery; injection moulding, for rubber or plastics   1  847720  Machinery; extruding, for rubber or plastics  1   847730   Machinery; blow moulding, for rubber or plastics   1   847740   Machinery; vacuum moulding and other thermoforming machines for rubber or plastics   1   847751  Machinery; for moulding or retreading pneumatic tyres or for moulding or otherwise forming inner tubes   1      847759    Machinery; for moulding or forming, other than for moulding or retreading pneumatic tyres or for moulding or otherwise forming inner tubes      1   847780  Machinery; for working rubber or plastics n.e.s. in heading no. 8477   1   847790  Machinery; parts of those for working rubber or plastics   1   847810   Machinery; for preparing or making up tobacco, n.e.s. in this chapter   1  847890  Machinery; parts of those for preparing or making up tobacco, n.e.s. in this chapter  1  847910  Machinery and mechanical appliances; for public works, building or the like  1   847920   Machinery; for the extraction or preparation of animal or fixed vegetable fats or oils   1    847930  Machinery and mechanical appliances; presses for the manufacture of particle or fibre building board of wood or other ligneous materials and other machinery for treating wood or cork    1  847940  Machines; for making rope or cable  1  847950  Machinery and mechanical appliances; industrial robots, n.e.s. or included  1  847960  Machinery and mechanical appliances; evaporative air coolers  1  Code    Dismantlement  847971  Machinery and mechanical appliances; passenger boarding bridges, of a kind used in airports  1   847979  Machinery and mechanical appliances; passenger boarding bridges, other than of a kind used in airports   1      847981     Machines and mechanical appliances; for treating metal, including electric wire coil-winders      1   847982  Machines; for mixing, kneading, crushing, grinding, screening, sifting, homogenising, emulsifying or stirring   1  847989  Machines and mechanical appliances; n.e.s. in item no. 8479.8, having individual functions  2  847990  Machines and mechanical appliances; parts, of those having individual functions  2  848010  Moulding boxes; for metal foundry  1  848020  Mould bases; for metal, metal carbides, glass, mineral materials, rubber or plastics  1   848030  Moulding patterns; of metal, metal carbides, glass, mineral materials, rubber or plastics   1   848041   Moulds; for metal or metal carbides, injection or compression types   1     848049    Moulds; for metal or metal carbides, other than injection or compression types     1  848050  Moulds; for glass  1   848060   Moulds; for mineral materials   1  848071  Moulds; for rubber or plastics, injection or compression types  1   848079  Moulds; for rubber or plastics, other than injection or compression types   1  848110  Valves; pressure reducing, for pipes, boiler shells, tanks, vats or the like  1  848120  Valves; for oleohydraulic or pneumatic transmissions  1  848130  Valves; check valves, for pipes, boiler shells, tanks, vats or the like  1  848140  Valves; safety or relief valves, for pipes, boiler shells, tanks, vats or the like  1    848180   Taps, cocks, valves and similar appliances; for pipes, boiler shells, tanks, vats or the like, including thermostatically controlled valves    3  848190  Taps, cocks, valves and similar appliances; parts thereof  3  848210  Ball bearings  1  848220  Bearings; tapered roller bearings, including cone and tapered roller assemblies  1  848230  Bearings; spherical roller bearings  1  848240  Bearings; needle roller bearings  1  Code    Dismantlement  848250  Bearings; cylindrical roller bearings n.e.s. in heading no. 8482  1     848280    Bearings; n.e.s. in heading no. 8482, including combined ball/roller     1  848291  Bearings; parts, balls, needles and rollers  1  848299  Bearings; parts, (other than balls, needles and rollers)  1  848310  Transmission shafts (including cam shafts and crank shafts) and cranks  1  848320  Bearing housings, incorporating ball or roller bearings  1  848330  Bearing housings, not incorporating ball or roller bearings and plain shaft bearings  1    848340  Gears and gearing; (not toothed wheels, chain sprockets and other transmission elements presented separately); ball screws; gear boxes and other speed changers, including torque converters    1  848350  Pulleys and flywheels, including pulley blocks  1  848360  Clutches and shaft couplings (including universal joints)  1    848390  Transmission components; parts of those components of heading no. 8483, designed for use solely or principally with a particular machine or appliance    1   848410  Gaskets and similar joints; of metal sheeting combined with other material or two or more layers of metal   1  848420  Seals; mechanical  1   848490  Gasket sets or assortments of gaskets and similar joints; dissimilar in composition, put up in pouches, envelopes or similar packings   1   848610  Machines and apparatus of a kind used solely or principally for the manufacture of semiconductor boules or wafers   1   848620  Machines and apparatus of a kind used solely or principally for the manufacture of semiconductor devices or of electronic integrated circuits   1   848630  Machines and apparatus of a kind used solely or principally for the manufacture of flat panel displays   1     848640  Machines and apparatus of a kind used solely or principally for the manufacture or repair of masks and reticles, assembling semiconductor devices or electronic integrated circuits, or for lifting, handling, loading or unloading items of heading 8486     1     848690     Machines and apparatus of heading 8486; parts and accessories     1  848710  Ships' or boats' propellers and blades therefor  1   848790  Machinery parts; not containing electrical connectors, insulators, coils, contacts or other electrical features, n.e.c. in chapter 84   1  850110  Electric motors; of an output not exceeding 37.5W  1  850120  Electric motors; universal AC/DC of an output exceeding 37.5W  1  Code    Dismantlement  850131  Electric motors and generators; DC, of an output not exceeding 750W  1  850132  Electric motors and generators; DC, of an output exceeding 750W but not exceeding 75kW  1  850133  Electric motors and generators; DC, of an output exceeding 75kW but not exceeding 375kW  1  850134  Electric motors and generators; DC, of an output exceeding 375kW  1  850140  Electric motors; AC motors, single-phase  1  850151  Electric motors; AC motors, multi-phase, of an output not exceeding 750W  1  850152  Electric motors; AC motors, multi-phase, of an output exceeding 750W but not exceeding 75kW  1  850153  Electric motors; AC motors, multi-phase, of an output exceeding 75kW  1  850161  Generators; AC generators, (alternators), of an output not exceeding 75kVA  1   850162  Electric generators; AC generators, (alternators), of an output exceeding 75kVA but not exceeding 375kVA   1   850163  Electric generators; AC generators, (alternators), of an output exceeding 375kVA but not exceeding 750kVA   1  850164  Electric generators; AC generators, (alternators), of an output exceeding 750kVA  1   850211  Electric generating sets; with compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi- diesel engines), of an output not exceeding 75kVA   2   850212  Electric generating sets; with compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi- diesel engines), of an output exceeding 75kVA but not exceeding 375kVA   2   850213  Electric generating sets; with compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi- diesel engines), of an output exceeding 375kVA   2  850220  Electric generating sets; with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engines  2   850231  Electric generating sets; wind-powered, (excluding those with spark-ignition or compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines)   2   850239  Electric generating sets; (excluding those with spark-ignition or compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines), other than wind powered   2  850240  Electric rotary converters  2   850300  Electric motors and generators; parts suitable for use solely or principally with the machines of heading no. 8501 or 8502   3  850410  Discharge lamps or tubes; ballasts therefor  1  850421  Electrical transformers; liquid dielectric, having a power handling capacity not exceeding 650kVA  1   850422  Electrical transformers; liquid dielectric, having a power handling capacity exceeding 650kVA but not exceeding 10,000kVA   1  850423  Electrical transformers; liquid dielectric, having a power handling capacity exceeding 10,000kVA  1   850431  Electrical transformers; n.e.s. in item no. 8504.2, having a power handling capacity not exceeding 1kVA   1   850432  Transformers; n.e.s. in item no. 8504.2, having a power handling capacity exceeding 1kVA but not exceeding 16kVA   1   850433  Transformers; n.e.s. in item no. 8504.2, having a power handling capacity exceeding 16kVA but not exceeding 500kVA   1  Code    Dismantlement  850434  Transformers; n.e.s. in item no. 8504.2, having a power handling capacity exceeding 500kVA  1  850440  Electrical static converters  1  850450  Electrical inductors; n.e.s. in heading no. 8504  1  850490  Electrical transformers, static converters and inductors; parts thereof  1   850511  Magnets; permanent magnets and articles intended to become permanent magnets after magnetisation, of metal   1   850519  Magnets; permanent magnets and articles intended to become permanent magnets after magnetisation, other than of metal   1  850520  Magnets; electro-magnetic couplings, clutches and brakes  1   850590   Magnets; electro-magnets, holding devices and parts n.e.s. in heading no. 8505   1  850610  Cells and batteries; primary, manganese dioxide  3  850630  Cells and batteries; primary, mercuric oxide  3  850640  Cells and batteries; primary, silver oxide  3  850650  Cells and batteries; primary, lithium  3  850660  Cells and batteries; primary, air-zinc  3   850680  Cells and batteries; primary, (other than manganese dioxide, mercuric oxide, silver oxide, lithium or air-zinc)   2  850690  Cells and batteries; primary, parts thereof  2   850710  Electric accumulators; lead-acid, of a kind used for starting piston engines, including separators, whether or not rectangular (including square)   3   850720  Electric accumulators; lead-acid, (other than for starting piston engines), including separators, whether or not rectangular (including square)   3   850730  Electric accumulators; nickel-cadmium, including separators, whether or not rectangular (including square)   3   850740  Electric accumulators; nickel-iron, including separators, whether or not rectangular (including square)   2   850750  Electric accumulators; nickel-metal hydride, including separators, whether or not rectangular (including square)   2   850760  Electric accumulators; lithium-ion, including separators, whether or not rectangular (including square)   2   850780  Electric accumulators; n.e.s. in heading no. 8507, including separators, whether or not rectangular (including square)   2  850790  Electric accumulators; parts n.e.s. in heading no. 8507  2   850811  Vacuum cleaners, with self-contained electric motor, of a power not exceeding 1,500 W and having a dust bag or other receptacle capacity not exceeding 20L   3   850819   Vacuum cleaners, with self-contained electric motor, n.e.c. in item no. 8508.1   2  Code    Dismantlement   850860  Vacuum cleaners, other than with a self-contained electric motor   2  850870  Parts of vacuum cleaners  2   850940  Electro-mechanical domestic appliances; food grinders and mixers, fruit or vegetable juice extractors, with self-contained electric motor   3    850980   Electro-mechanical domestic appliances; n.e.s. in heading no. 8509, with self-contained electric motor    3   850990  Electro-mechanical domestic appliances; parts for the appliances of heading no. 8509, with a self- contained electric motor   1  851010  Shavers; with self-contained electric motor  3  851020  Hair clippers; with a self-contained electric motor  3  851030  Hair-removing appliances; with self-contained electric motor  3  851090  Shavers and hair clippers; parts of those with self- contained electric motor  1   851110  Ignition or starting equipment; spark plugs, of a kind used for spark or compression-ignition internal combustion engines   3   851120  Ignition or starting equipment; ignition magnetos, magneto-dynamos and magnetic flywheels, of a kind used for spark or compression-ignition internal combustion engines   2   851130  Ignition or starting equipment; distributors and ignition coils of a kind used for spark-ignition or compression-ignition internal combustion engines   2   851140  Ignition or starting equipment; starter motors and dual purpose starter-generators, of a kind used for spark or compression-ignition internal combustion engines   3   851150  Ignition or starting equipment; generators n.e.s. in heading no. 8511, of a kind used for spark or compression-ignition internal combustion engines   3    851180   Ignition or starting equipment; n.e.s. in heading no. 8511, of a kind used for spark or compression- ignition internal combustion engines    3   851190  Ignition or starting equipment; parts of the equipment of heading no. 8511, for use in spark- ignition or compression-ignition internal combustion engines   1   851210  Lighting or visual signalling equipment; electrical, of a kind used on bicycles, excluding articles of heading no. 8539   2   851220  Lighting or visual signalling equipment; electrical, of a kind used on motor vehicles (excluding articles of heading no. 8539)   2   851230  Sound signalling equipment; electrical, used on cycles or motor vehicles (excluding articles of heading no. 8539)   2  851240  Windscreen wipers, defrosters and demisters; electrical, of kinds used for cycles or motor  2   851290  Lighting or signalling equipment; electrical, (excluding articles of heading no. 8539), windscreen wipers, defrosters and demisters; parts, of those kinds used for cycles or motor   1   851310  Lamps; portable, electric, designed to function by their own source of energy (excluding lighting equipment of heading no. 8512)   3  Code    Dismantlement   851390  Lamps; parts of portable, electric lamps of heading no. 8513, designed to function by their own source of energy   1  851410  Furnaces and ovens; industrial or laboratory electric, resistance heated  2  851420  Furnaces and ovens; industrial or laboratory induction or dielectric  2   851430  Furnaces and ovens; industrial or laboratory electric, other than induction dielectric or resistance heated   2   851440  Heating equipment; induction or dielectric, industrial or laboratory, other than furnaces and ovens   2     851490    Furnaces, ovens and heating equipment; parts of the industrial or laboratory equipment of heading no. 8514     1   851511  Brazing or soldering machines and apparatus; soldering irons and guns, whether or not capable of cutting   1   851519  Brazing or soldering machines and apparatus; other than soldering irons and guns, whether or not capable of cutting   1   851521  Welding machines and apparatus; for resistance welding of metal, fully or partly automatic, whether or not capable of cutting   1   851529  Welding machines and apparatus; for resistance welding of metal, other than fully or partly automatic, whether or not capable of cutting   1   851531  Welding machines and apparatus; for arc (including plasma arc) welding of metals, fully or partly automatic, whether or not capable of   1   851539  Welding machines and apparatus; for arc (including plasma arc) welding of metals, other than fully or partly automatic, whether or not   1     851580    Welding machines and apparatus; n.e.s. in heading no. 8515, whether or not capable of cutting     1    851590   Welding, brazing or soldering machines; parts of the machines of heading no. 8515    1  851610  Heaters; electric, instantaneous or storage water and immersion heaters  3  851621  Heating apparatus; electric storage heating radiators  3   851629  Heating apparatus; electric soil heating apparatus and space heating apparatus (excluding storage heating radiators)   3  851631  Hair-dressing apparatus; electro-thermic hair  3  851632  Hair-dressing apparatus; electro-thermic, other than hair dryers  3  851633  Hand-drying apparatus; electro-thermic  3  851640  Smoothing irons; electric  3  851650  Ovens; microwave, of a kind used for domestic purposes  3  Code    Dismantlement   851660  Ovens, cookers, cooking plates, boiling rings, grillers and roasters; of a kind used for domestic purposes (excluding microwaves)   3  851671  Electro-thermic appliances; coffee or tea makers, of a kind used for domestic purposes  3  851672  Electro-thermic appliances; toasters, of a kind used for domestic purposes  3     851679     Electro-thermic appliances; n.e.s. in heading no. 8516, used for domestic purposes     3  851680  Resistors; electric heating, other than those of heading no. 8545  3   851690  Electro-thermic appliances; parts, of heating resistors, of water, space and soil heaters, hair- dressing apparatus, hand dryers, smoothing irons and other domestic appliances of heading no.   1  851711  Line telephony or telegraphy apparatus; line telephone sets with cordless handsets  2  851712  Telephones for cellular networks or for other wireless networks  3   851718   Telephone sets n.e.c. in item no. 8517.1   3  851761  Base stations  3     851762  Communication apparatus (excluding telephone sets or base stations); machines for the reception, conversion and transmission or regeneration of voice, images or other data, including switching and routing apparatus     3       851769    Communication apparatus (excluding telephone sets or base stations); machines for the transmission or reception of voice, images or other data (including wired/wireless networks), n.e.c. in item no. 8517.6       2    851770   Telephone sets and other apparatus for the transmission or reception of voice, images or other data, via a wired or wireless network; parts    1  851810  Microphones and stands therefor  3  851821  Loudspeakers; single, mounted in their enclosures  3  851822  Loudspeakers; multiple, mounted in the same enclosure  3  851829  Loudspeakers; not mounted in their enclosures  3     851830    Headphones, earphones and combined microphone/speaker sets     3  851840  Amplifiers; audio-frequency electric  3  851850  Amplifier sets; electric sound  3  Code    Dismantlement   851890  Microphones, headphones, earphones, amplifier equipment; parts of the equipment of heading no. 8518   3    851920   Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; operated by coins, banknotes, bank cards, tokens or by other means of payment    3  851930  Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; turntables (record-decks)  3  851950  Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; telephone answering machines  3      851981    Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; using magnetic, optical or semiconductor media, n.e.c. in item no 8519.20, 8519.30 or 8519.50      3      851989     Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; n.e.c. in heading no 8519      3   852110   Video recording or reproducing apparatus; magnetic tape-type   3   852190   Video recording or reproducing apparatus; other than magnetic tape-type   3  852210  Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; parts and accessories thereof, pick-up cartridges  3    852290   Sound recording or reproducing apparatus; parts and accessories thereof, other than pick-up cartridges    1   852321  Magnetic media; cards incorporating a magnetic stripe, whether or not recorded, excluding products of Chapter 37   3   852329  Magnetic media; other than cards incorporating a magnetic stripe, whether or not recorded, excluding products of Chapter 37   3   852341  Optical media; unrecorded, excluding products of Chapter 37   3   852349  Optical media; recorded, excluding products of Chapter 37   3    852351   Semiconductor media; solid-state non-volatile storage devices, whether or not recorded, excluding products of Chapter 37    3  852352  Semiconductor media; smart cards, whether or not recorded, excluding products of Chapter 37  2  Code    Dismantlement    852359   Semiconductor media; other than smart cards, whether or not recorded, excluding products of Chapter 37    3    852380   Media n.e.c. in heading 8523, whether or not recorded, excluding products of Chapter 37    3   852550  Transmission apparatus for radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not incorporating sound recording or reproducing apparatus, not incorporating reception apparatus   3   852560  Transmission apparatus for radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not incorporating sound recording or reproducing apparatus, incorporating reception apparatus   3  852580  Television cameras, digital cameras and video camera recorders  2  852610  Radar apparatus  2  852691  Radio navigational aid apparatus  2  852692  Radio remote control apparatus  2    852712  Radio (telephony, telegraphy, broadcast) broadcast receivers; pocket-size radio cassette- players, operational without external power source, combined or not with sound recording or reproducing apparatus    3    852713  Radio (telephony, telegraphy, broadcast) broadcast receivers; apparatus (other than pocket- size radio cassette-players), combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus, not needing external power    3    852719  Radio-broadcast receivers; operational without external power source, without sound recording or reproducing apparatus, including apparatus capable of receiving radio-telephony or radio- telegraphy    3    852721  Radio-broadcast receivers; (not operational without external power source), combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus, including apparatus capable of receiving radio- telephony or radio-telegraphy    3    852729  Radio-broadcast receivers; (not operational without external power source), without sound recording or reproducing apparatus, including apparatus capable of receiving radio-telephony or radio-telegraphy    3   852791  Radio-broadcast receivers n.e.c. in heading no. 8527; combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus   3    852792   Radio-broadcast receivers n.e.c. in heading no. 8527; not combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus but combined with a clock    3    852799  Radio-broadcast receivers n.e.c. in heading no. 8527; not combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus and not combined with a clock    3    852842  Monitors; cathode-ray tube, capable of directly connecting to and designed for use with an automatic data processing machine of heading 84.71    3  Code    Dismantlement   852849  Cathode-ray tube monitors; other than of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data processing system of heading 84.71   3    852852  Monitors; other than cathode-ray tube; capable of directly connecting to and designed for use with an automatic data processing machine of heading 84.71    3   852859  Monitors other than cathode-ray tube; other than of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data processing system of heading 84.71   3    852862   Projectors; capable of directly connecting to and designed for use with an automatic data processing machine of heading 84.71    3   852869  Projectors; other than of a kind solely or principally used in an automatic data processing system of heading 84.71   3    852871  Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus; not designed to incorporate a video display or screen    3    852872  Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus; incorporating a colour video display or screen    3     852873  Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus; incorporating a black and white or other monochrome video display or screen     3   852910  Reception and transmission apparatus; aerials and aerial reflectors of all kinds and parts suitable for use therewith   3      852990     Reception and transmission apparatus; for use with the apparatus of heading no. 8525 to 8528, excluding aerials and aerial reflectors      1    853010   Signalling, safety or traffic control equipment; for railways or tramways (excluding those of heading no. 8608)    2    853080  Signalling, safety or traffic control equipment; for roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields (excluding those of heading no. 8608)    2   853090  Signalling apparatus; parts of safety, traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, roads, inland waterways, airfields, parking facilities, port instalments (excluding those of heading no. 8608)   1   853110  Signalling apparatus; electric, sound or visual, burglar or fire alarms and similar, other than those of heading no. 8512 or 8530   2  Code    Dismantlement   853120  Signalling apparatus; electric, sound or visual, indicator panels incorporating liquid crystal devices (LCD) or light emitting diodes (LED), excluding those of heading no. 8512 or 8530   3     853180    Signalling apparatus; electric, sound or visual, apparatus n.e.s. in heading no. 8531, excluding those of heading no. 8512 or 8530     2  853190  Signalling apparatus; parts of the electric, sound or visual apparatus of heading no. 8531  1   853210  Electrical capacitors; fixed, designed for use in 50/60 Hz circuits and having a reactive power handling capacity of not less than 0.5 kVAr (power capacitors)   1  853221  Electrical capacitors; fixed, tantalum  1  853222  Electrical capacitors; fixed, aluminium electrolytic  1  853223  Electrical capacitors; fixed, ceramic dielectric, single layer  1  853224  Electrical capacitors; fixed, ceramic dielectric, multilayer  1  853225  Electrical capacitors; fixed, dielectric of paper or plastics  1   853229   Electrical capacitors; fixed, n.e.s. in heading no. 8532   1  853230  Electrical capacitors; variable or adjustable (pre- set) capacitors  1  853290  Electrical capacitors; parts of the capacitors of heading no. 8532  1   853310  Electrical resistors; fixed carbon resistors, composition or film types (including rheostats and potentiometers but excluding heating resistors)   1   853321  Electrical resistors; fixed, for a power handling capacity not exceeding 20W (including rheostats and potentiometers but excluding heating resistors and carbon resistors)   1   853329  Electrical resistors; fixed, for a power handling capacity exceeding 20W (including rheostats and potentiometers but excluding heating resistors and carbon resistors)   1   853331  Electrical resistors; wirewound variable, including rheostats and potentiometers, for a power handling capacity not exceeding 20W (excluding heating)   1   853339  Electrical resistors; wirewound variable, including rheostats and potentiometers, for a power handling capacity exceeding 20W (excluding heating)   1   853340  Electrical resistors; variable, including rheostats and potentiometers (excluding heating)   1  853390  Resistors; parts of the resistors of heading no. 8533  1  853400  Circuits; printed  1  853510  Electrical apparatus; fuses, for a voltage exceeding 1000 volts  1  853521  Electrical apparatus; automatic circuit breakers, for a voltage exceeding 1000 volts but less than  1  853529  Electrical apparatus; automatic circuit breakers, for a voltage of 72.5kV or more  1  Code    Dismantlement  853530  Electrical apparatus; isolating and make-and-break switches, for a voltage exceeding 1000 volts  1   853540  Electrical apparatus; lightning arresters, voltage limiters and surge suppressors (for a voltage exceeding 1000 volts)   1     853590    Electrical apparatus; n.e.s. in heading no. 8535, for switching or protecting electrical circuits, for a voltage exceeding 1000 volts     2  853610  Electrical apparatus; fuses, for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts  1  853620  Electrical apparatus; automatic circuit breakers, for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts  1   853630  Electrical apparatus; for protecting electrical circuits, n.e.s. in heading no. 8536, for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts   1  853641  Electrical apparatus; relays, (for a voltage not exceeding 60 volts)  1  853649  Electrical apparatus; relays, for a voltage exceeding 60 volts  1  853650  Electrical apparatus; switches n.e.s. in heading no. 8536, for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts  1  853661  Electrical apparatus; lamp-holders, for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts  1  853669  Electrical apparatus; plugs and sockets, for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts  1  853670  Connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables  2     853690    Electrical apparatus; n.e.s. in heading no. 8536, for switching or protecting electrical circuits, for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts     2   853710  Boards, panels, consoles, desks and other bases; for electric control or the distribution of electricity, (other than switching apparatus of heading no. 8517), for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts   2   853720  Boards, panels, consoles, desks and other bases; for electric control or the distribution of electricity, (other than switching apparatus of heading no. 8517), for a voltage exceeding 1000 volts   2   853810  Electrical apparatus; parts (eg boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets, other bases), for goods of heading no. 8537, not equipped with their apparatus   2    853890   Electrical apparatus; parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of heading no. 8535, 8536 or 8537    2  853910  Lamps; sealed beam units  2  853921  Lamps; filament, (excluding ultra-violet or infra- red), tungsten halogen  2   853922  Lamps; filament, (excluding ultra-violet or infra- red), of a power not exceeding 200W and for a voltage exceeding 100 volts, other than tungsten halogen   2   853929   Lamps; filament, (excluding ultra-violet or infra- red), n.e.s. in item no. 8539.2   2  Code    Dismantlemen 853931  Lamps; discharge, (excluding ultra-violet), fluorescent, hot cathode  2  853932  Lamps; discharge, (excluding ultra-violet), mercury or sodium vapour lamps, metal halide lamps  2   853939  Lamps; discharge, (excluding ultra-violet, excluding fluorescent, hot cathode)   2  853941  Lamps; arc-lamps  2  853949  Lamps; ultra-violet or infra-red lamps, (excluding arc-lamps)  2  853950  Lamps; light-emitting diode (LED) lamps  2   853990   Lamps; parts of the lamps of heading no. 8539   3  854011  Tubes; cathode-ray television picture tubes, including video monitor cathode-ray tubes, colour  2   854012  Tubes; cathode-ray television picture tubes, including video monitor cathode-ray tubes, black and white or other monochrome   2   854020   Tubes; television camera tubes, image converters and intensifiers, other photo-cathode tubes   2    854040   Tubes; data/graphic display, colour, with a phosphor dot screen pitch smaller than 0.4mm    2     854060     Tubes; cathode ray, n.e.s. in heading no. 8540     2  854071  Tubes; microwave, magnetrons, excluding grid- controlled tubes  1   854079  Tubes; microwave, other than magnetrons and klystrons, (for example travelling wave tubes, carlinotrons), excluding grid-controlled tubes   1  854081  Valves and tubes; receiver or amplifier  1     854089     Valves and tubes; n.e.s. in heading no. 8540     2  854091  Tubes; parts of cathode-ray tubes  1   854099  Valves and tubes; parts of the valves and tubes of heading no. 8540, excluding parts of cathode-ray tubes   1  854110  Electrical apparatus; diodes, other than photosensitive or light emitting diodes  1   854121  Electrical apparatus; transistors, (other than photosensitive), with a dissipation rate of less than 1W   1   854129  Electrical apparatus; transistors, (other than photosensitive), with a dissipation rate of 1W or more   1  854130  Electrical apparatus; thyristors, diacs and triacs, other than photosensitive devices  1   854140  Electrical apparatus; photosensitive, including photovoltaic cells, whether or not assembled in modules or made up into panels, light emitting diodes   1  Code    Dismantlemen  854150  Electrical apparatus; photosensitive semiconductor devices n.e.s. in heading no. 8541, including photovoltaic cells, whether or not assembled in modules or made up into panels   1  854160  Crystals; mounted piezo-electric  1   854190  Electrical apparatus; parts for diodes, transistors and similar semiconductor devices and photosensitive semiconductor devices   1    854231  Electronic integrated circuits; processors and controllers, whether or not combined with memories, converters, logic circuits, amplifiers, clock and timing circuits, or other circuits    1  854232  Electronic integrated circuits; memories  1  854233  Electronic integrated circuits; amplifiers  1  854239  Electronic integrated circuits; n.e.c. in heading no. 8542  1  854290  Electronic circuits and microassemblies; parts of the electrical goods of heading no. 8542  1   854310  Electrical machines and apparatus; particle accelerators   2   854320  Electrical machines and apparatus; signal generators, having individual functions n.e.s. in chapter 85   2   854330  Electrical machines and apparatus; for electroplating, electrolysis or electrophoresis, having individual functions n.e.s. in chapter 85   2   854370  Electrical machines and apparatus; having individual functions, not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter, n.e.c. in heading no. 8543   2  854390  Electrical machines and apparatus; parts of the electrical goods of heading no. 8543  1  854411  Insulated electric conductors; winding wire, of copper  1  854419  Insulated electric conductors; winding wire, (of other than copper)  1  854420  Insulated electric conductors; co-axial cable and other co-axial electric conductors  2   854430  Insulated electric conductors; ignition wiring sets and other wiring sets of a kind used in vehicles, aircraft or ships   2  854442  Insulated electric conductors; for a voltage not exceeding 1000 volts, fitted with connectors  2  854449  Insulated electric conductors; for a voltage not exceeding 80 volts, not fitted with connectors  2  854460  Insulated electric conductors; for a voltage exceeding 1000 volts  1   854470   Insulated electric conductors; optical fibre cables   1  854511  Carbon electrodes; with or without metal, of a kind used for furnaces  2  854519  Carbon electrodes; with or without metal, of a kind used for other than furnaces  2  854520  Carbon brushes; with or without metal, used for electrical purposes  2   854590  Carbon; lamp carbons, battery carbons and other articles of graphite or other carbon, with or without metal, of a kind used for electrical purposes   2  854610  Electrical insulators; of glass  2  854620  Electrical insulators; of ceramics  2  Code    Dismantlement  854690  Electrical insulators; other than of glass and ceramics  2   854710  Insulating fittings; of ceramics, for electrical machines, of insulating material only (except minor assembly parts), excluding those of heading no. 8546   2   854720  Insulating fittings; of plastics, for electrical machines, of insulating material only (except minor assembly parts), excluding those of heading no. 8546   2   854790  Insulating fittings; (other than of ceramics or plastics), for electrical machines, appliances and equipment, excluding insulators of heading no. 8546   2   854810  Waste and scrap of primary cells, primary batteries and electric accumulators; spent primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric accumulators   3  854890  Electrical parts of machinery or apparatus; n.e.s. or included in chapter 85  1  860110  Rail locomotives; powered from an external source of electricity  1  860120  Rail locomotives; powered by electric  1  860210  Rail locomotives; diesel-electric powered  1   860290  Rail locomotives and locomotive tenders; other than diesel-electric powered   1   860310  Railway or tramway coaches, vans and trucks; self- propelled, powered from an external source of electricity (excluding those of heading no. 8604)   1   860390  Railway or tramway coaches, vans and trucks; self- propelled, powered other than from an external source of electricity (excluding those of heading no. 8604)   1    860400  Railway or tramway maintenance or service vehicles; whether or not self-propelled (eg workshops, cranes, ballast tampers, trackliners, testing coaches and track inspection vehicles)    1     860500   Railway or tramway coaches; passenger coaches, luggage vans, post office coaches and other special purpose railway or tramway coaches, not self- propelled (excluding those of heading no. 8604)     1  860610  Railway or tramway goods vans and wagons; tank wagons and the like, not self-propelled  1   860630  Railway or tramway goods vans and wagons; self- discharging, not self-propelled, excluding those of item no. 8606.10 or 8606.20   1   860691  Railway or tramway goods vans and wagons; covered and closed, not self-propelled   1   860692  Railway or tramway goods vans and wagons; open, with non-removable sides of a height exceeding 60cm, not self-propelled   1     860699     Railway or tramway goods vans and wagons; n.e.s. in heading no. 8606, not self-propelled     1  860711  Railway or tramway locomotives or rolling stock; parts, driving bogies and bissel-bogies  1  Code    Dismantlemen  860712  Railway or tramway locomotives or rolling stock; parts, bogies and bissel-bogies (excluding driving bogies and bissel-bogies)   1   860719  Railway or tramway locomotives or rolling stock; parts, axles and wheels, and parts thereof   1  860721  Railway or tramway locomotives or rolling stock; parts, air brakes and parts thereof  1   860729  Railway or tramway locomotives or rolling stock; parts, brakes (other than air brakes) and parts thereof   1   860730  Railway or tramway locomotives or rolling stock; parts, hooks and other coupling devices, buffers and parts thereof   1  860791  Railway or tramway locomotives; parts n.e.s. in heading no. 8607  1  860799  Railway or tramway rolling stock; parts n.e.s. in heading no. 8607  1      860800   Railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings; mechanical (including electro-mechanical) signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields; parts thereof      1   860900  Containers; (including containers for transport of fluids) specially designed and equipped for carriage by one or more modes of transport   2   870110   Tractors; pedestrian controlled   1  870120  Tractors; road, for semi-trailers  3  870130  Tractors; track-laying  2   870191  Tractors; n.e.c. in heading no 8701 (other than tractors of heading no 8709); of an engine power not exceeding 18kW   2   870192  Tractors; n.e.c. in heading no 8701 (other than tractors of heading no 8709); of an engine power exceeding 18kW but not exceeding 37kW   2   870193  Tractors; n.e.c. in heading no 8701 (other than tractors of heading no 8709); of an engine power exceeding 37kW but not exceeding 75kW   2   870194  Tractors; n.e.c. in heading no 8701 (other than tractors of heading no 8709); of an engine power exceeding 75kW but not exceeding 130kW   2   870195  Tractors; n.e.c. in heading no 8701 (other than tractors of heading no 8709); of an engine power exceeding 130kW   2   870210  Vehicles; public transport type (carries 10 or more passengers), compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel)   3    870220  Vehicles; public transport type (carries 10 or more persons, including driver), with both compression- ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel) and electric motor for propulsion, new or used    3    870230  Vehicles; public transport type (carries 10 or more persons, including driver), with both compression- ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel) and electric motor for propulsion, new or used    3  Code    Dismantlemen  870240  Vehicles; public transport type (carries 10 or more persons, including driver), with only electric motor for propulsion, new or used   3   870290  Vehicles; public transport type (carries 10 or more passengers), other than compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi- diesel)   3   870310   Vehicles; specially designed for travelling on snow, golf cars and similar vehicles   3      870321    Vehicles; spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine, cylinder capacity not exceeding 1000cc      3      870322    Vehicles; spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine, cylinder capacity exceeding 1000cc but not exceeding 1500cc      3      870323    Vehicles; spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine, cylinder capacity exceeding 1500cc but not exceeding 3000cc      3      870324    Vehicles; spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine, cylinder capacity exceeding 3000cc      3     870331    Vehicles; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel), cylinder capacity not exceeding 1500cc     3     870332   Vehicles; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel), cylinder capacity exceeding 1500cc but not exceeding 2500cc     3     870333    Vehicles; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel), cylinder capacity exceeding 2500cc     3  Code    Dismantlemen     870340    Vehicles; with both spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine and electric motor for propulsion, incapable of being charged by plugging to external source of electric power      3      870350   Vehicles; with both compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel) and electric motor for propulsion, incapable of being charged by plugging to external source of electric power      3       870360    Vehicles; with both spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine and electric motor for propulsion, capable of being charged by plugging to external source of electric power       3      870370    Vehicles; with both compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel) and electric motor for propulsion, capable of being charged by plugging to external source of electric power      3     870380     Vehicles; with only electric motor for propulsion     3      870390    Vehicles; for transport of persons (other than those of heading no. 8702) n.e.s. in heading no. 8703, including station wagons and racing cars      3  870410  Vehicles; dumpers, designed for off-highway use, for transport of goods  2    870421  Vehicles; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel), for transport of goods, (of a gvw not exceeding 5 tonnes), nes in item no 8704.1    2    870422  Vehicles; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel), for transport of goods, (of a g.v.w. exceeding 5 tonnes but not exceeding 20 tonnes), nes in item no 8704.1    2  Code    Dismantlement    870423  Vehicles; compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel), for transport of goods, (of a g.v.w. exceeding 20 tonnes), nes in item no 8704.1    2    870431   Vehicles; spark-ignition internal combustion piston engine, for transport of goods, (of a g.v.w. not exceeding 5 tonnes), nes in item no 8704.1    2    870432   Vehicles; spark-ignition internal combustion piston engine, for transport of goods, (of a g.v.w. exceeding 5 tonnes), nes in item no 8704.1    2    870490   Vehicles; for transport of goods, n.e.s. in heading no. 8704    2  870510  Vehicles; crane lorries  1  870520  Vehicles; mobile drilling derricks  1  870530  Vehicles; fire fighting vehicles  1  870540  Vehicles; concrete-mixer lorries  1    870590  Vehicles; break-down lorries, road-sweepers, spraying lorries, mobile workshops, mobile radiological units, and other special purpose vehicles n.e.s. in heading no. 8705    1    870600   Chassis; fitted with engines, for the motor vehicles of heading no. 8701 to 8705    2  870710  Vehicles; bodies (including cabs) for the motor vehicles of heading no. 8703  2   870790   Vehicles; bodies (including cabs) for the motor vehicles of heading no. 8701, 8702, 8704 or 8705   2    870810   Vehicles; bumpers and parts thereof, for the vehicles of heading no. 8701 to 8705    2  870821  Vehicles; parts of bodies, safety seat belts  2    870829   Vehicles; parts and accessories, of bodies, other than safety seat belts    2    870830   Vehicle parts; brakes, servo-brakes and parts thereof    2    870840    Vehicles; parts, gear boxes    3  Code    Dismantlement    870850   Vehicles; parts, drive-axles with differential, whether or not provided with other transmission components    3    870870   Vehicles; road wheels and parts and accessories thereof    2    870880    Vehicles; parts, suspension shock-absorbers    3   870891   Vehicles; parts, radiators   3    870892    Vehicles; parts, silencers and exhaust pipes    3   870893   Vehicles; clutches and parts   2    870894   Vehicles; parts, steering wheels, columns and boxes    3    870895   Vehicle parts; safety airbags with inflater system; parts thereof    3   870899   Vehicles; parts and accessories, n.e.s. in heading no. 8708   3   870911  Vehicles; electrical, self-propelled, (not fitted with lifting or handling equipment), of the type used for short distance transport of goods in factories, warehouses, dock areas or airports   2    870919  Vehicles; (not electrical), self-propelled, without handling equipment, used for short distance transport of goods in factories, airports and such, and tractors of the type used on railway station platforms    2   870990   Vehicles; parts of the vehicles of heading no. 8709   2   871000  Tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles; motorised, whether or not fitted with weapons, and parts of such vehicles   2   871110  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles; fitted with an auxiliary motor, with reciprocating internal combustion piston engine not exceeding 50cc, with or without side-cars; side-cars   3  Code    Dismantlement    871120  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles; fitted with an auxiliary motor, reciprocating internal combustion piston engine, of cylinder capacity exceeding 50cc but not exceeding 250cc, with or without side-cars; side-cars    3    871130  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles; fitted with an auxiliary motor, reciprocating internal combustion piston engine, of cylinder capacity exceeding 250cc but not exceeding 500cc, with or without side-cars; side-cars    3    871140  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles; fitted with auxiliary motor, reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of cylinder capacity exceeding 500cc but not exceeding 800cc, with or without sidecars; side-cars    3    871150  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles; fitted with auxiliary motor, with reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity exceeding 800cc, with or without side-cars; side- cars    3   871160  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles; fitted with auxiliary motor, with electric motor for propulsion, with or without side-cars; side-cars   3   871190  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles; n.e.s. in heading no. 8711, fitted with auxiliary motor, with or without side-cars; side-cars   3  871200  Bicycles and other cycles; including delivery tricycles, not motorised  3  871310  Invalid carriages; not mechanically propelled  1   871390   Invalid carriages; mechanically propelled   1  871410  Motorcycles (including mopeds); parts and accessories  1  871420  Invalid carriages; parts and accessories thereof  1  871491  Cycles; frames and forks, and parts thereof  1  871492  Cycles; parts thereof, wheel rims and spokes  1   871493  Cycles; parts thereof, hubs (other than coaster braking hubs and hubbrakes), and free-wheel sprocket-wheels   1  871494  Cycles; parts thereof, brakes, including coaster braking hubs and hub-brakes, and parts thereof  1  871495  Cycles; parts thereof, saddles  1  871496  Cycles; parts, pedals and crank-gear, and parts thereof  1  871499  Cycles; parts thereof, n.e.s. in item no. 8714.9  1  871500  Baby carriages and parts thereof  2  871610  Trailers and semi-trailers; of the caravan type, for housing or camping  3  871620  Trailers and semi-trailers; self-loading or self- unloading, for agricultural purposes  2  871631  Tanker trailers and tanker semi-trailers  2   871639   Trailers and semi-trailers; (other than tanker type)   2   871640   Trailers and semi-trailers; n.e.s. in item no. 8716.3   2  871680  Vehicles; n.e.s. in heading no. 8716  2  Code    Dismantlemen  871690  Trailers, semi-trailers and other vehicles not mechanically propelled; parts thereof for heading no. 8716   1  880100  Balloons and dirigibles; gliders, hang gliders and other non-powered aircraft.  1  880211  Helicopters; of an unladen weight not exceeding 2000kg  1  880212  Helicopters; of an unladen weight exceeding 2000kg  1   880220  Aeroplanes and other aircraft; of an unladen weight not exceeding 2000kg   1   880230  Aeroplanes and other aircraft; of an unladen weight exceeding 2000kg but not exceeding 15,000kg   1   880240  Aeroplanes and other aircraft; of an unladen weight exceeding 15,000kg   1  880260  Spacecraft; (including satellites) and suborbital and spacecraft launch vehicles  1  880310  Aircraft and spacecraft; propellers and rotors and parts thereof  1  880320  Aircraft and spacecraft; under-carriages and parts thereof  1  880330  Aircraft and spacecraft; parts of aeroplanes or helicopters n.e.s. in heading no. 8803  1  880390  Aircraft and spacecraft; parts thereof n.e.s. in chapter 88  1  880400  Parachutes (including dirigible) and rotochutes; parts thereof and accessories thereto  1    880510   Aircraft launching gear, deck-arrestor or similar gear and parts thereof    1  880521  Ground flying trainers and parts thereof; air combat simulators and parts thereof  1  880529  Ground flying trainers and parts thereof; other than air combat simulators and parts thereof  1   890110  Cruise ships, excursion boats and similar vessels, principally designed for the transport of persons, ferry boats of all kinds   1  890120  Tankers  1  890130  Vessels, refrigerated; other than tankers  1   890190  Vessels; n.e.s. in heading no. 8901, for the transport of goods and other vessels for the transport of both persons and goods   1   890200  Fishing vessels, factory ships and other vessels; for processing or preserving fishery products   1  890310  Yachts and other vessels; for pleasure or sports, rowing boats and canoes, inflatable  3  890391  Sailboats; with or without auxiliary motor, for pleasure or sports, other than inflatable  3  890392  Motorboats; (other than outboard motorboats), for pleasure or sports, other than inflatable  3   890399  Yachts and other vessels; for pleasure or sports, rowing boats and canoes, n.e.s. in heading no. 8903, other than inflatable   3  890400  Tugs and pusher craft  1  890510  Dredgers  1  890520  Floating or submersible drilling or production platforms  1  Code    Dismantlement    890590   Vessels; light, fire-floats, floating cranes and other vessels, the navigability of which is subsidiary to their main function, floating docks    1  890610  Vessels; warships  2   890690  Vessels; other, including lifeboats other than rowing boats, other than warships   1  890710  Rafts; inflatable  1   890790   Floating structures; tanks, coffer-dams, landing stages, buoys and beacons   1  890800  Vessels and other floating structures; for breaking up  2   900110  Optical fibres, optical fibre bundles and cables; excluding those of heading no. 8544   1  900120  Optical elements; polarising material, sheets and plates thereof  1  900130  Lenses, contact; unmounted, of any material, excluding elements of glass not optically worked  1  900140  Lenses, spectacle; unmounted, of glass, excluding elements of glass not optically worked  1  900150  Lenses, spectacle; unmounted, of materials other than glass  1   900190  Optical elements; lenses n.e.s. in heading no. 9001, prisms, mirrors and other optical elements, unmounted, of any material (excluding elements of glass not optically worked)   1    900211  Lenses; objective, for cameras, projectors or photographic enlargers or reducers, mounted, being parts or fittings for instruments or apparatus, of any material (excluding glass not optically worked)    2   900219  Lenses; objective, (other than for cameras, projectors or photographic enlargers or reducers), mounted, of any material (excluding elements of glass not optically worked)   2   900220  Filters; mounted as parts or fittings for instruments or apparatus, of any material (excluding elements of glass not optically worked)   2    900290  Optical elements; n.e.s. in heading no. 9002 (eg prisms and mirrors), mounted, being parts or fittings for instruments or apparatus, of any material (excluding elements of glass not optically worked)    2  900311  Frames and mountings; for spectacles, goggles or the like, of plastics  3  900319  Frames and mountings; for spectacles, goggles or the like, of materials other than plastics  3  900390  Frames and mountings; parts for spectacles, goggles or the like  3  900410  Sunglasses; corrective, protective or other  3   900490   Spectacles, goggles and the like; (other than sunglasses) corrective, protective or other   3  900510  Binoculars  3    900580   Monoculars; other optical telescopes and astronomical instruments, excluding instruments for radio-astronomy    3  Code    Dismantlement   900590  Binoculars, monoculars, other optical telescopes, astronomical instruments (excluding those of radio astronomy); parts and accessories (including mountings)   1    900630  Cameras, photographic (excluding cinematographic); specially designed for underwater use, aerial survey, medical or surgical examination of internal organs; comparison cameras for forensic or criminological use    3   900640  Cameras, photographic (excluding cinematographic); instant print cameras   3     900651   Cameras, photographic (excluding cinematographic); with a through-the-lens viewfinder, single lens reflex (SLR), for a roll film of a width not exceeding 35mm     3    900652   Cameras, photographic (excluding cinematographic); of a kind (not SLR) for roll film of a width less than 35mm    3    900653   Cameras, photographic (excluding cinematographic); of a kind (not SLR) for roll film of a width of 35mm    3      900659    Cameras, photographic (excluding cinematographic); of a kind (not SLR) for roll film n.e.s. in heading no. 9006      3  900661  Photographic flashlight apparatus; discharge lamp ("electronic")  3   900669  Photographic flashlight apparatus; n.e.s. in heading no. 9006   3  900691  Cameras, photographic (excluding cinematographic); parts and accessories  1  900699  Photographic flashlight apparatus; parts and accessories, for other than cameras  1  900710  Cameras, cinematographic; whether or not incorporating sound recording apparatus  3   900720  Projectors, cinematographic; whether or not incorporating sound recording or reproducing apparatus   3   900791  Cameras, cinematographic; parts and accessories, whether or not incorporating sound recording apparatus   1   900792  Projectors, cinematographic; parts and accessories, whether or not incorporating sound reproducing apparatus   1   900850  Image projectors, photographic enlargers and reducers, excluding cinematographic   3   900890  Photographic (excluding cinematographic) enlargers and reducers and image projectors; parts and accessories   1    901010  Photographic laboratory apparatus and equipment; for automatically developing photographic (including cinematographic) film or paper in rolls or for automatically exposing developed film to rolls of paper    2  Code    Dismantlement   901050  Photographic laboratory apparatus and equipment; n.e.s. in item no. 9010.10 or 9010.4, for photographic (including cinematographic) laboratories; negatoscopes   2  901060  Photographic laboratory apparatus and equipment (including cinematographic); projection screens  2   901090  Photographic laboratory apparatus and equipment (including cinematographic); parts and accessories   1  901110  Microscopes, compound optical; stereoscopic microscopes  1   901120  Microscopes, compound optical; for photomicrography, cinephotomicrography or microprojection   1    901180  Microscopes, compound optical; (other than stereoscopic and microscopes for photomicrography, cinephotomicrography or microprojection)    1   901190  Microscopes, compound optical; parts and accessories (including those for photomicrography, cinephotomicrography or microprojection)   1  901210  Microscopes (excluding optical microscopes) and diffraction apparatus  1  901290  Microscopes (excluding optical microscopes) and diffraction apparatus; parts and accessories  1   901310  Optical appliances and instruments; telescopic sights for fitting to arms; periscopes; telescopes designed to form parts of machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus of this chapter   3  901320  Lasers; other than laser diodes  1   901380  Optical devices, appliances and instruments; n.e.s. in heading no. 9013 (including liquid crystal devices)   1   901390  Optical appliances and instruments; parts and accessories for articles of heading no. 9013   1  901410  Navigational instruments and appliances; direction finding compasses  1   901420  Navigational instruments and appliances; for aeronautical or space navigation (excluding compasses)   1   901480  Navigational instruments and appliances; for navigation other than aeronautical or space navigation (excluding direction finding compasses)   1  901490  Navigational instruments and appliances; parts and accessories  1  901510  Rangefinders  1  901520  Surveying equipment; theodolites and tacheometers  1  901530  Surveying equipment; levels  1  901540  Surveying equipment; photogrammetrical surveying instruments and appliances  1     901580   Surveying equipment; articles n.e.s. in heading no. 9015, including hydrographic, oceanographic, hydrological, meteorological or geophysical instruments and appliances (excluding compasses)     1    901590   Surveying equipment; parts and accessories for articles of heading no. 9015    1  901600  Balances; of a sensitivity of 5cg or better, with or without weights  1  Code    Dismantlement   901710  Drafting tables and machines; whether or not automatic   1  901720  Drawing, marking-out or mathematical calculating instruments  1  901730  Mathematical equipment; micrometers, callipers and gauges  1  901780  Mathematical instruments and equipment; n.e.s. in heading no. 9017  1   901790  Drawing, marking-out equipment and mathematical instruments; parts and accessories   1  901811  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; electro-cardiographs  1  901812  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; ultrasonic scanning apparatus  1  901813  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; magnetic resonance imaging apparatus  1  901814  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; scintigraphic apparatus  1     901819  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; electro-diagnostic apparatus (including apparatus for functional exploratory examination or for checking physiological parameters), not electro- cardiographs     1  901820  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; ultra- violet or infra-red ray apparatus  1  901831  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; syringes, with or without needles  1  901832  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; tubular metal needles and needles for sutures  1  901839  Medical, surgical instruments and appliances; catheters, cannulae and the like  2   901841  Dental instruments and appliances; dental drill engines, whether or not combined on a single base with other dental equipment   1  901849  Dental instruments and appliances; other than dental drill engines  1  901850  Ophthalmic instruments and appliances  1  901890  Medical, surgical or dental instruments and appliances; n.e.s. in heading no. 9018  1  901910  Mechano-therapy appliances; massage apparatus and psychological aptitude-testing apparatus  1   901920  Therapeutic respiration apparatus; ozone, oxygen, aerosol therapy apparatus; artificial respiration or other therapeutic respiration apparatus   1    902000  Breathing appliances and gas masks; excluding protective masks having neither mechanical parts nor replaceable filters and excluding apparatus of item no. 9019.20    1  902110  Orthopaedic or fracture appliances  1  902121  Dental fittings; artificial teeth  1  902129  Dental fittings; other than artificial teeth  1  902131  Artificial parts of the body  1  902139  Artificial parts of the body; excluding artificial joints  1  902140  Hearing aids (excluding parts and accessories)  1  902150  Pacemakers; for stimulating heart muscles (excluding parts and accessories)  1  Code    Dismantlement    902190    Appliances; worn, carried or implanted in the body, to compensate for a defect or disability    1   902212  Apparatus based on the use of x-rays; including radiography or radiotherapy apparatus, whether or not for medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses, computed tomography apparatus   1   902213  Apparatus based on the use of x-rays; including radiography or radiotherapy apparatus, for dental uses, excluding computed tomography apparatus   1   902214  Apparatus based on the use of x-rays; including radiography or radiotherapy apparatus, for medical, surgical or veterinary uses, not dental uses, excluding computed tomography apparatus   1   902219  Apparatus based on the use of x-rays, including radiography or radiotherapy apparatus; for other than medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses   1   902221  Apparatus based on the use of alpha, beta or gamma radiations, including radiography or radiotherapy apparatus; for medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses   1   902229  Apparatus based on the use of alpha, beta or gamma radiations, including radiography or radiotherapy apparatus; (for other than medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses)   1  902230  X-ray tubes  1    902290  Apparatus based on use of x-rays and similar; parts and accessories (x-ray generators, tubes, high tension generators, control panels and desks, screens, examination or treatment tables, chairs and like    1    902300   Instruments, apparatus and models; designed for demonstrational purposes (in education or exhibitions), unsuitable for other uses    1   902410  Machines and appliances; for testing the hardness, strength, compressibility, elasticity or other mechanical properties of metals   1   902480  Machines and appliances; for testing the hardness, strength, compressibility, elasticity or other mechanical properties of materials other than metals   1   902490  Machines and appliances; parts and accessories for those testing hardness, strength, compressibility, elasticity or other mechanical properties of materials (eg metal, wood, textiles,   1   902511  Thermometers and pyrometers; liquid filled, for direct reading, not combined with other instruments   1   902519  Thermometers and pyrometers; (other than liquid filled, for direct reading), not combined with   1  other instruments    902580  Hydrometers and similar floating instruments, barometers, hygrometers, psychrometers, thermometers, pyrometers; recording or not, any combination of these instruments (excluding thermometers and barometers not combined with other instruments)    1  Code    Dismantlement    902590  Hydrometers and similar floating instruments, barometers, hygrometers, psychrometers, thermometers, pyrometers; recording or not, any combination of these instruments, parts and accessories    1   902610   Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or checking the flow or level of liquids   1   902620   Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or checking pressure   1   902680  Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or checking variables of liquids or gases (excluding pressure or the flow and level of liquids and those of heading no. 9014, 9015, 9028 and 9032)   1    902690  Instruments and apparatus; parts and accessories for those measuring or checking the flow, level, pressure or other variables of liquids or gases (excluding those of heading no. 9014, 9015, 9028 or 9032)    1  902710  Instruments and apparatus; gas or smoke analysis apparatus, for physical or chemical analysis  1  902720  Chromatographs and electrophoresis instruments  1   902730  Spectrometers, spectrophotometers and spectrographs; using optical radiations (UV, visible, IR)   1   902750  Instruments and apparatus; using optical radiations (UV, visible, IR), (other than spectrometers, spectrophotometers and spectrographs)   1    902780  Instruments and apparatus; for physical or chemical analysis, for measuring or checking viscosity, porosity, expansion, surface tension or quantities of heat, sound or light, n.e.s. in heading no. 9025    1      902790      Microtomes and parts and accessories thereof      1  902810  Meters; gas, supply or production meters, including calibrating meters thereof  1  902820  Meters; liquid supply or production meters, including calibrating meters thereof  1  902830  Meters; electricity supply or production meters, including calibrating meters thereof  1   902890  Meters; parts and accessories of gas, liquid, electricity supply or production meters, including calibrating meters thereof   1   902910  Meters and counters; revolution counters, production counters, taximeters, mileometers, pedometers and the like   1  902920  Meters; speed indicators and tachometers; stroboscopes  1    902990  Meters and counters; parts and accessories for revolution and production counters, taximeters, mileometers, pedometers and the like; speed indicators, tachometers (excluding heading no. 9015), stroboscopes    1  903010  Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or detecting ionising radiations  1  Code    Dismantlement  903020  Cathode-ray oscilloscopes and cathode-ray oscillographs  1   903031  Multimeters; for measuring or checking voltage, current, resistance or power, without a recording device   1   903032  Multimeters; for measuring or checking voltage, current, resistance or power, with a recording device   1   903033  Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or checking voltage, current, resistance or power, without a recording device (excluding multimeters)   1   903039  Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or checking voltage, current, resistance or power, without a recording device (excluding multimeters)   1    903040  Instruments and apparatus; specially designed for telecommunications (eg cross-talk meters, gain measuring instruments, distortion factor meters, psophometers)    1  903082  Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or checking semiconductor wafers or devices  1     903084     Instruments and apparatus; n.e.c. in heading no. 9030, with a recording device     1   903089  Instruments and apparatus; for measuring or detecting alpha, beta, gamma, x-ray, cosmic or other ionising radiations, without a recording device   1    903090  Instruments, apparatus for measuring, checking electrical quantities, not meters of heading no. 9028; parts and accessories, for measuring or detecting alpha, beta, gamma, x-ray, cosmic and other radiations    1  903110  Machines; for balancing mechanical parts  1  903120  Test benches  1   903141  Optical instruments and appliances; for inspecting semiconductor wafers or devices or for inspecting photomasks or reticles used in manufacturing semiconductor devices, n.e.s. in chapter 90   1  903149  Optical instruments and appliances; for measuring or checking, n.e.s. in chapter 90  1  903180  Instruments, appliances and machines; for measuring or checking n.e.s. in chapter 90  2   903190  Instruments, appliances and machines; parts and accessories for those measuring or checking devices of heading no. 9031   2  903210  Regulating or controlling instruments and apparatus; automatic type, thermostats  1  903220  Regulating or controlling instruments and apparatus; automatic, manostats  1   903281   Regulating or controlling instruments and apparatus; automatic, hydraulic or pneumatic   1     903289   Regulating or controlling instruments and apparatus; automatic, other than hydraulic or pneumatic     1  Code    Dismantlement  903290  Regulating or controlling instruments and apparatus; automatic, parts and accessories  1   903300  Machines and appliances; instruments or apparatus of chapter 90; parts and accessories n.e.s. in chapter 90   1    910111  Wrist-watches; battery or accumulator powered, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, with case of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal, with mechanical display only    3     910119   Wrist-watches; battery or accumulator powered, with or without a stop-watch, with case of precious metal or metal clad with precious metal, without mechanical or opto-electronic display     3   910121  Wrist-watches; excluding battery or accumulator powered, automatic winding, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, case of precious metal or of metal clad with precious   3   910129  Wrist-watches; excluding battery or accumulator powered, not automatic winding, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, case of precious metal or of metal clad with precious   3    910191   Pocket-watches and other watches, including stop- watches; battery or accumulator powered    3    910199  Pocket-watches and other watches, including stop- watches; other than battery or accumulator powered, with case of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal    3   910211  Wrist-watches; battery or accumulator powered, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, with mechanical display only, other than those of heading no. 9101   3    910212  Wrist-watches; battery or accumulator powered, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, with opto-electronic display only, other than those of heading no. 9101    3    910219  Wrist-watches; battery or accumulator powered, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, with other than mechanical or opto-electronic display, excluding those of heading no. 9101    3   910221   Wrist-watches; whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, with automatic winding   3   910229  Wrist-watches; whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility, with other than automatic winding   3   910291   Pocket watches and other watches, including stop- watches; battery or accumulator powered   3   910299  Pocket watches and other watches, including stop- watches; other than battery or accumulator powered   3  Code    Dismantlement    910310   Clocks; with watch movements, excluding instrument panel clocks, battery or accumulator powered    3    910390   Clocks; with watch movements, excluding instrument panel clocks, other than battery or accumulator powered    3   910400  Clocks; instrument panel clocks and clocks of a similar type for vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels   3  910511  Clocks; alarm clocks, battery, accumulator or mains powered  3  910519  Clocks; alarm clocks, other than battery, accumulator or mains powered  3  910521  Clocks; wall clocks, battery, accumulator or mains powered  3  910529  Clocks; wall clocks, other than battery, accumulator or mains powered  3     910591    Clocks; (other than alarm or wall clocks), battery, accumulator or mains powered     3     910599    Clocks; (other than alarm or wall clocks), other than battery, accumulator or mains powered     3   910610  Time recording apparatus; time-registers, time recorders, with clock, watch movement or synchronous motor   3   910690  Time recording apparatus; with clock or watch movement or with synchronous motor, n.e.s. in heading no. 9106   3   910700   Time switches; with clock, watch movement or synchronous motor   3   910811  Watch movements; complete and assembled, battery or accumulator powered, with mechanical display only or with a device to which a mechanical display can be incorporated   3   910812  Watch movements; complete and assembled, battery or accumulator powered, with opto- electronic display only   3   910819  Watch movements; complete and assembled, battery or accumulator powered, with other than mechanical display only or opto-electronic display only   3  910820  Watch movements; complete and assembled, with automatic winding  3  910890  Watch movements; complete and assembled, not automatic winding or electrically operated  3   910910  Clock movements; complete and assembled, electrically operated   3   910990  Clock movements; complete and assembled, other than battery, accumulator or mains powered   3  911011  Watches; complete movements, unassembled or partly assembled (movement sets)  3  Code    Dismantlemen 911012  Watches; incomplete movements, assembled  3  911019  Watches; rough movements  3   911090   Clocks; movements, whether or not complete, incomplete, assembled or unassembled   3   911110  Watch cases; of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal   3   911120  Watch cases; of base metal, whether or not gold- plated or silver-plated   3   911180   Watch cases; n.e.s. in heading no. 9111   3  911190  Watch cases and parts thereof  3   911220  Clock cases and similar cases for other goods of chapter 91; other than watch cases   3   911290   Clock cases and similar cases for other goods of chapter 91; other than watch cases, parts thereof   3   911310  Watch straps, watch bands, watch bracelets, and parts thereof; of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal   3   911320  Watch straps, watch bands, watch bracelets, and parts thereof; of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated   3  911390  Watch straps, watch bands, watch bracelets, and parts thereof; n.e.s. in heading no. 9113  3  911410  Clock or watch parts; springs, including hairsprings  3  911430  Clock or watch parts; dials  3  911440  Clock or watch parts; plates and bridges  3  911490  Clock or watch parts; n.e.s. in heading no. 9114  3  920110  Musical instruments; pianos, upright, including automatic pianos  3  920120  Musical instruments; pianos, grand  3   920190  Musical instruments; harpsichords and other keyboard stringed instruments n.e.s. in heading no. 9201   3  920210  Musical instruments; string, played with a bow (eg violins)  3  920290  Musical instruments; string, played other than with a bow (eg guitars and harps)  3  920510  Musical instruments; wind, brass (eg trumpets)  3  920590  Musical instruments; wind, other than brass (eg clarinets, bagpipes)  3  920600  Musical instruments; percussion (eg drums, xylophones, cymbals, castanets, maracas)  3   920710  Musical instruments; keyboard, (other than accordions), the sound of which is produced or must be amplified electrically   3   920790  Musical instruments; (other than keyboard), the sound of which is produced or must be amplified electrically   3  920810  Musical boxes  3    920890  Fairground and mechanical street organs, mechanical singing birds, musical saws and musical instruments nes in chapter 92; decoy calls of all kinds; whistles; call horns and other mouth-blown sound signalling instruments    3  920930  Musical instrument strings  3  920991  Musical instruments; parts and accessories for pianos  3  Code    Dismantlemen   920992   Musical instruments; parts and accessories for string musical instruments other than keyboard instruments    3   920994  Musical instruments; parts and accessories for the musical instruments the sound of which is produced or must be amplified electrically (eg organs, guitars and accordions)   3     920999   Musical instruments; parts and accessories for the musical instruments n.e.s. in heading no. 9209 and for other mechanical noise makers of chapter 92, n.e.s. in heading no. 9202     3  930110  Military weapons; artillery weapons (e.g. guns, howitzers, and mortars)  3   930120  Military weapons; other than revolvers, pistols and arms of heading 9307; rocket launchers: flame- throwers; grenade launchers, torpedo tubes and similar projectors   3    930190   Military weapons; other than revolvers, pistols and arms of heading 9307; other weapons not elsewhere included in heading 9301    3  930200  Revolvers and pistols; other than those of heading no. 9303 or 9304  3  930310  Firearms; muzzle-loading  3   930320   Firearms; sporting, hunting or target-shooting shotguns, including combination shotgun-rifles   3   930330  Firearms; sporting, hunting or target-shooting rifles n.e.s. in heading no. 9303   3   930390   Firearms; n.e.s. in heading no. 9303   3   930400   Firearms; (eg spring, air or gas guns and pistols, truncheons), excluding those of heading no. 9307   3  930510  Firearms; parts and accessories, of revolvers or pistols  3  930520  Firearms; parts and accessories, of shotguns or rifles of heading 9303  3  930591  Firearms; parts and accessories, of military weapons of heading 9301  3  930599  Firearms; parts and accessories, of firearms other than the military weapons of heading 9301  3  930621  Ammunition; shotgun cartridges  3  930629  Ammunition; parts of shotgun cartridges  3   930630  Ammunition; cartridges and parts thereof n.e.s. in heading no. 9306   3   930690   Ammunition; n.e.s. in chapter 93   3  Code    Dismantlement      930700    Arms; swords, cutlasses, bayonets, lances and the like, parts thereof and scabbards and sheaths therefor      3  940110  Seats; of a kind used for aircraft  3  940120  Seats; of a kind used for motor vehicles  3   940130  Seats; swivel with variable height adjustment, excluding medical, surgical, dental, veterinary or barber furniture   3   940140  Seats; convertible into beds, other than garden seats or camping equipment   3  940152  Seats; of bamboo  3  940153  Seats; of rattan  3  940159  Seats; of cane, osier or similar materials, other than bamboo or rattan  3   940161  Seats; with wooden frames, upholstered, (excluding medical, surgical, dental, veterinary or barber furniture)   5   940169  Seats; with wooden frames, not upholstered, (excluding medical, surgical, dental, veterinary or barber furniture)   5   940171  Seats; with metal frames, upholstered, (excluding medical, surgical, dental, veterinary or barber furniture)   3   940179  Seats; with metal frames, not upholstered, (excluding medical, surgical, dental, veterinary or barber furniture)   3   940180  Seats; n.e.s. in heading no. 9401, (excluding medical, surgical, dental, veterinary or barber furniture)   3  940190  Seat; parts  2   940210  Chairs; dentists', barbers' or similar chairs having rotating as well as both reclining and elevating movements, and parts thereof   1    940290   Furniture; for medical, surgical, veterinary use (eg operating tables, examination tables, hospital beds with mechanical fittings) and parts thereof    1  940310  Furniture; metal, for office use  3   940320   Furniture; metal, other than for office use   3  940330  Furniture; wooden, for office use  5  940340  Furniture; wooden, for kitchen use  5  940350  Furniture; wooden, for bedroom use  5  940360  Furniture; wooden, other than for office, kitchen or bedroom use  5   940370   Furniture; plastic   5  940382  Furniture; of bamboo  5  940383  Furniture; of rattan  5   940389   Furniture; of cane, osier, or similar materials (other than bamboo or rattan)   5  Code    Dismantlement  940390  Furniture; parts  3  940410  Mattress supports  5  940421  Mattresses; of cellular rubber or plastics, whether or not covered  5   940429   Mattresses; of other materials, not cellular rubber or plastics   5  940430  Sleeping bags  3    940490   Bedding and similar furnishing articles; n.e.s. in heading no. 9404 (eg quilts, eiderdowns, cushions, pouffes and pillows)    3   940510  Chandeliers and other electric ceiling or wall light fittings; excluding those used for lighting public open spaces or thoroughfares   3  940520  Lamps, electric; floor-standing or for table, desk or bedside  3  940530  Lighting sets; of a kind used for Christmas trees  3  940540  Lamps and light fittings; electric, n.e.s. in heading no. 9405  3  940550  Lamps and light fittings; non-electric  3   940560   Illuminated signs, name plates and the like   3   940591   Lamps and light fittings; parts thereof, of glass   2   940592   Lamps and light fittings; parts thereof, of plastics   2   940599  Lamps and light fittings; parts thereof, of materials other than glass or plastics   2  940610  Buildings; prefabricated, of wood  3  940690  Buildings; prefabricated, not of wood  3   950300  Tricycles, scooters, pedal cars and similar wheeled toys; dolls' carriages; dolls; other toys; reduced- size (scale) models and similar recreational models, working or not; puzzles of all kinds   3  950420  Billiard articles and accessories  3    950430   Games; coin or disc-operated, other than bowling alley equipment    3  950440  Playing cards  3  950450  Games; video game consoles and machines, other than those of subheading 9504.30  3     950490   Games; articles for funfair, table or parlour games, including pintables, tables for casino games, bowling alley equipment, n.e.s. in heading no. 9504     3  950510  Christmas festivity articles  3   950590  Festive, carnival or other entertainment articles including novelty jokes and conjuring tricks; other than Christmas festivity articles   3  950611  Skis; for snow  3  950612  Ski-fastenings (ski-bindings); for snow-skis  3  Code    Dismantlement  950619  Snow-ski equipment  3  950621  Sailboards; for water sport  3   950629  Water sport equipment; water-skis, surf-boards and other water-sport equipment, excluding sailboards   3  950631  Golf clubs; complete  3  950632  Golf balls  3  950639  Golf equipment; other than clubs and balls  3  950640  Table-tennis articles and equipment  3  950651  Lawn-tennis racquets; whether or not strung  3  950659  Tennis, badminton and similar racquets; whether or not strung  3  950661  Lawn-tennis balls  3  950662  Balls; inflatable  3  950669  Balls; (other than inflatable or for lawn-tennis, golf or table-tennis)  3  950670  Skates; ice and roller, including skating boots with skates attached  3  950691  Athletics and gymnastics equipment  3  950699  Equipment for outdoor games and recreation n.e.s. in heading no. 9506  3  950710  Fishing rods  3  950720  Fish-hooks; whether or not snelled  3  950730  Fishing reels  3   950790  Fishing tackle n.e.s., butterfly nets, decoy "birds" (other than those of heading no. 9208 or 9705) and similar hunting or shooting requisites   3  950810  Travelling circuses and travelling menageries  3      950890     Roundabouts, swings, shooting galleries, other fairground amusements; travelling theatres      3  960110  Ivory and articles thereof; worked  3   960190  Bone, tortoise shell, horn, antlers, coral, mother-of- pearl and other animal carving material and articles thereof (including articles obtained by moulding)   3    960200   Vegetable, mineral carving material and articles of these materials, moulded or carved articles of wax, stearin, natural gums, resins or modelling pastes, worked unhardened gelatin (not heading no. 3503)    3   960310  Brooms and brushes; consisting of twigs or other vegetable materials bound together, with or without handles   3  960321  Brushes; toothbrushes  3   960329  Brushes; shaving, hair, nail, eyelash and other toilet brushes for use on the person, including brushes as parts of appliances   3  960330  Brushes; artists' brushes, writing brushes and similar brushes for the application of cosmetics  3   960340  Brushes; paint, distemper, varnish or similar brushes (not those of item no. 9603.30), paint pads and rollers   3  960350  Brushes; constituting parts of machines, appliances or vehicles  3  Code    Dismantlement   960390  Brooms, brushes, mops, feather dusters, squeegees, hand operated mechanical floor sweepers; (not motorised), prepared knots and tufts for brooms or brush making n.e.s.   3  960400  Hand sieves and hand riddles  3   960500  Travel sets; for personal toilet, sewing, shoe or clothes cleaning   3  960610  Press-fasteners, snap-fasteners, press-studs and parts therefor  2  960621  Buttons; of plastics, not covered with textile material  2  960622  Buttons; of base metal, not covered with textile material  2   960629  Buttons; of other than base metal or plastics, not covered with textile material   2  960630  Button moulds and other parts of buttons; button blanks  2  960711  Slide fasteners; fitted with chain scoops of base metal  2  960719  Slide fasteners; other than those fitted with chain scoops of base metal  2  960720  Slide fasteners; parts  2  960810  Pens; ball point  5  960820  Pens; felt tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers  3  960830  Pens; fountain, stylograph and other pens  3  960840  Pencils; propelling or sliding  3   960850   Pen and pencil sets; of articles from two or more of the foregoing sub-headings   3  960860  Pens; ball-point, refills comprising the ball point and ink-reservoir  3  960891  Pens; nibs and nib points  3   960899  Pens and pencils n.e.s. in heading no. 9608; duplicating stylos, pen-holders, pencil-holders, and similar holders, parts of the articles of heading no. 9608   3  960910  Pencils and crayons; with leads encased in rigid sheath  3  960920  Pencil leads; black or coloured  3  960990  Pastels, drawing charcoals, writing or drawing chalks, tailors' chalk  3  961000  Slates and boards; with writing or drawing surfaces, whether or not framed  3   961100  Stamps; date, numbering, sealing stamps and the like (including devices for printing or embossing labels), designed for operating by hand; hand operated composing sticks and printing sets   3   961210  Ribbons; for typewriters and the like, inked or otherwise prepared, for giving impressions, whether or not on spools or in cartridges   3  961220  Ink pads; whether or not inked, with or without boxes  3  961310  Lighters; pocket, cigarette, gas fuelled, non- refillable  3  961320  Lighters; pocket, cigarette, gas fuelled, refillable  3   961380  Lighters; whether or not mechanical or electrical, n.e.s. in heading no. 9613   3   961390  Lighters; parts for cigarette lighters and other lighters, whether or not mechanical or electrical, other than flints and wicks   2  Code    Dismantlement  961400  Smoking pipes (including pipe bowls) and cigar or cigarette holders, and parts thereof  3  961511  Combs, hair slides and the like; of hard rubber or plastics  3   961519  Combs, hair slides and the like; of other than hard rubber or plastics   3   961590  Hairpins, curling pins, curling grips, hair curlers and the like (not those of heading no. 8516) and parts thereof   3  961610  Scent sprays and similar toilet sprays, and mounts and heads therefor  2  961620  Powder puffs and pads; for the application of cosmetics or toilet preparations  2   961700  Vacuum flasks and other vacuum vessels, complete with cases; parts thereof other than glass inners   3    961800   Tailors' dummies and other lay figures; automata and other animated displays used for shop window dressing    3   961900  Sanitary towels (pads) and tampons, napkins and napkin liners for babies and similar articles, of any material   5  962000  Monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles  1   970110   Paintings, drawings and pastels; executed entirely by hand, other than drawings of heading no. 4906   3  970190  Artwork; collages and similar decorative plaques  3  970200  Engravings, prints and lithographs; original  3  970300  Sculptures and statuary; original, in any material  3    970400  Stamps; postage or revenue; stamp-postmarks, first-day covers, postal stationery (stamped paper) and like, used, or if unused not of current or new issue in the country to which they are destined    3   970500  Collections and collectors' pieces; of zoological, botanical, mineralogical, anatomical, historical, archaeological, palaeontological, ethnographic or numismatic interest   3  970600  Antiques; of an age exceeding one hundred years  3     ANNEX IV   JOINT STATEMENT OF THE PARTIES ON THE OBJECTIVES AND ESSENTIAL AND FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS OF THIS AGREEMENT  1. Advancing economic development is an essential part of how the UK is helping make the global economy work for all. As set out in the UK’s Economic Development Strategy 2017, the UK is focused on trade as an engine for poverty reduction; the UK is committed to building the potential for developing countries to trade more with the UK and the rest of the world.  2. As the UK leaves the EU, it is seeking to maintain the effects of all existing EU trade agreements and preferential arrangements, including the EU’s Economic Partnership Agreements (‘EPAs’) with African, Caribbean and Pacific countries. This will ensure that the UK maintains the greatest amount of certainty, continuity and stability in its trade and investment relationships for its businesses, citizens and trading partners.  3. In light of this, the Parties agree that the following principles and procedures shall apply to this Agreement.  Objectives and Essential and Fundamental Elements of this Agreement  4. The UK will continue to promote the economic and social development of its EPA partners. This Agreement shall be centred on the objective of reducing and eventually eradicating poverty in a way that is consistent with the objectives of sustainable development.  5. Respect for human rights, democratic principles and the rule of law, and full compliance with and national implementation of existing obligations under international disarmament and non-proliferation treaties, shall underpin the domestic and international policies of the UK and of Cameroon, and constitute the essential elements of this Agreement. Good governance shall also underpin the domestic and international policies of the UK and Cameroon and constitutes a fundamental element of this Agreement.  Dialogue relating to Essential and Fundamental Elements of this Agreement  6. The UK and Cameroon shall support regular engagement through comprehensive and balanced dialogue to facilitate their shared agendas.  7. If the UK or Cameroon considers the other to be failing to fulfil an obligation stemming from respect for the essential and fundamental elements of this Agreement, they shall attempt to address this as part of their regular dialogue. If issues persist, they shall share information required for examining the situation, and if necessary hold consultations focused on measures to remedy the situation.    8. Those consultations, which shall begin within 30 days of any invitation to hold them, shall continue for a period established by mutual agreement, though lasting no longer than 120 days.  9. If this process does not lead to an acceptable solution for both the UK and Cameroon, if consultations are refused, or in exceptional cases of particularly serious and flagrant violation of the essential or fundamental elements of this Agreement, requiring an immediate reaction, appropriate measures may be taken.  10. Such measures would be taken in accordance with international law, and proportional to the violation, with priority given to those measures which least disrupt the application of this Agreement. Suspension of this Agreement would be a measure of last resort.  Development cooperation  11. The UK and Cameroon place great importance on the successful implementation of this Agreement, and on the continuing trade and development relationship between them. The Parties wish to build on the productive trade relationship under the EU-Central Africa iEPA.   12. Any UK development cooperation in support of this Agreement shall continue to be primarily guided by the principles of the internationally agreed aid effectiveness agenda and the UK Partnership Principles and aims to reduce poverty and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.     ANNEX V  Trade in Services, Competition and Investment  OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES Article 1 Objectives 1. Economic and trade cooperation shall aim at fostering the smooth and gradual integration of Cameroon into the world economy, with due regard for its political choices and development priorities, thereby promoting sustainable development and contributing to poverty eradication in the Central African region. 2. The ultimate objective of economic and trade cooperation is to enable Cameroon to play a full part in international trade. In this context, particular regard shall be had to the need for Cameroon to participate actively in multilateral trade negotiations. Given the current level of development of Cameroon, economic and trade cooperation shall be directed at enabling Cameroon to manage the challenges of globalisation and to adapt progressively to new conditions of international trade, thereby facilitating its transition to the liberalised global economy. In this context, close attention should be paid to Cameroon’s vulnerability resulting from dependency on commodities or a few key products, including value-added agro-industry products, and the risk of preference erosion. 3. To this end, economic and trade cooperation shall aim, through national and regional development strategies, at enhancing the production, supply and trading capacity of Cameroon as well as its capacity to attract investment, as the basis for such enhancements in the Central African region. It shall further aim at creating a new trading dynamic between the Parties, at strengthening Cameroon’s trade and investment policies, at reducing its dependency on commodities, at promoting a more diversified economy and at improving Cameroon’s capacity to handle all issues related to trade, thereby supporting such an economy in the Central African region. 4. Economic and trade cooperation shall be implemented in full conformity with the provisions of the World Trade Organization (‘WTO’), including special and differential treatment, taking account of the Parties’ mutual interests and their respective levels of development. It shall also address the effects of preference erosion in full conformity with multilateral commitments.  Article 2 Principles 1. Economic and trade cooperation shall be based on a true, strengthened and strategic partnership. It shall further be based on a comprehensive approach which builds on the strengths and achievements of the previous ACP-EC Conventions.  2. Economic and trade cooperation shall build on Central Africa’s regional integration initiatives. Cooperation in support of regional cooperation and integration and economic and trade cooperation shall be mutually reinforcing. Economic and trade cooperation shall address, in particular, supply and demand side constraints, notably interconnectivity of infrastructure, economic diversification and trade development measures as a means of enhancing Cameroon’s competitiveness, thereby supporting the promotion of these objectives in the Central African region. Appropriate weight shall therefore be given to the corresponding measures in Cameroon’s development strategies, which the UK shall support, in particular through the provision of aid for trade. 3. Economic and trade cooperation shall take account of the different needs and level of development in Cameroon.   COOPERATION IN THE INTERNATIONAL FORA Article 3 General Provisions 1. The Parties underline the importance of their active participation in the WTO as well as in other relevant international organisations by being or becoming members of these organisations and closely following their agenda and activities. 2. They agree to cooperate closely in identifying and furthering their common interests in international economic and trade cooperation in particular in the WTO, including participation in setting and conducting the agenda in future multilateral trade negotiations. In this context, particular attention shall be paid to improve access to the UK and other markets for products and services originating in Cameroon. 3. They also agree on the importance of flexibility in WTO rules to take account of Cameroon’s level of development as well of the difficulties faced in meeting its obligations. They further agree on the need for technical assistance to enable Cameroon to implement its commitments.  4. The UK agrees to assist Cameroon in its efforts to become an active member of these organisations, by developing the necessary capacity to negotiate, participate effectively, monitor and implement these agreements.  TRADE IN SERVICES Article 4 General Provisions 1. The Parties underline the growing importance of services in international trade and their major contribution to economic and social development. 2. They reaffirm their respective commitments under the General Agreement on Trade in Services (‘GATS’), and underline the need for special and differential treatment to suppliers of services from Cameroon. 3. In the framework of the negotiations for progressive liberalisation in trade and services, as provided for in Article XIX of GATS, the UK undertakes to give sympathetic consideration to Cameroon’s priorities for improvement in the UK's GATS schedule, with a view to meeting its specific interests. 4. The Parties further agree on the objective of extending under the economic partnership agreements, and after they have acquired some experience in applying the Most Favoured Nation (‘MFN’) treatment under GATS, their partnership to encompass the liberalisation of services in accordance with the provisions of GATS and particularly those relating to the participation of developing countries in liberalisation agreements. 5. The UK shall support, in conformity with Article 2 of this Annex, Cameroon’s efforts to strengthen its capacity in the supply of services. Particular attention shall be paid to services related to labour, business, distribution, finance, tourism, culture and construction and related engineering services with a view to enhancing its competitiveness and thereby increasing the value and the volume of its trade in goods and services.  MARITIME TRANSPORT Article 5 1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of cost-effective and efficient maritime transport services in a safe and clean marine environment as the main mode of transportation facilitating international trade and thereby constituting one of the forces behind economic development and the development of trade. 2. They undertake to promote the liberalisation of maritime transport and to this end apply effectively the principle of unrestricted access to the international maritime transport market on a non-discriminatory and commercial basis. 3. Each Party shall grant, inter alia, a treatment no less favourable than that accorded to its own ships, for ships operated by nationals or companies of the other Party, and for ships registered in the territory of either party, with respect to access to ports, the use of infrastructure and auxiliary maritime services of those ports, as well as related fees and charges, customs facilities and the assignment of berths and facilities for loading and unloading. 4. The UK shall support, in conformity with Article 2 of this Annex, Cameroon’s efforts to develop and promote cost-effective and efficient maritime transport services with a view to increasing the participation of its operators in international shipping services.  INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SOCIETY Article 6 1. The Parties recognise the important role of information and communication technologies, as well as the active participation in the Information Society, as a pre-requisite for the successful integration of Cameroon into the world economy. 2. They therefore reconfirm their respective commitments under existing multilateral agreements, and note in particular the value of the protocol on Basic Telecommunications attached to the GATS. Where Cameroon, or in the event of accession, another Central African Contracting State, is not yet a member of relevant agreements, it will consider acceding to them. 3. The Parties furthermore agree to participate fully and actively in any future international negotiation which might be conducted in this area. 4. The Parties will therefore take measures that will enable inhabitants of Cameroon easy access to information and communication technologies, through, amongst other things, the following measures: - the development and encouragement of the use of affordable renewable energy resources; - the development and deployment of more extensive low-cost wireless networks; and - the development and encouragement of the use of local content for information and communication technologies. 5. The Parties also agree to step up cooperation between them in the area of information and communication technologies, and the Information Society. This cooperation shall, in conformity with Article 2 of this Annex, in particular be directed towards greater complementarity and harmonisation of communication systems, at national, regional and international level and their adaptation to new technologies. COMPETITION POLICY Article 7 1. The Parties agree that the introduction and implementation of effective and sound competition policies and rules are of crucial importance in order to improve and secure an investment friendly climate, a sustainable industrialisation process and transparency in the access to markets. 2. To ensure the elimination of distortions to sound competition, they undertake to implement national or regional rules and policies including the control and under certain conditions the prohibition of agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition. The Parties further agree to prohibit the abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the market of either Party, or, in the event of accession, in the territory of a Central African Contracting State. 3. The Parties also agree to reinforce cooperation in this area with a view to formulating and supporting effective competition policies with the appropriate national competition agencies that progressively ensure the efficient enforcement of the competition rules by both private and state enterprises. Cooperation in this area shall, in particular, in conformity with Article 2 of this Annex, include assistance in the drafting of an appropriate legal framework and its administrative enforcement.  INVESTMENT AND PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT Article 8 Cooperation provided through multilateral organisations and international financial institutions may provide long-term financial resources, including risk capital, to assist in promoting growth in the private sector and help to mobilise domestic and foreign capital for this purpose. Such cooperation may, through financial and technical assistance, support the policies and strategies for investment and private sector development as set out in this Agreement.   INVESTMENT PROMOTION Article 9 The UK and Cameroon, recognising the importance of private investment in the promotion of their development cooperation and acknowledging the need to take steps to promote such investment, may: (a) implement measures to encourage participation in their development efforts by private investors who comply with the objectives and priorities of the development cooperation of the Parties and with the appropriate laws and regulations; (b) take measures and actions which help to create and maintain a predictable and secure investment climate as well as enter into negotiations on agreements which will improve such climate; (c) encourage the UK private sector to invest and to provide specific assistance to its counterparts in Cameroon under mutual business cooperation and partnerships; (d) facilitate partnerships and joint ventures by encouraging co-financing; (e) sponsor sectoral investment fora to promote partnerships and external investment; (f) support efforts of Cameroon to attract financing, with particular emphasis on private financing, for infrastructure investments and revenue generating infrastructure critical for the private sector; (g) support capacity building for domestic investment promotion agencies and institutions involved in promoting and facilitating foreign investment; (h) disseminate information on investment opportunities and business operating conditions in Cameroon; and (i) promote national, regional and UK-Cameroon private sector business dialogue, cooperation and partnerships, in particular through a UK-Cameroon private sector business forum. Support for operations of a UK-Cameroon private sector business forum shall be provided in pursuit of the following objectives: (i) to facilitate dialogue within the Cameroon-UK private sector; (ii) to analyse and periodically provide the relevant bodies with information on the whole range of issues concerning relations between the private sectors of Cameroon and the UK or, more generally, of economic relations between the UK and Cameroon; and (iii) to analyse and provide the relevant bodies with information on specific problems of a sectoral nature relating to, inter alia, branches of production or types of products at regional or sub-regional level.  INVESTMENT FINANCE AND SUPPORT Article 10 1. Cooperation as specified in Article 8 may provide, in particular: (a) grants for financial and technical assistance to support policy reforms, human resource development, institutional capacity-building or other forms of institutional support related to a specific investment, measures to increase the competitiveness of enterprises and to strengthen the capacities of the private financial and non-financial intermediaries, investment facilitation and promotion and competitiveness enhancement activities; (b) advisory and consultative services to assist in creating a responsive investment climate and information base to guide and encourage the flow of capital; and (c) risk-capital for equity or quasi-equity investments, guarantees in support of domestic and foreign private investment and loans or lines of credit on conditions which may be agreed on a case-by-case basis, by the organisation concerned.   INVESTMENT PROTECTION Article 11 1. The UK and Cameroon affirm the need to promote and protect the other Party's investments on their respective territories. 2. In order to encourage UK investment in development projects of special importance to, and promoted by Cameroon, the UK, on the one hand, and Cameroon, on the other, may also conclude agreements relating to specific projects of mutual interest where UK enterprises contribute towards their financing.    PROTOCOL 1 on mutual administrative assistance in customs matters   Article 1 Definitions  For the purposes of this Protocol:  1. ‘customs legislation’ shall mean any legal or regulatory provisions governing the import, export and transit of products and their placing under any other customs regime or procedure, including measures of prohibition, restriction and control;  2. ‘applicant authority’ shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been designated by one of the Parties for this purpose and which makes a request for assistance on the basis of this Protocol;  3. ‘requested authority’ shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been designated by one of the Parties for this purpose and which receives a request for assistance on the basis of this Protocol;  4. ‘personal data’ shall mean all information relating to an identified or identifiable individual; and  5. ‘operation in breach of customs legislation’ shall mean any violation or attempted violation of customs legislation.   Article 2 Scope  1. The Parties shall assist each other in the manner and under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, to ensure the correct application of the customs legislation, in particular in order to prevent, investigate and combat operations in breach of that legislation.  2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall apply to any administrative authority of the Parties which is responsible for the application of this Protocol. It shall not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in criminal matters. Nor shall it cover information obtained under powers exercised at the request of a judicial authority, except where communication of such information is authorised by that authority.  3. Assistance to recover duties, taxes or fines shall not be covered by this Protocol.   Article 3 Assistance on request  1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall provide it with all relevant information which may enable it to ensure that customs legislation is correctly applied, including information regarding activities noted or planned which are or could be operations in breach of customs legislation.  2. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall inform it:  (a) whether products exported from the territory of one of the Parties have been properly imported into the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the products; and  (b) whether products imported into the territory of one of the Parties have been properly exported from the territory of the other Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the products.  3. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, within the framework of its legal or regulatory provisions, take the necessary steps to ensure surveillance of:  (a) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are engaging in or have engaged in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (b) places where stocks of products have been or may be assembled in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that these products are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (c) products that are or may be transported in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation; and  (d) means of transport that are or may be used in such a way that there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are intended to be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.   Article 4 Spontaneous assistance  The Parties shall assist each other, on their own initiative and in accordance with their legal or regulatory provisions, if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs legislation, particularly by providing information obtained pertaining to:  (a) activities which are or appear to be operations in breach of customs legislation and which may be of interest to another Party;  (b) new means or methods employed in carrying out operations in breach of customs legislation;  (c) products known to be involved in operations in breach of customs legislation;  (d) natural or legal persons in respect of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are or have been involved in operations in breach of customs legislation; and  (e) means of transport for which there are reasonable grounds for believing that they have been, are or might be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.   Article 5 Delivery/notification  1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, in accordance with the legal or regulatory provisions applicable to the latter, take all necessary measures to:  — deliver any documents or  — notify any decisions  emanating from the applicant authority and falling within the scope of this Protocol, to an addressee residing or established in the territory of the requested authority.  2. Requests for delivery of documents and notification of decisions shall be made in writing in an official language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to that authority.   Article 6 Form and substance of requests for assistance  1. Requests pursuant to this Protocol shall be made in writing. They shall be accompanied by the documents deemed necessary to enable compliance with the request. Where required because of the urgency of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in writing immediately.  2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include the following information:  (a) the applicant authority;  (b) the measure requested;  (c) the object of and the reason for the request;  (d) the legal or regulatory provisions and other legal elements involved;  (e) indications as exact and comprehensive as possible on the natural or legal persons who are the subject of the investigations; and (f) a summary of the relevant facts and of the enquiries already carried out.  3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to that authority. This requirement shall not apply to any documents that accompany the request under paragraph 1.  4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements set out above, its correction or completion may be requested; in the meantime, precautionary measures may be ordered.   Article 7 Execution of requests  1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority shall proceed, within the limits of its competence and available resources, as though it were acting on its own account or at the request of other authorities of that same Party, by supplying information already possessed and by carrying out appropriate enquiries or arranging for them to be carried out. This provision shall also apply to any other authority to which the request has been addressed by the requested authority in application of this Protocol where the latter cannot act on its own.  2. Requests for assistance shall be met in accordance with the legal or regulatory provisions of the requested Party.  3. Duly authorised officials of one of the Parties may, with the agreement of the other Party involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present to obtain, in the offices of the requested authority or any other authority concerned in accordance with paragraph 1, information relating to activities that are or may be operations in breach of customs legislation and which the applicant authority needs for the purposes of this Protocol.  4. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party involved and under the conditions laid down by the latter, be present at enquiries carried out in the latter's territory.   Article 8 Form in which information is to be communicated  1. The requested authority shall communicate the results of enquiries to the applicant authority in writing, together with relevant documents, certified copies or other items.  2. This information may be supplied in computerised form.  3. Original documents shall be transmitted only upon request in cases where certified copies would be insufficient. These originals shall be returned at the earliest opportunity. Article 9 Exceptions to the obligation to provide assistance 1.Assistance may be refused or may be subject to thesatisfaction of certain conditions or needs, where a Party is of theopinion that assistance under this Agreement would:(a)be likely to prejudice the sovereignty of the state whoseassistance has been requested pursuant to this Protocol; or(b)be likely to be detrimental to public order, security or otheressential interests, in particular in the cases referred to inArticle 10(2); or(c)violate an industrial, commercial or professional secret.2.Assistance may be postponed by the requested authority onthe ground that it would interfere with an ongoing investigation,prosecution or proceeding. In such a case, the requestedauthority shall consult with the applicant authority to determinewhether assistance can be given subject to such terms orconditions as the requested authority may require.3.Where the applicant authority seeks assistance which itwould itself be unable to provide if so requested, it shall drawattention to that fact in its request. It shall then be for therequested authority to decide how to respond to such a request.4.In the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the decisionof the requested authority and the reasons for it must becommunicated to the applicant authority without delay.Article 10 Exchange of information and confidentiality 1.Any information communicated in whatsoever formpursuant to this Protocol shall be of a confidential or restrictednature, depending on the rules applicable in each of the Parties. Itshall be covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shallenjoy the protection extended to similar information under therelevant laws of the Party that received it.2.Personal data may be exchanged only where the Party whichmay receive them undertakes to protect such data in a manner atleast equivalent to that applying to the particular case in the Partythat may supply them. To that end, the Parties shall inform eachother of their applicable rules.3.The use, in judicial or administrative proceedings institutedin respect of operations in breach of customs legislation, ofinformation obtained under this Protocol is considered to be forthe purposes of this Protocol. The Parties may therefore, in theirrecords of evidence, reports and testimonies and in proceedings and charges brought before the courts, use as evidence information obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. The competent authority which supplied that information or gave access to those documents shall be notified of such use. 4.Information obtained shall be used solely for the purposesof this Protocol. Where one of the Parties wishes to use suchinformation for other purposes, it shall obtain the prior writtenconsent of the authority which provided the information. Suchuse shall then be subject to any restrictions laid down by thatauthority.Article 11 Experts and witnesses An official of a requested authority may be authorised to appear, within the limitations of the authorisation granted, as an expert or witness in judicial or administrative proceedings regarding the matters covered by this Protocol, and to produce such objects, documents or certified copies thereof as may be needed for the proceedings. The request for appearance must indicate specifically before which judicial or administrative authority the official will have to appear, on what matters and by virtue of what title or qualification the official will be questioned. Article 12 Assistance expenses The Parties shall waive all claims on each other for the reimbursement of expenses incurred pursuant to this Protocol except, as appropriate, for expenses relating to experts and witnesses and to interpreters and translators who are not public service employees. Article 13 Implementation 1.The implementation of this Protocol shall be entrusted tothe customs authorities of Cameroon and in the event ofaccession, of other Central African Contracting States andto the customs authorities of the UK. They shall decide onall practical measures and arrangements necessary for itsapplication, taking into consideration rules in the field ofdata protection in particular. They may recommend to thecompetent bodies amendments which they consider shouldbe made to this Protocol.2.The Parties shall consult each other and keep each otherinformed of the detailed rules of implementation which areadopted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. Article 14 Other agreements 1. The provisions of this Protocol shall:  — not affect the obligations of the Parties under any other international agreement or convention; and  — be deemed complementary to agreements on mutual assistance which have been or may be concluded between the UK and Cameroon; or the UK and any other Central African Contracting States.               2. Notwithstanding  a) the provisions of paragraph 1, the provisions of this Protocol shall take precedence over the provisions of any bilateral agreement on mutual assistance which has been concluded between the UK and Cameroon, prior to the date this Agreement is signed, insofar as the provisions of that mutual assistance agreement are incompatible with those of this Protocol.  b) In the event of accession, the following amendments will be made: (i) “Cameroon” is to be replaced with “a Central African Contracting State”; and (ii) after the words “prior to the date this Agreement is signed” shall be added “in the case of Cameroon and prior to accession, in any other case”.  In respect of questions relating to the application of this Protocol, the Parties shall consult each other to resolve the matter within the EPA Committee.     INTERIM PROTOCOL 2A CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF ‘ORIGINATING PRODUCTS’ AND METHODS OF ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION WITH RESPECT TO PRODUCTS IMPORTED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON TITLE I: General Provisions    Articles 1. Definitions   TITLE II: Definition of the concept of originating products   Articles 2. General requirements  3. Wholly obtained products  4. Sufficiently worked or processed products  5. Insufficient working or processing operations  6. Cumulation of origin  7. Unit of qualification  8. Accessories, spare parts and tools  9. Sets  10. Neutral elements TITLE III: Territorial requirements   Articles 11. Principle of territoriality  12. Direct transport  13. Exhibitions TITLE IV: Proof of origin   Articles 14. General requirements  15. Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1  16. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively  17. Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1  18. Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin issued or made out  previously 19. Conditions for making out an invoice declaration  20. Approved exporter  21. Validity of proof of origin  22. Transit procedure  23. Submission of proof of origin  24. Importation by instalments  25. Exemptions from proof of origin  26. Information procedure for cumulation purposes  27. Supporting documents  28. Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents  29. Discrepancies and formal errors  30. Amounts expressed in euro   TITLE V: Arrangements for administrative cooperation   Articles 31. Mutual assistance  32. Verification of proofs of origin  33. Verification of suppliers' declarations  34. Penalties  35. Free zones  36. Derogations   TITLE VI: Ceuta and Melilla   Articles 37. Special conditions   TITLE VII: Transitional and Final Provisions   Articles 38. Transitional provision for goods in transit or storage 39. Appendices  INDEX  APPENDICES  APPENDIX 1:  Introductory notes to the list in Appendix 2  APPENDIX 2:  List of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials    in order for the product manufactured to acquire originating status  APPENDIX 2A: Derogations from the list of working or processing required to be carried out on non-   originating materials in order for the product manufactured to acquire originating     status, in accordance with Article 4 of this Protocol  APPENDIX 3:  Form for movement certificate EUR.1  APPENDIX 4:  Invoice declaration  APPENDIX 5A: Supplier declaration for products having preferential origin status  APPENDIX 5B: Supplier declaration for products not having preferential origin status  APPENDIX 6:  Information certificate  APPENDIX 7:  Products to which Article 6(4) of this Protocol shall not be applicable  APPENDIX 8:  Fishery products to which Article 6(4) of this Protocol shall temporarily not be     applicable  APPENDIX 9:  Neighbouring developing countries  APPENDIX 10: Products to which the provisions of Article 6(4), (8) and (11) of this Protocol shall not    be applicable  APPENDIX 11: Overseas countries and territories  APPENDIX 12:  Eligible ACP States      TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS  Article 1A  This Protocol 2A (referred to in this Protocol 2A as "this Protocol") specifies the rules of origin and the methods of administrative cooperation applicable to determining whether goods are considered as "originating" from Cameroon for the purposes of the Agreement when exported to the United Kingdom.   Article 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Protocol, the following definitions apply:  (a) ‘manufacture’ means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;  (b) ‘material’ means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the manufacture of the product;  (c) ‘product’ means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;  (d) ‘goods’ means both materials and products;  (e) ‘customs value’ means the value as determined in accordance with the Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the GATT 1994 (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);  (f) ‘ex-works price’ means the price paid for the product ex works to the manufacturer in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;  (g) ‘value of materials’ means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the territory concerned;  (h) ‘value of originating materials’ means the value of such materials as defined in point (g) applied mutatis mutandis;  (i) ‘added value’ means the ex-works price minus the customs value of materials imported into either the United Kingdom or eligible ACP states;  (j) ‘chapters’ and ‘headings’ mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes) used in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as ‘the Harmonised System’ or ‘HS’;  (k) ‘classified’ refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular heading;  (l) ‘consignment’ means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;  (m) ‘territories’ means territories, including territorial waters;  (n) ‘OCT’ means the overseas countries and territories as defined in Appendix 11;  (o) ‘eligible ACP States’ means the States listed in Appendix 12 at any given time, in accordance with Article 1B of this Protocol.     Article 1B  Eligible ACP States  1. The United Kingdom may remove a state from the list of eligible ACP states in Appendix 12 where the United Kingdom in good faith considers it appropriate to do so, including but not limited to situations where:  (a)  the state concerned has ceased to be a member of the ACP group of states, established by the Georgetown Agreement 1975;   (b)  the state concerned has failed to ratify a preferential trade agreement with the UK within a reasonable period of time; or  (c)  the United Kingdom has concerns regarding the existence of appropriate conditions for the application of cumulation.  2. The United Kingdom may add a state to the list of eligible ACP states in Appendix 12 where it:  (a) is a member of the ACP group of states, established by the Georgetown Agreement 1975; and  (b) has ratified or provisionally applied a preferential trade agreement with the UK.   TITLE II DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF ‘ORIGINATING PRODUCTS’  Article 2  General requirements  1. For the purposes of this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in Cameroon:    (a) products wholly obtained in Cameroon within the meaning of Article 3 of this Protocol;   (b) products obtained in Cameroon incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in Cameroon within the meaning of Article 4 of this Protocol.     Article 3  Wholly obtained products  1.    The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in Cameroon:  (a) mineral products extracted from its soil or from its seabed;  (b) vegetable products harvested there;  (c) live animals born and raised there;  (d) products from live animals raised there;  (e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;  (f) products of aquaculture, including mariculture, where the fish are born and raised there;  (g) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside its territorial waters by its vessels;  (h) products made aboard its factory ships exclusively from products referred to in point (g);  (i) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including used tyres fit only for retreading or for use as waste;  (j) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;  (k) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside its territorial waters provided that it  has sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;  (l) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in points (a) to (k).  2. The terms ‘its vessels’ and ‘its factory ships’ in points (g) and (h) of paragraph 1 shall apply only to vessels and factory ships which:  (a) are registered in Cameroon, the United Kingdom, an eligible ACP State or a Member State of the EU ;  (b) fly the flag of Cameroon, the United Kingdom, an eligible ACP State or a Member State of the EU ; and  (c) meet one of the following conditions:  (i) they are at least 50 % owned by nationals of Cameroon, the United Kingdom , an eligible ACP state or a Member State of the EU; or  (ii) they are owned by companies which;  — have their head office and their main place of business in Cameroon, the United Kingdom, an eligible ACP state or a Member State of the EU, and  — are at least 50 % owned by Cameroon, the United Kingdom, an eligible ACP state or a Member State of the EU, public entities of that State or nationals of that State.   3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, the United Kingdom shall, upon request by Cameroon , recognise vessels chartered or leased by Cameroon to undertake fisheries activities in its exclusive economic zone as ‘its vessels’ under the following conditions:  (a) that Cameroon  offered the United Kingdom the opportunity to negotiate a fisheries agreement and the United Kingdom did not accept that offer; and  (b) that the charter or lease contract has been accepted by the United Kingdom as providing adequate opportunities for the development of the capacity of Cameroon to fish on its own account and in particular as conferring on Cameroon the responsibility for the nautical and commercial management of the vessel placed at its disposal for a significant period of time.   Article 4  Sufficiently worked or processed products  1.    For the purposes of this Protocol, products which are not wholly obtained shall be considered to be sufficiently worked or processed in Cameroon when the conditions set out in the list in Appendix 2 or in Appendix 2A are fulfilled. Those conditions indicate, for all products covered by this Agreement, the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. Accordingly, it follows that if a product, which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.  2.    Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in Appendices 2 and 2A, should not be used in the manufacture of a given product may nevertheless be used, provided that:  (a) their total value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product;  (b) none of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating materials are exceeded through the application of this paragraph.  This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised System.  3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply except as provided for in Article 5.   Article 5  Insufficient working or processing operations  1.    Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 4 are satisfied:  (a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during transport and storage (ventilation, spreading out, drying, chilling, placing in salt, sulphur dioxide or other aqueous solutions, removal of damaged parts and like operations); (b) simple operations consisting of the removal of dust, sifting or screening, sorting, classifying, matching (including the making-up of sets of articles), washing, painting, cutting up;  (c) changes of packaging and breaking up and assembly of packages;  (d) simple placing in bottles, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards, etc., and all other simple packaging operations;  (e) affixing marks, labels and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;  (f) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; mixing of sugar with any other material;  (g) simple assembly of parts to constitute a complete product;  (h) a combination of two or more of the operations specified in points (a) to (g);  (i) slaughter of animals;  (j) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of cereals and rice;  (k) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps; partial or total milling of sugar;  (l) peeling, stoning and shelling of fruits, nuts and vegetables.  2. All the operations carried out in either Cameroon or the United Kingdom on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.   Article 6  Cumulation of origin  1.    Materials originating in the United Kingdom, the EU, the OCT or eligible ACP States shall be considered as materials originating in Cameroon when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing beyond that referred to in Article 5.  2.    Working and processing carried out in the United Kingdom, the EU, the OCT or eligible ACP States shall be considered as having been carried out in Cameroon when the materials undergo subsequent working or processing in Cameroon beyond that referred to in Article 5.  3.     In determining whether, for the purposes of paragraph 1, the products/materials originate:  (a)  in eligible ACP States,  the provisions of this Protocol shall apply mutatis mutandis;   (b)  in the United Kingdom, the OCT or the EU the provisions of Protocol 2B shall apply mutatis mutandis.  4. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 10, materials originating in South Africa shall be considered as originating in Cameroon when incorporated into a product obtained there provided they have undergone working or processing beyond that referred to in Article 5. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing. 5.    Products which have acquired originating status by virtue of paragraph 4 shall continue to be considered as products originating in Cameroon only when the value added there exceeds the value of the materials used that originate in South Africa. If that is not so, the products concerned shall be considered as originating in South Africa. In the allocation of origin, no account shall be taken of materials originating in South Africa which have undergone sufficient working or processing in Cameroon.  6.    The cumulation provided for in paragraph 4 shall not apply to the products listed in Appendices 7, and 10.  7.    The cumulation provided for in paragraph 4 shall apply to the products listed in Appendix 8 only when the United Kingdom tariffs on those products have been eliminated on imports from South Africa. The United Kingdom shall publish in accordance with its own procedures the date on which the conditions of this paragraph have been fulfilled.  8.    Without prejudice to paragraphs 6 and 7, working and processing carried out in South Africa shall be considered as having been carried out in another Member State of the South African Customs Union (SACU), being an eligible ACP State, when the materials undergo subsequent working or processing in that other Member State of the SACU.  9.    Without prejudice to paragraphs 6 and 7 and at the request of Cameroon, working and processing carried out in South Africa shall be considered as having been carried out in Cameroon or in an  eligible ACP State when the materials undergo subsequent working or processing in Cameroon or in an eligible ACP State within the context of a regional economic integration agreement.  10.    The request shall be submitted by Cameroon to the United Kingdom, which shall take a decision on the request in accordance with its internal procedures.  11.    The cumulation provided for in paragraph 4 may be applied only where the South African materials used have acquired the status of originating products through the application of rules of origin identical to those set out in this Protocol. The cumulation provided for in paragraphs 8 and 9 may be applied only through the application of rules of origin identical to those set out in this Protocol.  12.    At the request of Cameroon, materials originating in a neighbouring developing country, other than an eligible ACP State, belonging to a coherent geographical entity, shall be considered as materials originating in Cameroon when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided that:  — the working or processing carried out in Cameroon exceeds the operations listed in Article 5, and  — Cameroon, the United Kingdom and the other countries concerned have concluded an agreement on adequate administrative procedures which will ensure correct implementation of this paragraph.  This paragraph shall not apply to tuna products classified under Harmonised System Chapter 3 or 16 and to rice products under tariff heading 1006.  For the purpose of determining whether products originate in a neighbouring developing country, the provisions of this Protocol shall apply.  Requests shall be submitted by Cameroon to the United Kingdom, which shall take a decision on the request in accordance with its internal procedures. Such decisions shall also identify the products for which cumulation provided for under this paragraph may not be permitted. Article 7  Unit of qualification  1.    The unit of qualification for the application of this Protocol shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System.  This means that:  (a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonised System in a single heading, the whole shall constitute the unit of qualification;  (b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonised System, each product shall be taken individually when this Protocol is applied.  2.    Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonised System, packaging is included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.   Article 8  Accessories, spare parts and tools  Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.   Article 9  Sets  Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised System, shall be regarded as originating when all the component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the set.   Article 10  Neutral elements  In order to determine whether a product is an originating product, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:  (a) energy and fuel;  (b) plant and equipment;  (c) machines and tools;  (d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product. TITLE III TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS  Article 11  Principle of territoriality  1.    Except as provided for in Article 6, the conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Title II shall be fulfilled without interruption in Cameroon.  2.    Except as provided for in Article 6, if originating goods exported from Cameroon to another country return, they shall be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:  (a) the returning goods are the same goods as those exported; and  (b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.   Article 12  Direct transport  1.    The preferential treatment provided for in this Agreement shall apply only to products that satisfy the requirements of this Protocol and are transported directly between the territories of Cameroon, of the United Kingdom, of eligible ACP States, of the EU, of the OCT or of South Africa for the purposes of Article 6 without entering any other territory. However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion arise, transhipment or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition.   Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of Cameroon or of the United Kingdom.  2. Consignments that are transported through the territory of the EU may undergo operations including unloading, reloading, splitting, storing, labelling, marking or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition provided they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the EU Member State.  3. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom by the production of:  (a) a single transport document covering the passage from Cameroon through the country of transit; or  (b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:  (i) giving an exact description of the products;  (ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable, the names of the ships, or the other means of transport used; and  (iii) certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or  (c) failing those, any substantiating documents.   Article 13  Exhibitions  1.    Originating products sent from Cameroon for exhibition in a country or a territory other than those referred to in Article 6 and sold after the exhibition for importation into the United Kingdom shall benefit on importation from the provisions of this Agreement provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:  (a) an exporter has consigned those products from Cameroon to the country or territory in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;  (b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in the United Kingdom;  (c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and  (d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.  2.    A proof of origin shall be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title IV and submitted to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition shall be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.  3.    Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products and during which the products remain under customs control.   TITLE IV PROOF OF ORIGIN  Article 14  General requirements  1.    Products originating in Cameroon shall, on importation into the United Kingdom, benefit from the provisions of this Agreement upon submission of either:  (a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Appendix 3; or  (b) in the cases specified in Article 19(1), a declaration, hereinafter referred to as the ‘invoice declaration’, given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified. The text of the invoice declaration appears in Appendix 4. 2.    Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 25, benefit from the provisions of this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to in that paragraph.   Article 15   Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1  1.    A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of Cameroon on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by the authorised representative of the exporter.  2.    For that purpose, the exporter or the authorised representative of the exporter shall fill out both the movement certificate EUR.1 and the application form, specimens of which appear in Appendix 3. Those forms shall be completed in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products shall be given in the box reserved for that purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line shall be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.  3.    The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of Cameroon, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  4.    A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of Cameroon if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Cameroon or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 6, and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  5.    The issuing customs authorities shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. For that purpose they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate. The issuing customs authorities shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.  6.    The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in box 11 of the certificate.  7.    A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.   Article 16  Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively  1.    Notwithstanding Article 15(7), a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:  (a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or  (b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate EUR.1 was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.  2.    For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter shall indicate in the application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and state the reasons for that request.  3.    The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application complies with that in the corresponding file.  4.    Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively shall be endorsed with the following phrase:  ‘ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY’  5.    The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in box 7 of the movement certificate EUR.1.   Article 17  Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1  1.    In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.  2.    The duplicate issued in this way shall be endorsed with the following word:  ‘DUPLICATE’  3.    The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in box 7 of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.  4.    The duplicate, which shall bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as from that date.   Article 18  Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin issued or made out previously  When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in Cameroon or in the United Kingdom, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of those products elsewhere within Cameroon or within the United Kingdom. The replacement movement certificate or certificates EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.     Article 19  Conditions for making out an invoice declaration  1.    An invoice declaration as referred to in point (b) of Article 14(1) may be made out: (a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 20; or  (b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products whose total value does not exceed EUR 6 000.  2.    An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Cameroon or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 6 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  3.    The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of Cameroon, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  4.    An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document the declaration the text of which appears in Appendix 4, using one of the linguistic versions set out in that Appendix and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of Cameroon. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed characters.  5.    Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 20 shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he or she gives the customs authorities of Cameroon a written undertaking that he or she accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which identifies him or her as if it had been signed in manuscript by him or her.  6.    An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the United Kingdom no longer than two years after the importation of the products to which it relates.   Article 20  Approved exporter  1.    The customs authorities of Cameroon may authorise any exporter who makes frequent shipments of products under the provisions of this Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation shall offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2.    The customs authorities of Cameroon may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.  3.    The customs authorities of Cameroon shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation number which shall appear on the invoice declaration.  4.    The customs authorities of Cameroon shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved exporter.  5.    The customs authorities of Cameroon may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, does not fulfil the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes incorrect use of the authorisation.   Article 21  Validity of proof of origin  1.    A proof of origin shall be valid for ten months from the date of issue in Cameroon and shall be submitted within that period to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom.  2.    Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment where the failure to submit those documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.  3.    In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the United Kingdom may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the final date.   Article 22  Transit procedure  When the products enter an eligible ACP State, a further period of validity of four months shall begin on the date on which the customs authorities in the country of transit enter the following in box 7 of the movement certificate EUR.1:  — the word ‘transit’,  — the name of the country of transit,  — the official stamp, a specimen of which has already been made available to the United Kingdom, and  — the date of the endorsements.   Article 23  Submission of proof of origin  Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom in accordance with its  procedures. Those authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the implementation of this Agreement.     Article 24  Importation by instalments  Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of the United Kingdom, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonised System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or headings 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonised System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.   Article 25  Exemptions from proof of origin  1.    Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, that declaration can be made on the customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.  2.    Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.  3.    Furthermore, the total value of those products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the case of small packages or EUR 1 200 in the case of products forming part of travellers' personal luggage.   Article 26  Information procedure for cumulation purposes  1.    When Articles  6(1) and 6(4) are applied, evidence of the originating status within the meaning of this Protocol of the materials coming from eligible ACP States, the United Kingdom, the EU, South Africa or the OCT shall be given by a movement certificate EUR.1 or by the supplier's declaration, a specimen of which is given in Appendix 5A, given by the exporter in the State or OCT from which the materials came.  2.    When Articles 6(2), 6(8),  and 6(9) are applied, evidence of the working or processing carried out in eligible ACP States, Cameroon the United Kingdom, the EU, the OCT or South Africa shall be given by the supplier's declaration, a specimen of which appears in Appendix 5B, given by the exporter in the State or OCT from which the materials came.  3.    A separate supplier's declaration shall be given by the supplier for each consignment of material on the commercial invoice relating to that shipment or in an annex to that invoice, or on a delivery note or other commercial document relating to that shipment which describes the materials concerned in sufficient detail for them to be identified.  4.    The supplier's declaration may be made out on a pre-printed form.  5.    The suppliers' declarations shall be signed in manuscript. However, where the invoice and the supplier's declaration are established using electronic data-processing methods, the supplier's declaration need not be signed in manuscript provided the responsible official in the supplying company is identified to the satisfaction of the customs authorities in the State where the suppliers' declarations are drawn up. Those customs authorities may lay down conditions for the implementation of this paragraph.  6.    The suppliers’ declarations shall be submitted to the competent customs office in Cameroon.    Article 27  Supporting documents  The documents referred to in Articles 15(3) and 19(3) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice declaration can be considered as products originating in Cameroon or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 6 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol may consist inter alia of the following:  (a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained, for example, in the accounts or internal bookkeeping of the exporter or the supplier;  (b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Cameroon or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 6, where those documents are used in accordance with domestic law;  (c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in Cameroon, the eligible ACP States, the United Kingdom, the EU, the OCT or South Africa, issued or made out in Cameroon, an eligible ACP State, the United Kingdom, the EU, an OCT or South Africa, where those documents are used in accordance with domestic law;  (d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Cameroon or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 6 and in accordance with this Protocol.   Article 28  Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents  1.    The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep the documents referred to in Article 15(3) for at least three years.  2.    The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep a copy of that invoice declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 19(3) for at least three years.  3.    The customs authorities of Cameroon issuing a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep the application form referred to in Article 15(2) for at least three years.  4.    The customs authorities of the United Kingdom shall keep the movement certificates EUR.1 and the invoice declarations submitted to them for at least three years.     Article 29  Discrepancies and formal errors  1.    The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that that document does correspond to the products submitted.  2.    Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause that document to be rejected if those errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in that document.   Article 30  Amounts expressed in euro  1.    For the application of Article 19(1)(b) and Article 25(3) in cases where products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the national currencies of Cameroon, of the United Kingdom and of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 6 equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro shall be fixed annually by each of the countries concerned.  2.    A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 19(1)(b) or Article 25(3) by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the country concerned.  3.    The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that currency of the amounts expressed in euro as on the first working day of October each year. The amounts shall be fixed by the country concerned by 15 October and shall apply from 1 January the following year.  4.  A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion of an amount expressed in euro into the applicable currency. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5 %. A country may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, before any rounding-off, results in an increase of less than 15 % in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a decrease in that equivalent value.  5.    The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the EPA Committee. When carrying out that review, the EPA Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For that purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in euro.     TITLE V ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION  Article 31  Mutual assistance  1.    Cameroon shall send the customs authorities of the United Kingdom specimens of the stamps used together with the address of Cameroon’s customs authorities competent to issue movement certificates EUR.1 and carry out the subsequent verification of movement certificates EUR.1 and invoice declarations. Movement certificates EUR.1 and invoice declarations shall be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment from the date the information is received by the United Kingdom.  2.    In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the United Kingdom and Cameroon  shall assist each other, through the competent customs authorities, in checking the authenticity of movement certificates EUR.1, invoice declarations or suppliers’ declarations and the correctness of the information given in those documents.  The authorities consulted shall provide the relevant information concerning the conditions under which a product has been made, indicating in particular the conditions in which the rules of origin have been complied with in the various States concerned.   Article 32  Verification of proofs of origin  1.    Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the United Kingdom have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2.    For the purposes of implementing paragraph 1, the customs authorities of the United Kingdom shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of those documents to the customs authorities of Cameroon giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the request for verification. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.  3.    The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of Cameroon. For that purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.  4.    If the customs authorities of the United Kingdom decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.  5.    The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of that verification as soon as possible. Those results shall indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Cameroon or in one of the countries or territories referred to in Article 6 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  6.    If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.  7.    Where the verification procedure or any other information available appears to indicate that the provisions of this Protocol are being contravened, appropriate enquiries shall be carried out with due urgency to identify and prevent such contraventions.   Article 33  Verification of suppliers’ declarations  1.    Verification of suppliers' declarations shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the United Kingdom have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of the document or the accuracy or completeness of the information concerning the true origin of the materials in question.  2.    The customs authorities to which a supplier's declaration is submitted may request the customs authorities of the State where the declaration was made to issue an information certificate, a specimen of which appears in Appendix 6. Alternatively, the customs authorities to which a supplier's declaration is submitted may request the exporter to produce an information certificate issued by the customs authorities of the State where the declaration was made.  A copy of the information certificate shall be preserved by the office which issued it for at least three years.  3.    The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of the verification as soon as possible. The results shall indicate clearly whether the declaration concerning the status of the materials is correct.  4.    For the purpose of verification, suppliers shall keep a copy of the document containing the declaration together with all necessary evidence showing the true status of the materials for not less than three years.  5.    The customs authorities in the State where the supplier's declaration is drawn up shall have the right to call for any evidence or to carry out any check which they consider appropriate in order to verify the correctness of any supplier's declaration.  6.    Any movement certificate EUR.1 or invoice declaration issued or made out on the basis of an incorrect supplier's declaration shall be considered null and void.   Article 34  Penalties  Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining preferential treatment for products.     Article 35  Free zones  1.    All necessary steps shall be taken to ensure that products traded under cover of a proof of origin or a supplier's declaration and which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.  2.    By way of derogation from paragraph 1, when originating products are imported into a free zone under cover of a proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned shall issue a new movement certificate EUR.1 at the exporter's request if the treatment or processing undergone complies with the provisions of this Protocol.   Article 36  Derogations  1.    On its own initiative or in response to a request from Cameroon the United Kingdom may grant Cameroon a temporary derogation from the provisions of this Protocol where:  (a) internal or external factors temporarily deprive Cameroon of the ability to comply with the rules for the acquisition of origin laid down in this Protocol where it could do so previously; or (b) Cameroon requires time to prepare itself to comply with the rules for the acquisition of origin laid down in this Protocol.  2.    Such a temporary derogation shall be limited to the duration of the effect of the internal or external factors giving rise to it or the length of time needed for Cameroon to achieve compliance with the rules.  3.    A request for derogation shall be made in writing to the United Kingdom. It shall state the reasons as indicated in paragraph 1 why a derogation is required and shall include appropriate supporting documents.  4.   The request shall be submitted by Cameroon to the United Kingdom, which shall take a decision on the request in accordance with its internal procedures.   The United Kingdom shall respond positively to all requests by Cameroon which are duly justified in accordance with this Article and which cannot cause serious injury to an established United Kingdom industry.   TITLE VI CEUTA AND MELILLA  Article 37  Special conditions  1.    The term ‘EU’ used in this Protocol shall not cover Ceuta and Melilla.  The term ‘products originating in the EU’ shall not cover products originating in Ceuta and Melilla.      TITLE VII TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS  Article 38  Transitional provision for goods in transit or storage  Goods which comply with the provisions of this Protocol and which on the date of its entry into force are either in transit or are in temporary storage in customs warehouses or in free zones, in Cameroon, the eligible ACP States, the European Union or the United Kingdom, may benefit from the provisions of this Protocol, subject to the submission to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom, within twelve (12) months of that date, of a movement certificate EUR.1 issued retrospectively by the customs authorities of Cameroon, together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly.    Article 39  Appendices  The Appendices to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.   Appendix 1 Introductory notes to the list in appendix 2 Note 1: The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or processed within the meaning of Article 4 of this Protocol. Note 2: 1.  The first two  2.  Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 3.  Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within a heading, each indent contains the descrip 4.  Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both columns Note 3: 1.  The provisions of Article 2.  The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or pr 3.  Without prejudice to Note 4.  When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufacture 5.  Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a particular material, the condition does not  6.  Where, in a rule in  Note 4: 1.  The term ‘natural fibres’ is used in the list to refer to fibres other than  2.  The term ‘natural  3.  The terms ‘textile pulp’, ‘chemical materials’ and ‘paper 4.  The t Note 5: 1.  Where for a given product in the list a reference is made to this Note, the  2.  However, the tolerance mentioned in Note—  silk,  —  wool,  —  coarse animal hair,  —  fine animal hair,  —  horsehair,  —  cotton,  —  paper-making materials and paper,  —  flax,  —  true hemp,  —  jute and other textile bast fibres,  —  sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave,  —  coconut, abaca, ramie and other vegetable textile fibres,  —  synthetic man-made filaments,  —  artificial man-made filaments,  —  current conducting filaments,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polypropylene,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyamide,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyacrylonitrile,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyimide,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polytetrafluoroethylene,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyphenylene sulphide,  —  synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyvinyl chloride,  —  other synthetic man-made staple fibres,  —  artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose,  —  other artificial man-made staple fibres,  —  yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped,  —  yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyester whether or not gimped,  —  products of heading 5605 (metallised yarn) incorporating strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film,  —  other products of heading 5605.   Example: A woollen fabric of heading 5112 made from woollen yarn of heading 5107 and synthetic yarn of staple fibres of heading 5509 is a mixed fabric. Therefore synthetic yarn which does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) or woollen yarn that does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from natural fibres, not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning) or a combination of the two may be used provided their total weight does not exceed 10 % of the weight of the fabric. Example: Tufted textile fabric of heading 5802 made from cotton yarn of heading 5205 and cotton fabric of heading 5210 is only a mixed product if the cotton fabric is itself a mixed fabric being made from yarns classified in two separate headings or if the cotton yarns used are themselves mixtures. Example: If the tufted textile fabric concerned had been made from cotton yarn of heading 5205 and synthetic fabric of heading 5407, then, obviously, the yarns used are two separate basic textile materials and the tufted textile fabric is accordingly a mixed product.  3.  In the case  4.  In the case of products incorporating ‘strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil Note 6: 1.  In the case of  2.  Any non 3.  In accordance with Note 4.  Where a percentage rule applies, the value of trimmings and accessories must Note 7: 1.  For the purposes of headings ex(a)  vacuum distillation;  (b)  redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process (2) ;  (c)  cracking;  (d)  reforming;  (e)  extraction by means of selective solvents;  (f)  the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;  (g)  polymerisation;  (h)  alkylation;  (i)  isomerisation.   2.  For the purposes of headings(a)  vacuum distillation;  (b)  redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process (2);  (c)  cracking;  (d)  reforming;  (e)  extraction by means of selective solvents;  (f)  the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;  (g)  polymerisation;  (h)  alkylation;  (i)  isomerisation;   (j)  in respect of heavy oils falling within heading ex 2710 only, desulphurisation with hydrogen resulting in a reduction of at least 85 % of the sulphur content of the products processed (ASTM D 1266-59 T method);  (k)  in respect of products falling within heading 2710 only, deparaffining by a process other than filtering;  (l)  in respect of heavy oils falling within heading ex 2710 only, treatment with hydrogen at a pressure of more than 20 bar and a temperature of more than 250 °C with the use of a catalyst, other than to effect desulphurisation, when the hydrogen constitutes an active element in a chemical reaction. The further treatment with hydrogen of lubricating oils of heading ex 2710 (e.g. hydrofinishing or decolourisation) in order, more especially, to improve colour or stability shall not, however, be deemed to be a specific process;  (m)  in respect of fuel oils falling within heading ex 2710 only, atmospheric distillation, on condition that less than 30 % of those products distils, by volume, including losses, at 300 °C by the ASTM D 86 method;  (n)  in respect of heavy oils other than gas oils and fuel oils falling within heading ex 2710 only, treatment by means of a high-frequency electrical brush-discharge.    3.  For the purposes of headings ex   (1)  This example is given for the purpose of explanation only. It is not legally binding.  (2)  See additional Explanatory Note 4(b) to Chapter 27 of the Combined Nomenclature  Appendix 2 List of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials in order for the product manufactured to acquire originating status  The products included in the list may not all be covered by this Agreement. It is therefore necessary to consult the other parts of this Agreement. HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Chapter 01  Live animals  All the animals of Chapter 1 used must be wholly    obtained     Chapter 02   Meat and edible meat offal   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapters 1 and 2 used must be wholly obtained     ex Chapter 03   Fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates, except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 3 used must be wholly obtained     0304   Fish fillets and other fish meat (whether or not minced), fresh, chilled of frozen   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product   0305   Fish, dried, salted or in brine; smoked fish, whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process; flours, meals and pellets of fish, fit for human consumption   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product   ex 0306   Crustaceans, whether in shell or not, dried, salted or in brine; crustaceans, in shell, cooked by steaming or by boiling in water, whether or not chilled, frozen, dried, salted or in brine; flours, meals and pellets of crustaceans, fit for human consumption   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product   ex 0307   Molluscs, whether in shell or not, dried, salted or in brine; aquatic invertebrates other than crustaceans and molluscs, dried, salted or in brine; flours, meals and pellets of crustaceans, fit for human consumption   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product   ex Chapter 04   Dairy produce; birds' eggs; natural honey; edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 4 used must be wholly obtained     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  0403  Buttermilk, curdled milk and cream, yoghurt, kephir and other fermented or acidified milk and cream, whether or not concentrated or containing added sugar or other sweetening matter or flavoured or containing added fruit, nuts or cocoa  Manufacture in which: — all the materials of Chapter 4 used must be wholly obtained; — any fruit juice (except those of pineapple, lime or grapefruit) of heading 2009 used must al ready be originating;        — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 05   Products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 5 used must be wholly obtained     ex 0502   Prepared pigs', hogs' or boars' bristles and hair   Cleaning, disinfecting, sorting and straightening of bristles and hair   Chapter 06   Live trees and other plants; bulbs, roots and the like; cut flowers and ornamental foliage   Manufacture in which: — all the materials of Chapter 6 used must be wholly obtained;        — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   Chapter 07   Edible vegetables and certain roots and tubers   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 7 used must be wholly obtained     Chapter 08   Edible fruit and nuts; peel of citrus fruits or melons   Manufacture in which: — all the fruit and nuts used must be wholly obtained;        — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the value of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 09   Coffee, tea, maté and spices; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 9 used must be wholly obtained     0901   Coffee, whether or not roasted or    decaffeinated; coffee husks and skins; coffee substitutes containing coffee in any proportion   Manufacture from materials of any heading  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  0902  Tea, whether or not flavoured  Manufacture any heading  from  materials  of     ex 0910   Mixtures of spices   Manufacture any heading   from   materials   of   Chapter 10   Cereals   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 10 used must be wholly obtained     ex Chapter 11   Products of the milling industry; malt; starches; inulin; wheat gluten; except for:   Manufacture in which all the cereals, edible vegetables, roots and tubers of heading 0714 or fruit used must be wholly obtained     ex 1106   Flour, meal and powder of the dried, shelled leguminous vegetables of heading 0713   Drying and milling of leguminous vegetables of heading  0708   Chapter 12   Oil seeds and oleaginous fruits; miscellaneous grains, seeds and fruit; industrial or medicinal plants; straw and fodder   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 12 used must be wholly obtained     1301   Lac; natural gums, resins, gum-resins and oleoresins (for example, balsams)   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of heading 1301 used may not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   1302   Vegetable saps and extracts; pectic sub stances, pectinates and pectates; agar- agar and other mucilages and thickeners, whether or not modified, derived from vegetable products:       – Mucilages and thickeners, modified, derived from vegetable products   Manufacture from non-modified mucilages and thickeners     – Other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used    does   not   exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   Chapter 14   Vegetable plaiting materials; vegetable products not elsewhere specified or included   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 14 used must be wholly obtained    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 15  Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products; prepared edible fats; animals or vegetable waxes; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     1501   Pig fat (including lard) and poultry fat, other than that of heading 0209 or 1503:       – Fats from bones or waste   Manufacture from materials of any heading except those of heading  0203, 0206  or  0207  or  bones of heading 0506     – Other   Manufacture from meat or edible offal of swine of heading 0203 or     0206  or   of meat and edible offal of poultry of heading  0207   1502   Fats of bovine animals, sheep or goats, other than those of heading 1503       – Fats from bones or waste   Manufacture from materials of any heading except those of heading   0201, 0202, 0204  or  0206     or bones of heading 0506     – Other   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 2 used must be wholly obtained   1504   Fats and oils and their fractions, of fish or marine mammals, whether or not re fined, but not chemically modified:       – Solid fractions   Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading 1504     – Other   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapters 2 and 3 used must be wholly obtained   ex 1505   Refined lanolin   Manufacture from crude wool grease of heading 1505  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  1506  Other animals fats and oils and their fractions, whether or not refined, but        not chemically modified:       – Solid fractions   Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials        of heading 1506     – Other   Manufacture  in  which  all  the materials  of  Chapter  2  used  must  be      wholly obtained   1507 to 1515   Vegetable oils and their fractions:      – Soya, ground nut, palm, copra, palm  Manufacture in which all the materials    kernel, babassu, tung and oiticica oil,   used  are  classified within  a    myrtle wax and Japan wax, fractions  heading other than that of the    of  jojoba  oil   and  oils  for  technical  or industrial uses other than the manufacture  product           of foodstuffs for human consumption             – Solid fractions, except for that of   Manufacture from other materials    jojoba oil  of headings 1507 to 1515     – Other   Manufacture in which all the vegetable materials used must be      wholly obtained   1516   Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their fractions, partly or wholly hydrogenated, interesterified, reesterified or elaidinised, whether or not refined, but not further prepared   Manufacture in which: — all the materials of Chapter 2 used must be wholly obtained; — all the vegetable materials used must be wholly obtained.                 However, materials of headings                1507, 1508, 1511 and 1513 may      be used   1517   Margarine; edible mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats or oils or of fractions of different fats or oils of this Chapter, other than edible fats or oils or their fractions of heading 1516   Manufacture in which: — all the materials of Chapters 2 and 4 used must be wholly obtained; — all the vegetable materials used       must be wholly obtained.  However,       materials of headings 1507,      1508, 1511 and 1513 may be used        HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 16  Preparations of meat, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates; except for:  Manufacture from animals of Chapter 1.     1604 and 1605   Prepared or preserved fish; caviar and caviar substitutes prepared from fish eggs; Crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates, prepared or preserved   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product   ex Chapter 17   Sugars and sugar confectionery; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 1701   Cane or beet sugar and chemically pure sucrose, in solid form, flavoured or coloured   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product   1702   Other sugars, including chemically pure lactose, maltose, glucose and fructose, in solid form; sugar syrups not containing added flavouring or colouring matter; artificial         honey, whether or not mixed with natural honey; caramel:       – Chemically pure maltose and fructose   Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading 1702     – Other sugars in solid form, flavoured or coloured   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product     – Other   Manufacture in which all the materials used must already be originating   ex 1703   Molasses resulting from the extraction or refining of sugar, flavoured         or       coloured   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product   HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  1704  Sugar confectionery (including white chocolate), not containing cocoa  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;        — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   Chapter 18   Cocoa and cocoa preparations   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are  classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product     1901   Malt extract; food preparations of flour, meal, starch or malt extract, not         containing cocoa or containing less than 40 % by weight of cocoa calculated on a to tally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included; food preparations of goods of headings 0401 to 0404, not containing cocoa or containing less than 5 % by weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included:        – Malt extract   Manufacture from cereals of Chapter 10     – Other   Manufacture in which:      — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  1902   Pasta, whether or not cooked or stuffed (with meat or other substances) or other wise prepared, such as spaghetti, macaroni, noodles, lasagne, gnocchi, ravioli, cannelloni; couscous, whether or not prepared:       – Containing 20 % or less by weight of meat, meat offal, fish, crustaceans or molluscs   Manufacture in which all the cereals and derivatives (except durum wheat and its derivatives) used must be wholly obtained  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)    – Containing more than 20 % by weight of meat, meat offal, fish, crustaceans or molluscs  Manufacture in which: — all cereals and derivatives (except durum wheat and its derivatives) used must be wholly obtained;        — all the materials of Chapters 2 and 3 used must be wholly obtained   1903   Tapioca and substitutes therefore pre pared from starch, in the form of flakes, grains, pearls, siftings or in similar forms   Manufacture from materials of any heading except potato starch of heading 1108   1904   Prepared foods obtained by the swelling or roasting of cereals or cereal products (for example, corn flakes); cereals (other than maize (corn)) in grain form or in the form of flakes or other worked grains (except flour and meal), pre- cooked, or otherwise prepared, not else where specified or included   Manufacture: — from materials not classified within heading 1806; — in which all the cereals and flour (except durum wheat and its derivates) used must be wholly obtained;      — in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   1905   Bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits and other bakers' wares, whether or not containing cocoa; communion wafers, empty cachets of a kind suitable for pharmaceutical use, sealing wafers, rice paper and similar products   Manufacture from materials of any heading except those of Chapter 11   ex Chapter 20   Preparations of vegetables, fruit, nuts or other parts of plants; except for:   Manufacture in which all the fruit, nuts or vegetables used must be wholly obtained     ex 2001   Yams, sweet potatoes and similar edible parts of plants containing 5 % or more by weight of starch, prepared or pre served by vinegar or acetic acid   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   ex 2004 and ex 2005   Potatoes in the form of flour, meal or flakes, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   2006   Vegetables, fruit, nuts, fruit-peel and other parts of plants, preserved by sugar (drained, glacé or  crystallised)   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  2007  Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, fruit or nut purée and fruit or nut pastes, being cooked preparations, whether or not containing added sugar or other   sweetening matter  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 2008   – Nuts, not containing added sugar or spirit   Manufacture in which the value of the originating nuts and oil seeds of headings 0801, 0802 and 1202 to 1207 used exceeds 60 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Peanut butter; mixtures based on cereals; palm hearts; maize (corn)   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     – Other except for fruit and nuts cooked otherwise than by steaming or boiling in water, not containing added sugar, frozen   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   2009   Fruit juices (including grape must) and vegetable juices, unfermented and not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are  classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 21   Miscellaneous edible preparations; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     2101   Extracts, essences and concentrates, of coffee, tea or maté and preparations with a basis of these products or with a basis of coffee, tea or maté; roasted chicory and other roasted coffee substitutes, and extracts, essences and concentrates thereof   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are  classified within a heading other than that of the product; — all the chicory used must be wholly obtained  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  2103  Sauces and preparations therefore; mixed condiments and mixed seasonings; mustard flour and meal and prepared mustard:         – Sauces and preparations therefore; mixed condiments and mixed seasonings   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, mustard flour or meal or prepared mustard may be used     – Mustard   flour   and   meal  and  prepared mustard   Manufacture from materials of any heading   ex 2104   Soups and broths and preparations therefore   Manufacture from materials of any heading except prepared or preserved vegetables of headings 2002 to 2005   2106   Food preparations not elsewhere specified or included   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 22   Beverages, spirits and vinegar; except for:   Manufacture in which:        — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — all the grapes or any material derived from grapes used must be wholly obtained   2202   Waters, including mineral waters and aerated waters, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter or flavoured, and other non-alcoholic beverages, not including fruit or vegetable juices of heading 2009   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product;      — any fruit juice used (except for pineapple, lime and grapefruit juices) must already be originating  S heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  2207  Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume of 80 % vol. or higher; ethyl alcohol and other spirits, denatured, of any strength.  Manufacture: — sing materials not classified in heading 2207 or 2208, — in which all the grapes or any materials derived from grapes used must be wholly obtained or if all the other materials used are already originating, arrack may be used up to a limit of 5 % by volume     2208   Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by  volume  of  less than 80 % vol.; spirits, liqueurs and other spirituous beverages   Manufacture: — from materials not classified within   heading     2207 or 2208, — in which all the grapes or any material derived from grapes used must be wholly obtained or if all the other materials used are already originating, arrack may be used up to a limit of 5 % by volume   ex Chapter 23   Residues and waste from the food industries; prepared animal fodder; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 2301   Whale meal; flours, meals and pellets of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates, unfit for human consumption   Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapters 2 and 3 used must be wholly obtained   ex 2303   Residues from the manufacture of starch from maize (excluding concentrated steeping liquors), of a protein content, calculated on the dry product, exceeding 40 % by weight   Manufacture in which all the maize used must be wholly obtained   ex 2306   Oil cake and other solid residues resulting from the extraction of  olive oil, containing more than 3 % of olive oil   Manufacture in which all the olives used must be wholly obtained   2309   Preparations of a kind used in animal feeding   Manufacture in which: — all the cereals, sugar or molasses, meat or milk used must already be originating;      — all  the  materials  of  Chapter 3 used  must  be  wholly  obtained  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter     2402      ex 2403  24  Tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes; except for:    Cigars, cheroots, cigarillos and cigarettes, of tobacco or of tobacco substitutes      Smoking tobacco  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 24 used must be wholly obtained   Manufacture in which at least 70 % by weight of the unmanufactured tobacco or tobacco refuse of heading 2401 used must already be originating   Manufacture in which at least 70 % by weight of the unmanufactured tobacco or tobacco refuse of heading 2401 used must already be originating     ex Chapter   25   Salt;  s  ulphur; earth s and stone; plastering materials, lime and cement; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 2504   Natural    crystalline graphite, with enriched carbon content, and ground purified      Enriching of the carbon content, purifying and grinding of crude crystalline graphite   ex 2515   Marble, merely cut, by sawing or other wise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape, of a thickness not exceeding 25 cm   Cutting, by sawing or otherwise, of marble (even if already sawn) of a thickness exceeding 25 cm   ex 2516   Granite, porphyry, basalt, sandstone and other monumental and building stone, merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape, of a thickness    not   exceeding 25 cm   Cutting, by sawing or otherwise, of stone (even if already sawn) of a thickness exceeding 25 cm   ex 2518   Calcined dolomite   Calcinations of dolomite not calcined   ex 2519   Crushed natural magnesium carbonate (magnetite), in hermetically-sealed containers, and magnesium oxide, whether or not pure, other than fused magnesia or dead-burned (sintered) magnesia   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, natural  magnesium carbonate (magnetite) may be used  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 2520  Plasters specially prepared for dentistry  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used  does  not     exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 2524   Natural asbestos fibres   Manufacture from asbestos concentrate   ex 2525   Mica powder   Grinding of mica or mica waste   ex 2530   Earth colours, calcined or powdered   Calcinations or grinding of earth colours   Chapter 26   Ores, slag and ash   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex Chapter 27   Mineral fuels, mineral oils and products of their distillation; bituminous sub stances; mineral waxes; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 2707   Oils in which the weight of the aromatic constituents exceeds that of the non-aromatic constituents, being oils similar to mineral oils obtained by distillation of high temperature coal tar, of which more than 65 % by volume distils at a temperature of up to 250 °C (including mixtures of petroleum spirit and benzole), for use as power or heating fuels   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (1) or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product   ex 2709   Crude oils obtained from bituminous minerals   Destructive distillation of bituminous materials   2710   Petroleum oils and oils obtained from  bituminous materials, other than crude; preparations not elsewhere specified or included, containing by weight 70 % or more of petroleum oils or of oils obtained from bituminous materials, these oils being the basic constituents of the preparations   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (2) or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  2711  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (2)        or      Other operations in which all the      materials used are classified within      a heading other than that of the      product. However, materials classified      within the same heading      may be used provided their value      does not exceed 50 % of the ex-      works price of the product   2712   Petroleum jelly; paraffin wax, microcrystalline petroleum wax, slack wax, ozokerite, lignite wax, peat wax, other mineral waxes and similar products obtained by synthesis or by other processes, whether or not coloured   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (2)  or  Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within      a heading other than that of the      product. However, materials classified        within the same heading      may be used provided their value      does not exceed 50 % of the ex-      works price of the product   2713   Petroleum coke, petroleum bitumen and other residues of petroleum oils or of oils obtained from bituminous materials   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (1)  or      Other operations in which all the      materials used are classified within      a heading other than that of the      product. However, materials classified      within the same heading      may be used provided their value      does not exceed 50 % of the ex-      works price of the product   2714   Bitumen and asphalt, natural; bituminous or oil shale and tar sands; asphaltites and asphaltic rocks   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (1) or      Other operations in which all the      materials used are classified within      a heading other than that of the      product. However, materials classified      within the same heading      may be used provided their value      does not exceed 50 % of the ex-      works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  2715  Bituminous mixtures based on natural asphalt, on natural bitumen, on petroleum bitumen, on mineral tar or on mineral tar pitch (for example, bituminous mastics, cut-backs)  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (1) or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product     ex Chapter 28   Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorganic compounds of precious metals, of rare- earth metals, of radioactive elements or of isotopes; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 2805   ‘Mischmetall’   Manufacture by electrolytic or thermal treatment in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product     ex 2811   Sulphur trioxide   Manufacture from sulphur dioxide   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 2833   Aluminium sulphate   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials        used       does  not  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 2840   Sodium perborate   Manufacture from disodium tetra borate pentahydrate   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 29   Organic chemicals; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 2901  Acyclic hydrocarbons for use as power or heating fuels  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (1)        or        Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product     ex 2902   Cyclanes and cyclenes (other than azulenes), benzene, toluene, xylenes, for use as power or heating fuels   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (1) or        Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used, provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product     ex 2905   Metal alcoholates of alcohols of this heading and of ethanol   Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 2905. However, metal alcoholates of this heading may be used, provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   2915   Saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids and their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2915 and 2916 used may not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 2932   – Internal ethers and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of  heading 2909 used may not  exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Cyclic acetals and internal hemiacetals and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives   Manufacture from materials of any heading   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  2933  Heterocyclic compounds with nitrogen hetero-atom(s) only  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932 and 2933 used may not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   2934   Nucleic acids and their salts; other het erocyclic compounds   Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings 2932, 2933 and 2934 used may not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 30   Pharmaceutical products; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their    value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product     3002   Human blood; animal blood prepared for therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic uses; antisera and other blood         fractions and modified immunological products, whether or not obtained by means of biotechnological processes; vaccines, toxins, cultures of micro-organisms (excluding yeasts) and similar products:       – Products consisting of two or more constituents which have been mixed together for therapeutic or prophylactic uses or unmixed products for these uses, put up in measured doses or in forms or packing's for retail sale   Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value       does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Other:       – – human blood   Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)    – – animal  blood  prepared  for  therapeutic or prophylactic uses       – – blood fractions other than antisera, haemoglobin, blood globulins and serum globulins      – – haemoglobin, blood globulins and serum globulins       – – other        Medicaments (excluding goods of heading 3002, 3005 or 3006):   – Obtained from amikacin of heading 2941       – Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product       Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product   3003 and 3004       Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials of heading 3003 or 3004 may be used provided their value, taken together, does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     Manufacture in which:    — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. How ever, materials of heading 3003 or 3004 may be used provided their value, taken together, does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product;  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 31   Fertilisers; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. How ever, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 3105     Mineral or chemical fertilisers containing two or three of the fertilising elements nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium; other fertilisers; goods of this Chapter, in tablets or similar forms or in packages of a gross weight not exceeding 10 kg, except for:     Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    — sodium nitrate      — calcium cyanamide      — potassium sulphate      — magnesium potassium sulphate     ex Chapter 32   Tanning or dyeing extracts; tannins and their derivatives; dyes, pigments and other colouring matter; paints and varnishes; putty and other mastics; inks; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3201   Tannins and their salts, ethers, esters and other derivatives   Manufacture from tanning extracts of vegetable origin   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   3205   Colour lakes; preparations as specified in Note 3 to this Chapter based on colour lakes (3)   Manufacture from materials of any heading,  except  headings 3203, 3204 and 3205. How ever, materials from heading 3205 may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 33  Essential oils and resinoids; perfumery, cosmetic or toilet preparations; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   3301   Essential oils (terpeneless or not), including concretes and absolutes; resinoids; extracted oleoresins; concentrates of essential oils in fats, in fixed oils, in waxes or the like, obtained by effleurage or maceration; terpenic by-products of the deterpenation of essential oils; aqueous distillates  and  aqueous solutions of essential oils   Manufacture from materials of any heading, including materials of a different ‘group’ (4) in this heading. However, materials of the same group may be used, pro vided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 34   Soap, organic surface-active agents, washing preparations, lubricating preparations, artificial waxes, prepared waxes, polishing or scouring preparations, candles and similar articles, model ling pastes, ‘dental waxes’ and dental preparations  with  a  basis  of  plaster; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3403   Lubricating preparations containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals, provided they represent less than 70 % by weight   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (1) or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product     3404   Artificial waxes and prepared waxes:         – With a basis of paraffin, petroleum waxes, waxes obtained from bituminous minerals, slack wax or scale wax   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)    – Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except: — hydrogenated oils having the character of waxes of heading 1516;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    — fatty acids not chemically de fined or industrial fatty alcohols having the character of waxes of heading 3823;      — materials of heading 3404      However, these materials may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 35    Albuminoidal substances; modified starches; glues; enzymes; except for:    Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   3505   Dextrins and other modified starches (for example, pregelatinised or esterified starches); glues based on starches, or on dextrins or other modified starches:         – Starch ethers and esters   Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading 3505   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Other   Manufacture from materials of any heading, except those of heading 1108   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 3507    Prepared enzymes not elsewhere specified or included    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does  not    exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Chapter 36  Explosives; pyrotechnic products; matches; pyrophoric alloys; certain combustible preparations  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 37   Photographic or cinematographic goods; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   3701   Photographic plates and film in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, of any material other than paper, paperboard or textiles; instant print film in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, whether or not in packs:         – Instant print film for colour   photography, in packs   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than heading 3701 or 3702. However, materials from heading 3702 may be used pro vided their value does not  exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Other   Manufacture in which all the materials used are  classified within a heading other than heading 3701 or 3702. However, materials from headings 3701 and 3702 may be used provided their value taken together, does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   3702   Photographic film in rolls, sensitised, un exposed, of any material other than pa per, paperboard or textiles; instant print film in rolls, sensitised, unexposed   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than heading 3701 or 3702   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  3704  Photographic plates, film paper, paper board and textiles, exposed but not developed  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than headings 3701 to 3704  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 38   Miscellaneous chemical products; except for:         – Colloidal graphite in suspension in oil and semi colloidal graphite; carbonaceous pastes for electrodes    – Graphite in paste form, being a  mixture of more than 30 % by weight of graphite with mineral oils    Refined tall oil      Spirits of sulphate turpentine, purified      Ester gums      Wood pitch (wood tar pitch)   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their   value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3801   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does   not     exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product       Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading 3403 used does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3803   Refining of crude tall oil   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3805   Purification by distillation or re fining of raw spirits of sulphate turpentine   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3806   Manufacture from resin acids   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3807   Distillation of wood tar   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  3808  Insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, anti-sprouting products and  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used    does   not       plant-growth regulators, disinfectants  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price    and similar products, put up in forms or packings  for retail sale or as preparations  of the products    or articles (for example, sulphur-treated      bands, wicks and candles, and fly-papers)     3809   Finishing agents, dye carriers to                    accelerate the dyeing  or  fixing  of  dyestuffs  and   Manufacture in which the value of all  the materials     used     does   not  exceed    other  products  and  preparations  (for    50 % of the ex-works price    example, dressings and mordants), of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or  of the products    like industries, not elsewhere specified or      included     3810   Pickling preparations for metal surfaces; fluxes and other auxiliary preparations   Manufacture in which the value of all         the materials    used     does  not     for soldering, brazing or welding; soldering,  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price    brazing or welding powders and pastes consisting of metal and other materials:  of the products    preparations of a kind used as      cores or coatings for welding electrodes      or rods     3811   Anti-knock preparations, oxidation inhibitors, gum inhibitors, viscosity improvers,      anti-corrosive preparations and      other prepared additives, for mineral oils      (including gasoline) or for other liquids      used for the same purposes as mineral      oils:       – Prepared additives for lubricating oil,   Manufacture in which the value of    containing petroleum oils or oils obtained  all the materials of heading 3811    from bituminous minerals  used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does  not       exceed 50 % of the ex-works price      of the product   3812   Prepared rubber accelerators; compound plasticizers for rubber or plastics, not   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials       used    does    not   exceed    elsewhere specified or included; anti-oxidising  50 % of the ex-works price    preparations and other compound  of the product    stabilisers for rubber or plastics     HS  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  3813  Preparations and charges for fire-extinguishers; charged fire-extinguishing grenades  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does   not  exceed         50 % of the ex-works price of the product   3814   Organic composite solvents and thinners, not elsewhere specified or included;    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does   not     prepared paint or vanish removers  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   3818   Chemical elements doped for use in electronics, in the form of discs, wafers or   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used    does  not  exceed    similar forms; chemical compounds  50 % of the ex-works price    doped for use in electronics  of the product   3819   Hydraulic brake fluids and other pre pared liquids for hydraulic transmission,   Manufacture in which the value of all  the materials  used   does  not  exceed     not containing or containing less  50 % of the ex-works price    than 70 % by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous  of the product    minerals     3820   Anti-freezing preparations and prepared          de-icing fluids   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does  not     exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product         3822   Diagnostic or laboratory reagents on a backing and prepared diagnostic or laboratory   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does  not  exceed    reagents, whether or not on a  50 % of the ex-works price    backing, other than those of heading 3002 or 3006  of the product   3823   Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids; acid oils from refining; industrial fatty      alcohols.       – Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids,   Manufacture in which all the materials    acid oils from refining  used are classified within a heading other than that of the product          – Industrial fatty alcohols  Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading 3823   HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  3824  Prepared binders for foundry moulds or cores; chemical products and preparations of the chemical or allied industries (including those consisting of mixtures of natural products), not elsewhere specified or included; residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not else where specified or included:         – The following of this heading:  – – Prepared binders for foundry moulds or cores based on natural resinous products  – – Naphthenic acids, their water insoluble salts and their esters   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    – – Sorbitol  other  than  that  of  heading 2905        – – Petroleum sulphonates, excluding petroleum sulphonates of alkali metals, of ammonium or of ethanol amines; thiophenated sulphonic acids of oils obtained from bituminous minerals, and their salts        – – Ion exchangers        – – Getters for vacuum tubes        – – Alkaline iron oxide for the purification of gas        – – Ammoniacal gas liquors and spent oxide produced in coal gas purification        – – Sulphonaphthenic acids, their water insoluble salts and their esters        – – Fusel oil and Dippel's oil        – – Mixtures of salts having different anions        – – Copying pastes with a basis of gelatine, whether or not on a paper or textile backing         – Other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does  not   exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  3901 to 3915  Plastics in primary forms, waste, parings and scrap, of plastic; except for headings ex 3907 and 3912 for which the rules are set out below:         – Addition homopolymerisation products in which a single monomer con tributes more than 99 % by weight to the total polymer content   Manufacture in which: — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product (5)       – Other   Manufacture in which the value of the materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product (5)   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3907   – Copolymer, made from polycarbonate and acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene co polymer (ABS)   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product (5)       – Polyester   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product and/or manufacture from polycarbonate of tetrabromo-(bisphenol A)     3912   Cellulose and its chemical derivatives, not elsewhere specified or included, in primary forms   Manufacture in which the value of any materials classified in the same heading as the product does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     3916 to 3921   Semi-manufactures and articles of plastics; except for  headings  ex  3916, ex 3917, ex 3920 and ex 3921, for which the rules are set out below:         – Flat products, further worked than only surface-worked or cut into forms other than rectangular (including square); other products, further worked than only surface-worked   Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product   HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)    – Other:   – – Addition homopolymerisation              products  in which a single monomer contributes more than 99 % by weight to the total polymer content        – – Other     Profile shapes and tubes           – Ionomer sheet or film      – Sheets of regenerated cellulose, polyamides or polyethylene     Foils of plastic, metallised      Articles of plastics     Manufacture in which: — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product;     Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    — the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product (5)       Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product (5)   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 3916 and ex 3917   Manufacture in which: — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    — the value of any materials classified within the same heading as the product does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 3920   Manufacture from a thermoplastic partial salt which is a copolymer of ethylene and metacrylic acid partly neutralised with metal ions, mainly zinc and sodium   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product     Manufacture in which the value of any materials classified in the same heading as the product does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 3921   Manufacture from highly transparent polyester foils with a thickness of less than 23 micron (6)   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product   3922 to 3926   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials      used   does  not     exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 40  Rubber     and   articles   thereof; except  for:     Laminated slabs of crepe rubber for shoes   Compounded rubber, unvulcanised, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip    Retreaded or used pneumatic tyres of rubber; solid or cushion tyres, inter changeable tyre treads and tyre flaps, of rubber:   – Retreaded pneumatic, solid or cushion tyres, of rubber   – Other    Articles of hard rubber  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 4001   Lamination of sheets of natural rubber   4005   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used, except natural rubber, does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   4012        Retreading of used tyres     Manufacture from materials of any heading, except those of heading 4011 or 4012   ex 4017   Manufacture from hard rubber   ex Chapter 41   Raw hides and skins (other than fur skins) and leather; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 4102   Raw skins of sheep or lambs, without wool on   Removal of wool from sheep or lamb skins, with wool on   4104 to 4107   Leather, without hair or wool, other than leather of heading 4108 or 4109  Retanning of pre-tanned leather or      Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   4109   Patent leather and patent laminated leather; metallised leather   Manufacture from leather of headings 4104 to 4107 provided its value does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Chapter 42  Articles of leather; saddlery and harness; travel goods, handbags and similar containers; articles of animal gut (other than silk worm gut)  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex Chapter 43   Furskins and artificial fur; manufactures thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 4302   Tanned or dressed furskins, assembled:       – Plates, crosses and similar forms   Bleaching or dyeing, in addition to cutting and assembly of non-assembled tanned or dressed fur skins     – Other   Manufacture from non-assembled, tanned or dressed furskins   4303   Articles of apparel, clothing accessories and other articles of furskin   Manufacture from non-assembled tanned or dressed furskins of heading 4302   ex Chapter 44   Wood and articles of wood; wood charcoal; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 4403   Wood roughly squared   Manufacture from wood in the rough, whether or not stripped of its bark or merely roughed down   ex 4407   Wood sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, of a thickness exceeding 6 mm, planed, sanded or finger-jointed   Planning, sanding or finger-jointing   ex 4408   Veneer sheets and sheets for plywood, of a thickness not exceeding 6 mm,      spliced, and other wood sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled of a thickness not exceeding 6 mm, planed, sanded or finger- jointed   Splicing, planning, sanding or finger-jointing  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 4409  Wood continuously shaped along any of its edges or faces, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed:   – Sanded or finger-jointed   – Beadings and mouldings   Beadings and mouldings, including moulded skirting and other moulded boards   Packing cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar packings, of wood   Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and other coopers' products and parts thereof, of wood    – Builders' joinery and carpentry of wood      – Beadings and mouldings   Match splints; wooden pegs or pins for footwear          Sanding or finger-jointing     Beading or moulding   ex 4410 to ex 4413   Beading or moulding   ex 4415   Manufacture from boards not cut to size   ex 4416   Manufacture from riven staves, not further worked than sawn on the two principal surfaces   ex 4418   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, cellular wood panels, shingles and shakes may be used     Beading or moulding   ex 4421   Manufacture from wood of any heading except drawn wood of heading 4409   ex Chapter 45   Cork and articles of cork; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     4503   Articles of natural cork   Manufacture from cork of heading 4501   Chapter 46   Manufactures of straw, of esparto or of other plaiting materials; basket ware and wickerwork   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Chapter 47  Pulp of wood or of other fibrous cellulosic material; recovered (waste and scrap) paper or paperboard  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex Chapter 48   Paper and paperboard; articles of paper pulp, of paper or of paperboard; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 4811   Paper and paperboard, ruled, lined or squared only   Manufacture from paper-making materials of Chapter 47   4816   Carbon paper, self-copy paper and other copying or transfer papers (other than those of heading 4809), duplicator stencils and offset plates, of paper, whether or not put up in boxes   Manufacture from paper-making materials of Chapter 47   4817   Envelopes, letter cards, plain postcards and correspondence cards, of paper or paperboard; boxes, pouches, wallets and writing compendiums, of paper or paperboard, containing an assortment of paper stationery   Manufacturing in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 4818   Toilet paper   Manufacture from paper-making materials of Chapter 47   ex 4819   Cartons, boxes, cases, bags and other packing containers, of paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding or webs of cellulose fibres   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 4820   Letter pads   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used   does   not  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 4823   Other paper, paperboard, cellulose wad ding and webs of cellulose fibres, cut to size or shape   Manufacture from paper-making materials of Chapter 47  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 49  Printed books, newspapers, pictures and other products of the printing industry; manuscripts, typescripts and plans; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     4909   Printed or illustrated postcards; printed cards bearing personal greetings, messages or announcements, whether or not illustrated, with or without envelopes or trimmings   Manufacture from materials not classified  within  heading  4909 or 4911   4910   Calendars of any kind, printed, including calendar blocks:       – Calendars of the ‘perpetual’ type or with replaceable blocks mounted on bases other than paper or paperboard   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Other   Manufacture from materials not classified in heading 4909 or 4911   ex Chapter 50   Silk; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 5003   Silk waste (including cocoons unsuitable for reeling, yarn waste and garneted stock), carded or combed   Carding or combing of silk waste   5004 to ex 5006   Silk yarn and yarn spun from silk waste   Manufacture from (7): — raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise pre pared for spinning,      — other natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise pre pared for spinning,      — chemical materials or textile pulp, or      — paper-making materials  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  5007  Woven fabrics of silk or of silk waste:  Manufacture from yarn (7)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the un printed fabric used does not  exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 51    Wool, fine or coarse animal hair; horse hair yarn and woven fabric; except for:    Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product      5106 to 5110    Yarn of wool, of fine or coarse animal hair or of horsehair    Manufacture from (7): — raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise pre pared for spinning,        — natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning,        — chemical materials or textile pulp, or        — paper-making materials      5111 to 5113    Woven fabrics of wool, of fine or coarse animal hair or of horsehair:    Manufacture from yarn (7)    Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the un printed fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 52    Cotton; except for:    Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  5204 to 5207  Yarn and thread of cotton  Manufacture from (7):  — raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise pre pared for spinning,  — natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning,  — chemical materials or textile pulp, or  — paper-making materials     Manufacture from yarn (7)           5208 to 5212         Woven fabrics of cotton:         Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the un printed fabric used does not  exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 53    Other vegetable textile fibres; paper yarn and woven fabrics of paper yarn; except for:    Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product      5306 to 5308    Yarn of other vegetable textile fibres; pa per yarn    Manufacture from (7):  — raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise pre pared for spinning,      — natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning,      — chemical materials or textile pulp, or      — paper-making materials  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  5309 to  Woven fabrics of other vegetable textile  Manufacture from yarn (7)           Manufacture from (7): — raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise pre pared for spinning, — natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, — chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials      Manufacture from yarn (7)           Manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp    Manufacture from (7): — raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise pre pared for spinning, — natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning,  Printing accompanied by at least  5311  fibres; woven fabrics of paper yarn:  two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching,      mercerising, heat setting, raising,      calendaring, shrink resistance                processing, permanent finishing,       decatising, impregnating, mending and      burling) where the value of the un      printed fabric used does not       exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price      of the product  5401 to 5406  Yarn, monofilament and thread of man- made filaments                5407 and        Woven fabrics of man-made filament        Printing accompanied by at least  5408  yarn:  two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching,      mercerising, heat setting, raising,      calendaring, shrink resistance       processing, permanent finishing,       decatising, impregnating, mending and      burling) where the value of the un      printed fabric used does not       exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price      of the product  5501 to 5507  Man-made staple fibres    5508 to 5511  Yarn and sewing thread of man-made staple fibres                      HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)      5512 to 5516      Woven fabrics of man-made staple fibres:  — chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials Manufacture from yarn (7)      Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the un printed fabric used does not  exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 56   Wadding, felt and non-wovens; special yarns; twine, cordage, ropes and cables and articles thereof; except for:   Manufacture from (7): — coir yarn, — natural fibres, — chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper making materials       Manufacture from (7): — natural fibres, — chemical materials or textile pulp   Manufacture from (7): — natural fibres, — man-made staple fibres, or — chemical materials or textile pulp          Manufacture from rubber thread or cord, not textile covered       5602     Felt, whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated:     – Needle loom felt      – Other     5604     Rubber thread and cord, textile covered; textile yarn, and strip and the like of heading 5404 or 5405, impregnated, coated, covered or sheathed with rubber or plastics:     – Rubber thread and cord, textile covered  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)    – Other  Manufacture from (7): — natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise processed for spinning, — chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials   Manufacture from (7): — natural fibres, — man-made staple fibres not carded or combed or other wise processed for spinning, — chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials   Manufacture from (7): — natural fibres, — man-made staple fibres not carded or combed or other wise processed for spinning, — chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials        5605      Metallised yarn, whether or not gimped, being textile yarn, or strip or the like of heading 5404 or 5405, combined with metal in the form of thread, strip or powder or covered with metal     5606     Gimped yarn, and strip and the like of heading 5404 or 5405, gimped (other than those of heading 5605 and gimped horsehair yarn); chenille yarn (including flock chenille yarn; loop wale-yarn   Chapter 57   Carpets and other textile floor coverings:      Manufacture from (7): — natural fibres, or — chemical materials or textile pulp However jute fabric may be used as backing   Manufacture from (7): — natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise processed for spinning, or — chemical materials or textile pulp   Manufacture from yarn (7). However jute fabric may be used as backing       – Of needle loom felt       – Of other felt       – Other  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 58  Special woven fabrics; tufted textile fabrics; lace; tapestries; trimmings; embroidery; except for:  Manufacture from yarn (7)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the un printed fabric used does not -exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product   5805   Hand-woven tapestries of the types gobelins, Flanders, aubusson, Beauvais and the like, and needle-worked tapestries (for example, petit point, cross stitch), whether or not made up   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     5810   Embroidery in the piece, in strips or in motifs   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not         exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product      5901    Textile fabrics coated with gum or amylaceous substances, of a kind used for the outer covers of books or the like; tracing cloth; prepared painting canvas; buckram and similar stiffened textile fabrics  of a kind used for hat foundations    Manufacture from yarn     5902   Tyre  cord fabric of high tenacity yarn of nylon or other polyamides, polyesters or viscose rayon:   Manufacture from yarn     5903   Textile fabrics impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with plastics, other than those of heading 5902   Manufacture from yarn   Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, razing, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the un printed fabric used does not            exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  5904  Linoleum, whether or not cut to shape; floor coverings consisting of a coating or  Manufacture from yarn (7)      covering applied on a textile backing,        whether or not cut to shape       5905   Textile wall coverings:   Manufacture from yarn   Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing         operations (such as scouring, bleaching,        mercerising, heat setting, raising,        calendaring, shrink resistance         processing, permanent finishing,         decatising, impregnating, mending and        burling) where the value of the un        printed fabric used does not         exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price        of the product   5906   Rubberised textile fabrics, other than those of heading 5902:   Manufacture from yarn     5907   Textile fabrics otherwise impregnated, coated or covered; painted canvas being   Manufacture from yarn   Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations    theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths or    (such as scouring, bleaching,    the like    mercerising, heat setting, razing,  calendaring, shrink resistance         processing, permanent finishing,         decatising, impregnating, mending and        burling) where the value of the un        printed fabric used does not         exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price        of the product   5908   Textile wicks, woven, plaited or knitted, for lamps, stoves, lighters, candles or the        like; incandescent gas mantles and tubular        knitted gas mantle fabric therefore,        whether or not impregnated:         – Incandescent gas mantles, impregnated   Manufacture from tubular knitted        gas mantle fabric       – Other   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a        heading other than that of the        product     5909 to   Textile articles of a kind suitable for       5911  industrial use:         – Polishing  discs  or  rings  other  than  of   Manufacture from yarn or waste      felt of heading 5911  fabrics or rags of heading 6310     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)    (3) or  (4)    – Woven fabrics, of a kind commonly used in papermaking or other technical uses, felted or not, whether or not impregnated or coated, tubular or endless with single or multiple warp and/or weft, or flat woven with multiple warp and/or weft of heading 5911  Manufacture from yarn (7):     – Other   Manufacture from yarn (7):   Chapter 60   Knitted or crocheted fabrics   Manufacture from yarn (7):     Chapter 61   Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, knitted or crocheted:         – Obtained by sewing together or other wise assembling, two or more pieces of knitted or crocheted fabric which have been either cut to form or obtained directly to form   Manufacture from fabric     – Other   Manufacture from yarn (7):   ex Chapter 62   Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, not knitted or crocheted; except for:   Manufacture from fabric     6213 and 6214   Handkerchiefs, shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like:         – Embroidered   Manufacture from yarn (7) (8)   Manufacture from unembroidered fabric provided  the  value of the un embroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product (7)     – Other   Manufacture from yarn (7) (8)   Making up followed by printing accompanied by at least two  preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the un printed goods of headings 6213 and 6214 used does  not  exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product   HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  6217  Other made-up clothing accessories; parts of garments or of clothing accessories, other than those of heading 6212:       Manufacture from yarn (7)      Manufacture from yarn (7)      Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product       – Embroidered   Manufacture from unembroidered fabric provided the value of the un embroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product (7)     – Fire-resistant equipment of fabric covered with  foil  of  aluminised  polyester   Manufacture from uncoated fabric provided the value of the uncoated fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product (7)     – Interlinings for collars and cuffs, cut out     ex Chapter 63   Other made-up textile articles; sets; worn clothing and worn textile articles; rags; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product      Manufacture from (7): — fibres, or — chemical materials or textile pulp     Manufacture from yarn (8) (9)       Manufacture from yarn (7) (8)     6301 to 6304   Blankets, travelling rugs, bed linen, etc.; curtains etc.; other furnishing articles:       – Of felt, of non-wovens        – Other:       – – Embroidered   Manufacture from unembroidered fabric (other than knitted or crocheted) provided the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     – – Other     HS heading No  Description of  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  6305  Sacks and bags, of a kind used for the packing of goods  Manufacture from yarn (7):     6306   Tarpaulins,  awnings  and  sunblinds; tents; sails for boats, sailboards or land craft;   Manufacture from fabric    camping goods:     6307   Other made-up articles, including dress patterns   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does  not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      of the product   6308   Sets consisting of woven fabric and yarn, whether or not with accessories, for   Each item in the set must satisfy the rule which would apply to it if    making up into rugs, tapestries,   it were not included in the set.    embroidered tablecloths or serviettes, or  However, non-originating articles    similar textile articles, put up in packings  may be incorporated provided    for retail sale  their  total value does not  exceed 25 % of the ex-works price      of the set   ex Chapter 64   Footwear, gaiters and the like; except for:   Manufacture from materials of any heading except for assemblies of uppers affixed to inner soles or to other sole components      of   heading 6406     6406   Parts of footwear (including uppers whether or not attached to soles other than outer soles); removable in-soles, heel cushions and similar articles; gaiters, leggings and similar articles, and parts thereof   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   ex Chapter 65   Headgear and parts thereof, except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     6503   Felt hats and other felt headgear, made from the hat bodies, hoods or plateaux of heading 6501, whether or not lined or trimmed   Manufacture from yarn or textile fibres (8)   6505   Hats and other headgear, knitted or crocheted, or made up from lace, felt or other textile fabric, in the piece (but not in strips), whether or not lined or trimmed; hair-nets of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed   Manufacture from yarn or textile fibres (8)  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter  66  Umbrellas, sun umbrellas, walking-sticks, seat-sticks, whips, riding-crops, and parts thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     6601   Umbrellas and sun umbrellas (including walking-stick umbrellas, garden umbrellas and similar umbrellas)   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does  not  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   Chapter 67   Prepared feathers and down and articles made of feathers or of down; artificial flowers; articles of human hair   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex Chapter   68   Articles of stone, plaster, cement, asbestos, mica or similar materials; except for:   Manufacture in which all the ma terials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 6803   Articles of slate or of agglomerated slate   Manufacture from worked slate   ex 6812   Articles of asbestos; articles of mixtures with a basis of asbestos or of mixtures with a basis of asbestos and magnesium carbonate   Manufacture any heading   from   materials   of   ex 6814   Articles of mica, including agglomerated or reconstituted mica, on a support of paper, paperboard or other materials   Manufacture from worked mica (including agglomerated or reconstituted mica)   Chapter 69   Ceramic products   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex Chapter   70   Glass and glassware; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 7003, ex 7004 and ex 7005   Glass with a non-reflecting layer   Manufacture heading 7001   from   materials   of  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  7006  Glass of heading 7003, 7004 or 7005, bent, edge worked, engraved, drilled,         enamelled or otherwise worked, but not      framed or fitted with other materials:       – glass plate substrate coated with di   Manufacture from non-coated    electric thin film, semi conductor  glass plate substrate of heading    grade, in accordance with SEMII standards (10)  7006     – other   Manufacture from materials of heading 7001   7007   Safety glass, consisting of toughened (tempered) or laminated glass   Manufacture from materials of heading 7001   7008   Multiple-walled insulating units of glass   Manufacture from materials of heading 7001   7009   Glass mirrors, whether or not framed, including rear-view mirrors   Manufacture from materials of heading 7001   7010   Carboys, bottles, flasks, jars, pots, phials, ampoules and other containers, of glass,   Manufacture  in  which  all  the  materials used are classified within a    of a kind used for the conveyance or  heading other than that of the    packing of goods; preserving jars of glass; stoppers, lids and other closures, of glass  product or Cutting of glassware, provided the      value of the uncut glassware does      not exceed 50 % of the ex-works      price of the product   7013   Glassware of a kind used for table, kitchen, toilet, office, indoor decoration   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a    or similar purposes (other than that of  heading other than that of the    heading 7010 or 7018)  product      or      Cutting of glassware, provided the      value of the uncut glassware does      not exceed 50 % of the ex-works      price of the product      or      Hand-decoration (with the       exception of silk-screen printing) of      hand-blown glassware, provided      the value of the hand-blown       glassware does not exceed 50 % of the      ex-works price of the product  HS  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 7019  Articles (other than yarn) of glass fibres  Manufacture from: — uncoloured slivers, rovings, yarn or chopped strands, or — glass wool     ex Chapter 71   Natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi precious stones, precious metals, metals clad with precious metal, and articles thereof; imitation jewellery; coin; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 7101   Natural or cultured pearls, graded and temporarily strung for convenience of transport   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does  not   exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 7102, ex 7103 and ex 7104   Worked precious or semi precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed)   Manufacture from unworked precious or semi precious stones   7106, 7108 and 7110   Precious metals:      – Unwrought  Manufacture from materials not classified within heading 7106, 7108 or 7110      or      Electrolytic, thermal or chemical separation of precious metals of heading 7106, 7108 or 7110      or      Alloying of precious metals of heading 7106, 7108 or 7110 with each other or with base metals     – Semi-manufactured or in powder form   Manufacture from unwrought precious metals   ex 7107, ex 7109 and ex 7111   Metals clad with precious metals, semi manufactured   Manufacture from metals clad with precious metals, unwrought   7116   Articles of natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed)   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used   does  not   exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  7117  Imitation jewellery  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product or Manufacture from base metal parts, not plated or covered with precious metals, provided the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 72   Iron and steel; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a        heading other than that of the      product   7207   Semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel   Manufacture from materials of heading 7201, 7202, 7203, 7204 or 7205   7208 to   Flat-rolled products, bars and rods,    Manufacture from ingots or other  7216  angles,  shapes  and  sections  of  iron  or  non- alloy steel  primary forms of heading 7206   7217   Wire of iron or non-alloy steel   Manufacture from semi finished materials of heading 7207   ex 7218, 7219   Semi-finished products, flat-rolled    Manufacture from ingots  or other  to 7222  products, bars and rods, angles, shapes and sections of stainless steel  primary forms of heading 7218   7223   Wire of stainless steel   Manufacture from semi finished materials of heading 7218   ex 7224, 7225   Semi-finished products, flat-rolled products,   Manufacture from ingots or other  to 7228  hot-rolled bars and rods, in irregularly wound coils; angles, shapes and sections, of other alloy steel; hollow  drill  primary forms of heading 7206, 7218 or 7224    bars and rods, of alloy or non-alloy steel     7229   Wire of other alloy steel   Manufacture from semi finished materials of heading 7224   ex Chapter 73   Articles of iron or steel; except for:   Manufacture in which all the ma terials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 7301  Sheet piling  Manufacture from materials of heading 7206     7302   Railway or tramway track construction materials of iron or steel, the following: rails, checkrails and rack rails, switch blades, crossing frogs, point rods and other crossing pieces, sleepers (cross- ties), fish-plates, chairs, chair wedges, sole pates (base plates), rail clips, bed plates, ties and other material specialised for jointing or fixing rails   Manufacture from materials of heading 7206   7304, 7305 and 7306   Tubes, pipes and hollow profiles, of iron (other than cast iron) or steel   Manufacture from materials of heading 7206, 7207, 7218 or 7224   ex 7307   Tube or pipe fittings of stainless steel (ISO No X5CrNiMo 1712), consisting of several parts   Turning, drilling, reaming, thread ing, deburring and sandblasting of forged blanks the value of which does not exceed 35 % of the ex- works price of the product   7308   Structures (excluding prefabricated building of heading 9406) and parts of structures (for example, bridges and bridge- sections, lock-gates, towers, lattice masts, roofs, roofing frame-works, doors and windows and their frames and thresholds for doors, shutters, balustrades, pillars and columns), of iron or steel; plates, rods, angles, shapes, sections, tubes and the like, prepared for use in structures, of iron or steel   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, welded angles, shapes and sections of heading 7301 may not be used   ex 7315   Skid chain   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading 7315 used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 74   Copper and articles thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are  classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  7401  Copper mattes; cement copper (precipitated copper)     Unrefined copper; copper anodes for electrolytic refining     Refined copper and copper alloys, un wrought:   – Refined copper      – Copper alloys and refined copper containing other elements    Copper waste and scrap      Master alloys of copper  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a      heading other than that of the    product   7402   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a    heading other than that of the    product   7403       Manufacture in which all the     materials    used are classified within a    heading other than that of the    product     Manufacture from refined copper,    unwrought, or waste and scrap of    copper   7404   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a    heading other than that of the    product   7405   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a    heading other than that of the    product   ex Chapter 75   Nickel and articles thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which:        — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   7501 to 7503   Nickel mattes, nickel oxide sinters and other intermediate products of nickel metallurgy; unwrought nickel; nickel waste and scrap   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 76  Aluminium and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;        — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   7601   Unwrought aluminium   Manufacture in which:      — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; and      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the productor      Manufacture by thermal or electrolytic treatment from unalloyed aluminium or waste and scrap of aluminium   7602   Aluminium waste or scrap   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 7616    Aluminium articles other than gauze, cloth, grill, netting, fencing, reinforcing fabric and similar materials (including endless bands) of aluminium wire, and expanded metal of aluminium    Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. How ever, gauze, cloth, grill, net ting, fencing, reinforcing fabric and similar materials (including endless bands) of aluminium wire, or expanded metal of aluminium may be used;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    Chapter 77    Reserved for possible future use in HS      HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 78  Lead and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which:        — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   7801   Unwrought lead:       – Refined lead   Manufacture from ‘bullion’ or ‘work’ lead     – Other   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading 7802 may not be used   7802   Lead waste and scrap   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   ex Chapter 79   Zinc and articles thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which:        — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   7901   Unwrought zinc   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading 7902 may not be used   7902   Zinc waste and scrap   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 80  Tin and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which:        — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   8001   Unwrought tin   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading 8002 may not be used   8002 and 8007   Tin waste and scrap; other articles of tin   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   Chapter 81   Other base metals; cermets; articles thereof:   – Other base metals, wrought; articles thereof     – Other         Manufacture in which the value of all the materials classified within the same heading as the product used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   ex Chapter 82   Tools, implements, cutlery, spoons and forks, of base metal; parts thereof of base metal; except for:   Manufacture in which all the ma terials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     8206   Tools of two or more of the headings 8202 to 8205, put up in sets for retail sale   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than headings 8202 to 8205. However, tools of headings 8202 to 8205 may be incorporated into the set provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the set  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8207  Interchangeable tools for hand tools, whether or not power-operated, or for machine-tools (for example, for pressing, stamping, punching, tapping, threading, drilling, boring, broaching, milling, turning, or screw driving), including dies for drawing or extruding metal, and rock drilling or earth boring tools  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8208   Knives and cutting blades, for machines or for mechanical appliances   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified               within a heading other      than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials      used does not exceed 40 % of      the ex-works price of the      product   ex 8211   Knives with cutting blades, serrated or not (including pruning knives), other   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a    than knives of heading 8208  heading other  than  that of the product. However, knife  blades      and handles of base metal may be      used   8214   Other articles of cutlery (for example, hair clippers, butchers' or kitchen cleavers,    Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a    choppers and mincing knives, paper  heading other than that of the    knives); manicure or pedicure sets and  product. However, handles of base    instruments (including nail files)  metal may be used   8215   Spoons, forks, ladles, skimmers, cake-servers, fish-knives, butter-knives, sugar   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a    tongs and similar kitchen or tableware  heading other  than  that of the product. However, handles   of  base      metal may be used   ex Chapter 83   Miscellaneous articles of base metal; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 8302   Other mountings, fittings and similar articles suitable for buildings, and automatic door closers   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, the other materials of heading 8302 may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 8306  Statuettes and other ornaments, of base metal  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, the other materials of heading 8306 may be used provided their value does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 84   Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 8401   Nuclear fuel elements     Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the final product   8402   Steam or other vapour generating boilers (other than central heating hot water boilers capable also of producing low pressure steam); super heated water boilers   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product   8403 and ex 8404   Central heating boilers other than those of heading 8402 and auxiliary plant for central heating boilers   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than heading 8403 or 8404   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   8406   Steam turbines and other vapour tur bines   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used    does   not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8407   Spark-ignition reciprocating or rotary internal combustion piston engines   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials     used     does     not       exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8408  Compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi diesel  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does  not               Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product             Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product       Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    engines)  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   8409   Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the engines of heading 8407 or   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used  does  not     8408  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   8411   Turbo-jets, turbo propellers and other gas turbines   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified              within a heading other      than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials      used does not exceed 40 % of      the ex-works price of the      product   8412   Other engines and motors   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used     does   not       exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      of the product   ex 8413   Rotary positive displacement pumps   Manufacture in which:      — all the materials used are classified               within a heading other      than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials      used does not exceed 40 % of      the ex-works price of the      product   ex 8414   Industrial fans, blowers and the like   Manufacture in which:      — all the materials used are           classified within a heading other      than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials      used does not exceed 40 % of      the ex-works price of the      product  8415  Air conditioning machines, comprising a motor-driven fan and elements for changing the temperature and humidity, including those machines in which the humidity cannot be separately regulated  Manufacture in which the value of all  the materials  used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product        HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8418  Refrigerators, freezers and other refrigerating or freezing equipment, electric or other; heat pumps other than air conditioning machines of heading 8415  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;        — the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     ex 8419   Machines for wood, paper pulp and  paperboard industries   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 25 % of the ex-works price of the product     8420   Calendaring or other rolling machines, other than for metals or glass, and    cylinders therefor   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 25 % of the ex-works price of the product     8423   Weighing machinery (excluding balances of a sensitivity of 5 cg or better), including weight operated counting or checking machines; weighing machine weights of all kinds   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product   8425 to 8428   Lifting, handling, loading or unloading machinery   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 8431 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product    8429  Self-propelled bulldozers, angle dozers, graders, levellers, scrapers, mechanical shovels, excavators, shovel loaders, tamping machines and road rollers:        – Road rollers   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not      exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product      – Other  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 8431 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product    8430   Other moving, grading, levelling, scraping, excavating, tamping, compacting, extracting or boring machinery, for earth, minerals or ores; pile-drivers and pile-extractors; snow-ploughs and snow- blowers  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product; — where, within the above limit, the value of the materials classified within heading 8431 are only used up  to  a  value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 8431   Parts suitable for use solely or principally with road rollers   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials     used       does   not      exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    8439   Machinery for making pulp of fibrous cellulosic material or for making or finishing paper or paperboard  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8441  Other machinery for making up paper pulp, paper or paperboard, including cutting machines of all kinds  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 25 % of the ex-works price of the product     8444 to 8447   Machines of these headings for use in the textile industry   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does  not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 8448   Auxiliary machinery for use with ma chines of headings 8444 and 8445   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8452   Sewing machines, other than book-sewing machines of heading 8440; furniture, bases and covers specially designed for sewing machines; sewing machine needles:         – Sewing machines (lock stitch only) with heads of a weight not exceeding 16 kg without motor or 17 kg with motor   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;        — where the value of all the non- originating materials used in assembling the head (without motor) does not exceed the value of the originating materials used;        — the thread tension, crochet and zigzag mechanisms used are already originating       – Other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does   not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8456 to 8466   Machine-tools and machines and their parts and accessories of headings 8456 to 8466   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8469 to  Office machines (for example, typewriters,  Manufacture in which the value of    8472  calculating machines, automatic data processing machines, duplicating  all      the     materials  used  does  not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      machines, stapling machines)  of the product     8480   Moulding boxes for metal foundry; mould bases; moulding patterns; moulds   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials      used    does  not       for metal (other than ingot moulds),  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price      metal carbides, glass, mineral materials, rubber or plastics  of the product     8482   Ball or roller bearings   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials        used does not exceed 40 % of        the ex-works price of the        product     8484   Gaskets and similar joints of metal sheeting combined with other material or of   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials     used    does    not       two or more layers of metal; sets or   exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      assortments of gaskets and similar joints, dissimilar in composition, put up in  of the product      pouches, envelopes or similar packings;        mechanical seals       8485   Machinery parts, not containing electrical connectors, insulators, coils, contacts   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials      used       does       not      or other electrical features, not specified  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      or included elsewhere in this Chapter  of the product     ex Chapter 85   Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles; except for:   Manufacture in which — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   8501   Electric motors and generators (excluding generating sets)   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 8503 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8502  Electric generating sets and rotary converters  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 8501 or 8503, taken together, are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 8504   Power supply units for automatic data- processing machines   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 8518   Microphones and stands therefore; loud speakers, whether or not mounted in their enclosures; audio-frequency electric amplifiers; electric sound amplifier sets   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     8519   Turntables (record-decks), record-players, cassette- players and other sound reproducing apparatus, not incorporating a sound recording device   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     8520   Magnetic tape recorders and other sound recording apparatus, whether or not  incorporating a sound reproducing device   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8521  Video recording or reproducing apparatus, whether or not incorporating a video tuner  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      price of the product;        — where the value of all the non-        originating materials used        does not exceed the value of        the originating materials used     8522   Parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus   Manufacture in which the value of   all the  materials  used       does  not       of headings 8519 to 8521  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8523   Prepared unrecorded media for sound re cording or similar recording of other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials     used   does  not       phenomena, other than products of  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      Chapter 37  of the product     8524   Records, tapes and other recorded media for sound or other similarly recorded        phenomena, including matrices and masters        for the production of records, but        excluding products of Chapter 37:         – Matrices and masters for the production   Manufacture in which the value of           of records  all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price        of the product       – Other   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      price of the product;        — where, within the above limit,        the materials classified within        heading 8523 are only used        up to a value of 10 % of the        ex-works price of the product     8525   Transmission apparatus for radio-tele phony, radio-telegraphy, radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not incorporating reception apparatus or sound recording or reproducing apparatus; tele vision cameras; still image video cameras and other video camera recorders   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product; — where the value of all the non- originating materials used   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      does not exceed the value of        the originating materials used    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8526  Radar apparatus, radio navigational aid apparatus and radio remote control apparatus  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     8527   Reception apparatus for radio-telephony, radio-telegraphy or radio broadcasting, whether or not combined, in the same housing, with sound recording or reproducing apparatus or a clock   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     8528   Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio broadcast receivers or sound or video re cording or reproducing apparatus; video monitors and video projectors   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     8529   Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of headings 8525 to 8528:         – Suitable for use solely or principally with video recording or reproducing apparatus   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product       – Other   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8535 and 8536  Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making connections to or in electrical circuits  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 8538 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product     8537   Boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases, equipped with two or more apparatus of heading 8535 or 8536, for electric control or the distribution of electricity, including those incorporating instruments or apparatus of Chapter 90, and numerical control apparatus, other than switching apparatus of heading 8517   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product; — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 8538 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 8541   Diodes, transistors and similar semi conductor devices, except wafers not yet cut into chips   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8542   Electronic integrated circuits and micro assemblies   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 8541 or 8542, taken together, are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product     8544   Insulated (including enamelled or  anodised) wire, cable (including coaxial cable) and other insulated electric conductors, whether or not fitted with connectors; optical fibre cables, made up of individually sheathed fibres, whether or not assembled with electric conductors or fitted with connectors   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does  not    exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working or processing carried out on non-originating materials that confers originating status  (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8545  Carbon electrodes, carbon brushes, lamp carbons, battery carbons and other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used   does    not       articles of graphite or other carbon, with or  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price    without metal, of a kind used for electrical purposes  of the product   8546   Electrical insulators of any material   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does  note      exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      of the product   8547   Insulating fittings for electrical machines, appliances or equipment, being fittings   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used     does      not         wholly of insulating materials apart from  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price    any minor components of metal (for ex ample,  threaded  sockets)  incorporated  of the product    during moulding solely for purposes of      assembly other than insulators of heading      8546; electrical conduit tubing and      joints therefore, of base metal lined with      insulating material     8548   Waste and scrap of primary cells, primary batteries and electric accumulators;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used    does  not     spent primary cells, spent primary   exceed 40 % of the ex-works price    batteries  and  spent  electric accumulators; electrical  parts  of  machinery  or   of the product    apparatus, not specified or included else      where in this Chapter     ex Chapter 86   Railway or tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts thereof; railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings and parts thereof; mechanical (including electro-mechanical) traffic signalling equipment of all kinds; except for:   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does   not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8608   Railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings; mechanical (including electro- mechanical) signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tram ways, roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields; parts of the foregoing   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex Chapter 87   Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling-stock, and parts and accessories thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used     does   not   exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8709  Works trucks, self-propelled, not fitted with lifting or handling equipment, of the type used in factories, warehouses, dock areas or airports for short distance transport of goods; tractors of the type used on railway station platforms; parts of the foregoing vehicles  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product               Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product       Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product       Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   8710   Tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles, motorised, whether or not fitted with weapons, and parts of such vehicles   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   8711   Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles fitted with an auxiliary motor, with or without side-cars; side-cars:       – With reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity:       – – Not exceeding 50 cc   Manufacture:      — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product;      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     – – Exceeding 50 cc   Manufacture:      — in which the value of all the materials used does not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     – Other   Manufacture:      — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used    ex 8712  Bicycles without ball bearings  Manufacture from materials not classified in heading 8714  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   8715   Baby carriages and parts thereof   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     8716   Trailers and semi trailers; other vehicles, not mechanically propelled; parts thereof   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 88   Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 8804   Rotochutes   Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading 8804   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   8805   Aircraft launching gear; deck-arrestor or similar gear; ground flying trainers; parts of the foregoing articles   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   Chapter 89   Ships, boats and floating structures   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, hulls of head ing 8906 may not be used   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 90  Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking, precision, medical or surgical instruments and apparatus; parts and accessories thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9001   Optical fibres and optical fibre bundles; optical fibre cables other than those of heading 8544; sheets and plates of polarising material; lenses (including contact lenses), prisms, mirrors and other optical elements, of any material, unmounted, other than such elements of glass not optically worked   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used     does    not  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9002   Lenses, prisms, mirrors and other optical elements, of any material, mounted, being parts of or fittings for instruments or apparatus, other than such elements of glass not optically worked   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9004   Spectacles, goggles and the like, corrective, protective or other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex 9005   Binoculars, monocular, other optical tele scopes, and mountings therefore, except for astronomical refracting telescopes and mountings therefore   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;        — the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     ex 9006   Photographic (other than cinematographic) cameras; photographic flashlight apparatus and flashbulbs other than electrically ignited flashbulbs   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;        — the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used    9007  Cinematographic cameras and projectors, whether or not incorporating sound recording or reproducing apparatus  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;        — the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     9011   Compound optical microscopes, including those for photomicrography, cine photomicrography or micro projection   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;        — the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     ex 9014   Other navigational instruments and appliances   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used    does     not    exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9015   Surveying (including photogram metrical surveying), hydrographic, oceanographic, hydrological, meteorological or geophysical instruments and appliances, excluding compasses; rangefinders   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used      does     not    exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9016   Balances of a sensitivity of 5 cg or better, with or without weights   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used   does   not     exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9017  Drawing, marking-out or mathematical calculating instruments (for example,  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used    does   not   exceed      drafting machines, pantographs, protractors,  40 % of the ex-works price      drawing sets, slide rules, disc calculators); instruments for measuring length,  of the product      for use in the hand (for example, measuring        rods and tapes, micrometers, callipers),        not specified or included elsewhere        in this Chapter       9018   Instruments and appliances used in medical, surgical, dental or veterinary        sciences, including scintigraphic         apparatus, other electro-medical apparatus        and sight-testing instruments:         – Dentists' chairs incorporating dental   Manufacture from materials of   Manufacture in which the value of    appliances or dentists' spittoons  any heading, including other materials of heading 9018  all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     – Other   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials        used does not exceed 40 % of        the ex-works price of the        product     9019   Mechano-therapy appliances; massage apparatus; psychological aptitude-testing apparatus; ozone therapy, oxygen therapy, aerosol therapy, artificial respiration or other therapeutic respiration apparatus   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      the ex-works price of the        product     9020   Other breathing appliances and gas masks, excluding protective masks having neither mechanical parts nor replace able filters   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials        used does not exceed 40 % of        the ex-works price of the        product     9024   Machines and appliances for testing the hardness, strength, compressibility, elasticity   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used   does      not          or other mechanical properties of  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      materials (for example, metals, wood, textiles, paper, plastics)  of the product      HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9025  Hydrometers and similar floating instruments, thermometers, pyrometers,   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used     does   not       barometers, hygrometers and psychrometers,  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      recording or not, and any combination of these instruments  of the product     9026   Instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking the flow, level, pressure or   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials     used   does   not         other variables of liquids or gases (for  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      example, flow meters, level gauges, manometers, heat meters), excluding instruments  of the product      and apparatus of heading 9014,        9015, 9028 or 9032       9027   Instruments and apparatus for physical or chemical analysis (for example, Polari   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used  does    not       meters, refract meters, spectrometers, gas  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      or smoke analysis apparatus); instruments and apparatus for measuring or  of the product      checking viscosity, porosity, expansion,        surface tension or the like; instruments        and apparatus for measuring or checking        quantities of heat, sound or light (including        exposure meters); microtomes       9028   Gas, liquid or electricity supply or production meters, including calibrating meters        therefore:         – Parts and accessories   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used   does   not        exceed 40 % of the ex-works price        of the product       – Other   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      price of the product;        — where the value of all the non-        originating materials used        does not exceed the value of        the originating materials used     9029   Revolution counters, production counters, taximeters, mileometers, pedometers   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used   does   not       and the like; speed indicators and   exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      tachometers, other than those of heading 9014 or 9015; stroboscopes  of the product     HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9030  Oscilloscopes, spectrum analysers and other instruments and apparatus for  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used  does  not       measuring or checking electrical quantities,  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price    excluding meters of heading 9028; instruments and apparatus for measuring  of the product    or detecting alpha, beta, gamma, X-ray,      cosmic or other ionising radiations     9031   Measuring or checking instruments, appliances and machines, not specified or   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials     used   does  not     included elsewhere in this Chapter; pro  exceed 40 % of the ex-works price    file projectors  of the product   9032   Automatic regulating or controlling  instruments and apparatus   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used    does   not   exceed 40 % of the ex-works price      of the product   9033   Parts and accessories (not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter) for ma   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used     does  not     chines, appliances, instruments or   exceed 40 % of the ex-works price    apparatus of Chapter 90  of the product   ex Chapter 91   Clocks and watches and parts thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used   does    not    exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9105   Other clocks   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used     9109   Clock movements, complete and assembled   Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used      HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9110  Complete watch or clock movements, unassembled or partly assembled (movement sets); incomplete watch or clock movements, assembled; rough watch or clock movements  Manufacture: — in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading 9114 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product     9111   Watch cases and parts thereof   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9112   Clock cases and cases of a similar type for other goods of this Chapter, and parts thereof   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     9113   Watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets, and parts thereof:         – Of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated, or of metal clad with precious metal   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials  used    does     not      exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product       – Other   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used   does   not   exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     Chapter 92   Musical instruments; parts and accessories of such articles   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used   does   not   exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product     HS  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Chapter 93  Arms and ammunition; parts and accessories thereof  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 94   Furniture; bedding, mattresses, mattress supports, cushions and similar stuffed furnishings; lamps and lighting fittings, not elsewhere specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and the like; prefabricated buildings; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 9401 and ex 9403   Base metal furniture, incorporating un stuffed cotton  cloth  of  a  weight  of 300 g/m2 or less   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified in a heading other than that of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product      or        Manufacture from cotton cloth already made up in a form ready for use of heading 9401 or 9403, provided:        — its value does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product;        — all the other materials used are already originating and are classified in a heading other than heading 9401 or 9403     9405   Lamps and lighting fittings including searchlights and spotlights and parts thereof, not elsewhere specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and the like, having a permanently fixed light source, and parts thereof not elsewhere specified or included   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials   used     does    not    exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     9406   Prefabricated buildings   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    used   does    not  exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 95   Toys, games and sports requisites; parts and accessories thereof; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product      HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9503  Other toys; reduced-size (‘scale’) models and similar recreational models, working or not; puzzles of all kinds  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;        — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   ex 9506   Golf clubs and parts thereof   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, roughly shaped blocks for making golf club heads may be used   ex Chapter 96   Miscellaneous manufactured articles; except for:   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product     ex 9601 and ex 9602   Articles of animal, vegetable or mineral carving materials   Manufacture from ‘worked’ carving materials of the same heading   ex 9603   Brooms and brushes (except for besoms and the like and brushes made from marten or squirrel hair), hand-operated mechanical floor sweepers, not motorised, paint pads and rollers, squeegees and mops   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials     used   does  not     exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product   9605   Travel sets for personal toilet, sewing or shoe or clothes cleaning   Each item in the set must satisfy the rule, which would apply to it if it were not included in the set. However, non-originating articles may be incorporated, provided their total value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the set   9606   Buttons, press-fasteners, snap-fasteners and press-studs, button moulds and other parts of these articles; button blanks   Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product;      — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of product  Working (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9608  Ball-points pens; felt-tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers; fountain pens, stylograph pens and other pens; duplicating stylos; propelling or sliding pencils; penholders, pencil- holders and similar holders; parts (including caps and clips) of the foregoing articles, other than those of heading 9609  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, nibs or nib-points classified within the same heading may be used    9612  Typewriter or similar ribbons, inked or otherwise prepared for giving impressions, whether or not on spools or in cartridges; ink-pads, whether or not inked, with or without boxes  Manufacture in which: — all the materials used are   classified within a heading other than that of the product; — the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 9613  Lighters with piezo-igniter  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading 9613 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 9614  Smoking pipes and pipe bowls  Manufacture from roughly shaped blocks  Chapter 97  Works of art, collectors' pieces and antiques  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    (1) For the special conditions relating to ‘specific processes’ see Introductory Notes 7.1 and 7.3. (2) For the special conditions relating to ‘specific processes’ see Introductory Note 7.2. (3) Note 3 to Chapter 32 says that these preparations are those of a kind used for colouring any material or used as ingredients in the manufacture of colouring preparations, provided they are not classified in another heading in Chapter 32. (4) A ‘group’ is regarded as any part of the heading separated from the rest by a semicolon. (5) In the case of the products composed of materials classified within both headings 3901 to 3906, on the one hand, and within headings 3907 to 3911, on the other hand, this restriction only applies to that group of materials which predominates by weight in the product. (6) The following foils shall be considered as highly transparent: foils, the optical dimming of which — measured according to ASTM-D 1003-16 by Gardner Hazemeter (i.e. Hazefactor) — is less than 2 %. (7) For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 5. (8) See Introductory Note 6. (9) For knitted or crocheted articles, not elastic or rubberised, obtained by sewing or assembly pieces of knitted or crocheted fabrics (cut out or knitted directly to shape), see Introductory Note 6. (10) SEMII-Semiconductor Equipment and Materials Institute Incorporated           Appendix 2A Derogations from the list of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials in order for the product manufactured to acquire originating status, in accordance with Article 4 of this Protocol The products included in the list may not all be covered by this Agreement. It is therefore necessary to consult the other parts of this Agreement. Common provisions   1.  For the products described in the table below, the following rules may also apply instead of the rules set out    2.  A proof of origin issued or made out pursuant to this Appendix shall include the following statement in    3.  Cameroon HS heading  Description of product  Working or processing,  ex Chapter 4  Dairy produce, –  with a content of materials of Chapter 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 4 used are wholly obtained  Chapter 6  Live trees and other plants; bulbs, roots and the like; cut flowers and ornamental foliage  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 6 used are wholly obtained  ex Chapter 8  Edible fruit and nuts; peel of citrus fruits or melons, –  with a content of materials of Chapter 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 8 used are wholly obtained  1101  Wheat or meslin flour  Manufacture from materials of any heading except that of the product  Chapter 12  Oil seed, oleaginous fruits; miscellaneous grain, seed, fruit; industrial or medical plants; straw and fodder  Manufacture from materials of any heading except that of the product  1301  Lac; natural gums, resins, gum-resins and oleoresins (for example, balsams)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading 1301 used does not exceed 60 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 1302  Vegetable saps and extracts; pectics substances, pectinates and pectates; agar-agar and other mucilages and thickeners, whether or not modified, derived from vegetable products:  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60 % of the ex-works price of the product  –  other than mucilages and thickeners, modified, derived from vegetable products    ex 1506  Other animal fats and oils and their fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified; –  other than solid fractions    Manufacture from materials of any heading except that of the product  ex 1507 to ex 1515  Vegetable oils and their fractions:     –  Soya, ground nut, palm, copra, palm kernel, babassu, tung and oiticica oil, myrtle wax and Japan wax, fractions of jojoba oil and oils for technical or industrial uses other than the manufacture of foodstuffs for human consumption    Manufacture from materials of any subheading except that of the product  –  other than olive oils under headings 1509 and 1510    Manufacture from materials of any heading except that of the product  ex 1516  Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their fractions, partly or wholly hydrogenated, inter-esterified, re-esterified or elaidinised, whether or not refined, but not further prepared: –  fats and oils and their fractions of hydrogenated castor oil, so called ‘opal wax’    Manufacture from materials classified in a heading other than that of the product  ex Chapter 18  Cocoa and cocoa preparations, –  with a content of materials of Chapter 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  ex 1901  Food preparations of flour, groats, meal, starch or malt extract, not containing cocoa in more than 40 % by weight calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included; food preparations of goods of heading 0401 to 0404 , not containing cocoa in more than 5 % by weight calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included. –  with a content of materials of Chapter 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  1902  Pasta, whether or not cooked or stuffed (with meat or other substances) or otherwise prepared, such as spaghetti, macaroni, noodles, lasagne, gnocchi, ravioli, cannelloni; couscous, whether or not prepared     –  containing 20 % or less by weight of meat, meat offal, fish, crustaceans or molluscs    Manufacture in which all the products of Chapter 11 used are originating  –  containing more than 20 % by weight of meat, meat offal, fish, crustaceans or molluscs    Manufacture in which: —  all the products of Chapter 11 used are originating,  —  all the materials of Chapters 2 and 3 used are wholly obtained    1903  Tapioca and substitutes thereof prepared from starch, in the form of flakes, grains, pearls, sifting or similar forms:  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except that of the product  –  with a content of materials of heading 1108 13 (potato starch) not more than 20 % by weight    1904  Prepared foods obtained by the swelling or roasting of cereals or cereal products (for example, corn flakes); cereals (other than maize (corn)) in grain form or in the form of flakes or other worked grains (except flour, groats and meal), pre-cooked or otherwise prepared, not elsewhere specified or included: –  with a content of materials of Chapter 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture: —  from materials of any heading, except those of heading 1806,  —  in which all the products of Chapter 11 used are originating    1905  Bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits and other bakers' wares, whether or not containing cocoa; communion wafers, empty cachets of a kind suitable for pharmaceutical use, sealing wafers, rice paper and similar products  Manufacture in which all the products of Chapter 11 used are originating  ex Chapter 20  Preparations of vegetables, fruit, nuts or other parts of plants: –  from materials other than those of subheading 0711 51  –  from materials other than of headings 2002 , 2003 , 2008 and 2009  –  with a content of materials of Chapter 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 21  Miscellaneous edible preparations: –  with a content of materials of Chapters 4 and 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 23  Residues and waste from the food industries; prepared animal fodder: –  with a content of maize or materials of Chapters 2, 4 and 17 not more than 20 % by weight    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 60 % of the ex-works price of the product     Appendix 3 Form for movement certificate EUR.1 1. Movement certificates EUR.1 shall be made out on the form of which a specimen appears in this Appendix. This form shall be printed in one or more of the languages in which this Agreement is drawn up. Certificates shall be made out in one of these languages and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting State; if they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink and in capital letters.  2. Each certificate shall measure 210 . 297 mm, a tolerance of up to plus 8 mm or minus 5 mm in the length may be allowed. The paper used must be white, sized for writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 25 g/m2. It shall have a printed green guilloche pattern background making any falsification by mechanical or chemical means apparent to the eye.  3. The exporting States may reserve the right to print the certificates themselves or may have them printed by approved printers. In the latter case each certificate must include a reference to such approval. Each certificate must bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified. It shall also bear a serial number, either printed or not, by which it can be identified.                 Appendix 4 Invoice declaration  The invoice declaration, the text of which is given below, must be made out in accordance with the footnotes. However, the footnotes do not have to be reproduced.   English Version  The exporter of the products covered by this document (customs authorisation No … (1)) declares that, except where otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of … (2) preferential origin.   French version   L'exportateur des produits couverts par le présent document (autorisation douanière no … (1)) déclare que, sauf indication claire du contraire, ces produits ont l'origine préférentielle … (2).   … (3)  (Place and date)  … (4)  (Signature of the exporter; in addition the name of the person signing the declaration has to be indicated in clear script)   (1) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 20 of this Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank. (2) Origin of products has to be indicated.  (3) These indications may be omitted if the information is contained on the document        itself. (4) See Article 19(5) of this Protocol. In cases where the exporter is not required to sign, the exemption of signature also implies the exemption of the name of the signatory.    Appendix 5A Supplier declaration for products having preferential origin status I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this invoice ………………… (1) were produced in……….. (2) and satisfy the rules of origin governing preferential trade between Cameroon and the United Kingdom. I undertake to make available to the customs authorities, if required, evidence in support of this declaration. ……………………… (3) ………………… (4) …………………….. (5)  Note The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity with the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier's declaration. The footnotes do not have to be reproduced.            (1)  If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should be clearly indicated or marked and this marking entered on the declaration as follows: ‘ …listed on this invoice and marked …were produced …’. If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see Article 26(3)), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead of …the word ‘invoice’. (2)  The United Kingdom, Cameroon, EU, eligible ACP State, OCT or South Africa. Where an eligible ACP State or an OCT is given, a reference must also be made to the United Kingdom customs office holding any relevant movement certificate(s) EUR.1, giving the reference number(s) of the certificate(s) concerned and, if possible, the relevant customs entry number. (3)  Place and date. (4)  Name and function in company. (5)  Signature.   Appendix 5B Supplier declaration for products not having preferential original status I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this invoice …… (1) were produced in …… (2) and incorporate the following components or materials which do not have eligible ACP State, OCT, United Kingdom, Cameroon, or EU origin for preferential trade: …………………….. (3) ……………………. (4) …………………………. (5) …………………………………. ………………………………… (6) I undertake to make available to the customs authorities, if required, evidence in support of this declaration. …………………………. (7) ……………………… (8) ………………………….. (9)  Note The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity with the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier's declaration. The footnotes do not have to be reproduced.    (1)  If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should be clearly indicated or marked and this marking entered on the declaration as follows: ‘ ……………listed on this invoice and marked ……………..were produced ………………………..’. If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see Article 26(3)), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead of ………………………………the word ‘invoice’. (2)  The United Kingdom, Cameroon, EU, eligible ACP State, OCT or South Africa. (3)  Description is to be given in all cases. The description must be adequate and should be sufficiently detailed to allow the tariff classification of the goods concerned to be determined. (4)  Customs values to be given only if required. (5)  Country of origin to be given only if required. The origin to be given must be a preferential origin, all other origins to be given as ‘third country’. (6)  ‘and have undergone the following processing in [the United Kingdom] [Cameroon ] [EU] [an eligible ACP State] [OCT] [South Africa] …’, to be added with a description of the processing carried out if this information is required. (7)  Place and date. (8)  Name and function in company. (9)  Signature.    Appendix 6 Information Certificate  1. The form of information certificate given in this Appendix shall be used and be printed in one or more of the official languages in which the Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting State. Information certificates shall be completed in one of those languages; if they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink, in capital letters. They shall bear a serial number, whether or not printed, by which they can be identified.  2. The information certificate shall measure 210 . 297mm, a tolerance of up to plus 8mm or minus 5mm in the length may be allowed. The paper must be white, sized for writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 25g/m2 .   3. The national administrators may reserve the right to print the forms themselves or may have them printed by printers approved by them. In the latter case, each form must include a reference to such approval. The forms shall bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified.        Appendix 7  Products to which Article 6(4) of this Protocol shall not be applicable  Industrial Products (1)  CN code 96  Motor cars and other motor vehicles  8703 10 10 8703 10 90 8703 21 10 8703 21 90 8703 22 11 8703 22 19 8703 22 90 8703 23 11 8703 23 19 8703 23 90 8703 24 10 8703 24 90 8703 31 10 8703 31 90 8703 32 11 8703 32 19 8703 32 90 8703 33 11 8703 33 19 8703 33 90 8703 90 10 8703 90 90  Chassis fitted with engines  8706 00 11 8706 00 19 8706 00 91 8706 00 99  Bodies (including cabs), for the motor vehicles  8707 10 10 8707 10 90 8707 90 10 8707 90 90  Parts and accessories of the motor vehicles  8708 10 10 8708 10 90 8708 21 10 8708 21 90 8708 29 10 8708 29 90 8708 31 10 8708 31 91 8708 31 99 8708 39 10 8708 39 90 8708 40 10 8708 40 90 8708 50 10 8708 50 90 8708 60 10 8708 60 91 8708 60 99 8708 70 10 8708 70 50 8708 70 91 8708 70 99 8708 80 10 8708 80 90 8708 91 10 8708 91 90 8708 92 10 8708 92 90 8708 93 10 8708 93 90 8708 94 10 8708 94 90 8708 99 10 8708 99 30 8708 99 50 8708 99 92 8708 99 98  Industrial Products (2)  Unwrought aluminium  7601 10 00 7601 20 10 7601 20 91 7601 20 99  Aluminium powders and flakes  7603 10 00 7603 20 00    Agricultural Products (1)  Live horses, asses, mules and hinnies  0101 20 10  Milk and cream, not concentrated  0401 10 10 0401 10 90 0401 20 11 0401 20 19 0401 20 91 0401 20 99 0401 30 11 0401 30 19 0401 30 31 0401 30 39 0401 30 91 0401 30 99  Buttermilk, curdled milk and cream, yogurt, kephir  0403 10 11 0403 10 13 0403 10 19 0403 10 31 0403 10 33 0403 10 39  Potatoes, fresh or chilled  0701 90 51  Leguminous vegetables, shelled or unshelled, fresh or chilled  0708 10 20 0708 10 95  Other vegetables, fresh or chilled  0709 51 90 0709 60 10  Vegetables (uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiled)  0710 80 95  Vegetables provisionally preserved  0711 10 00 0711 30 00 0711 90 60 0711 90 70     Dates, figs, pineapples, avocados, guavas, mangoes  0804 20 90 0804 30 00 0804 40 20 0804 40 90 0804 40 95  Grapes, fresh or dried  0806 10 29 (3)  0806 20 11 0806 20 12 0806 20 18  Melons (including watermelons) and papaws (papayas)  0807 11 00 0807 19 00  Apricots, cherries, peaches (including nectarines)  0809 30 11 (5)  0809 30 51 (6)   Other fruit, fresh  0810 90 40 0810 90 85  Fruit and nuts, provisionally preserved  0812 10 00 0812 20 00 0812 90 50 0812 90 60 0812 90 70 0812 90 95  Fruit, dried  0813 40 10 0813 50 15 0813 50 19 0813 50 39 0813 50 91 0813 50 99  Pepper of the genus Piper; dried or crushed  0904 20 10  Soya-bean oil and its fractions  1507 10 10 1507 10 90 1507 90 10  1507 90 90  Sunflower-seed, safflower or cotton-seed oil  1512 11 10 1512 11 91 1512 11 99 1512 19 10 1512 19 91 1512 19 99 1512 21 10 1512 21 90 1512 29 10 1512 29 90  Rape, colza or mustard oil and fractions thereof  1514 10 10 1514 10 90 1514 90 10 1514 90 90  Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants  2008 19 59  Fruit juices (including grape must)  2009 20 99 2009 40 99 2009 80 99  Unmanufactured tobacco; tobacco refuse  2401 10 10 2401 10 20 2401 10 41 2401 10 49 2401 10 60 2401 20 10 2401 20 20 2401 20 41 2401 20 60 2401 20 70  Agricultural Products (2)  Cut flowers and flower buds  0603 10 55 0603 10 61 0603 10 69     Onions, shallots, garlic, leeks  0703 10 11 0703 10 19 0703 10 90 0703 90 00  Cabbages, cauliflowers, kohlrabi, kale and similar  0704 10 05 0704 10 10 0704 10 80 0704 20 00 0704 90 10 0704 90 90  Lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and chicory  0705 11 05 0705 11 10 0705 11 80 0705 19 00 0705 21 00 0705 29 00  Carrots, turnips, salad beetroot, salsify, celeriac  0706 10 00 0706 90 05 0706 90 11 0706 90 17 0706 90 30 0706 90 90  Leguminous vegetables, shelled or unshelled, fresh or chilled  0708 10 90 0708 20 20 0708 20 90 0708 20 95 0708 90 00  Other vegetables, fresh or chilled  0709 10 30  0709 30 00 0709 40 00 0709 51 10 0709 51 50 0709 70 00 0709 90 10 0709 90 20 0709 90 40 0709 90 50 0709 90 90  Vegetables (uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiled)  0710 10 00 0710 21 00 0710 22 00 0710 29 00 0710 30 00 0710 80 10 0710 80 51 0710 80 61 0710 80 69 0710 80 70 0710 80 80 0710 80 85 0710 90 00  Vegetables provisionally preserved  0711 20 10 0711 40 00 0711 90 40 0711 90 90  Dried vegetables, whole, cut, sliced, broken  0712 20 00 0712 30 00 0712 90 30 0712 90 50 0712 90 90  Manioc, arrowroot, salep, Jerusalem artichokes  0714 90 11 0714 90 19  Other nuts, fresh or dried, whether or not shelled  0802 11 90 0802 21 00 0802 22 00 0802 40 00  Bananas, including plantains, fresh or dried  0803 00 11 0803 00 90  Dates, figs, pineapples, avocados, guavas, mangoes  0804 20 10  Citrus fruit, fresh or dried  0805 20 21 (1)  0805 20 23 (1)  0805 20 25 (1)  0805 20 27 (1)  0805 20 29 (1)  0805 30 90 0805 90 00  Grapes, fresh or dried  0806 10 95 0806 10 97  Apples, pears and quinces, fresh  0808 10 10  0808 20 10  0808 20 90  Apricots, cherries, peaches (including nectarines)  0809 10 10  0809 10 50  0809 20 19  0809 20 29  0809 30 11 (7)  0809 30 19  0809 30 51 (8)  0809 30 59  0809 40 40   Other fruit, fresh  0810 10 05 0810 20 90 0810 30 10 0810 30 30 0810 30 90 0810 40 90 0810 50 00  Fruit and nuts, uncooked or cooked by steaming  0811 20 11 0811 20 31 0811 20 39 0811 20 59 0811 90 11 0811 90 19 0811 90 39 0811 90 75 0811 90 80 0811 90 95    Fruit and nuts, provisionally preserved  0812 90 10 0812 90 20  Fruit, dried  0813 20 00  Wheat and meslin  1001 90 10  Buckwheat, millet and canary seed; other cereals  1008 10 00 1008 20 00 1008 90 90  Flour, meal, powder, flakes, granules and pellets  1105 10 00 1105 20 00  Flour, meal and powder of the dried leguminous vegetables  1106 10 00 1106 30 10 1106 30 90  Fats and oils and their fractions, of fish  1504 30 11  Other prepared or preserved meat, meat offal  1602 20 11 1602 20 19 1602 31 11 1602 31 19 1602 31 30 1602 31 90 1602 32 19 1602 32 30 1602 32 90 1602 39 29 1602 39 40 1602 39 80 1602 41 90 1602 42 90 1602 90 31 1602 90 72 1602 90 76  Vegetables, fruit, nuts and other edible parts  2001 10 00 2001 20 00 2001 90 50 2001 90 65 2001 90 96  Mushrooms and truffles, prepared or preserved  2003 10 20 2003 10 30 2003 10 80 2003 20 00  Other vegetables prepared or preserved otherwise  2004 10 10 2004 10 99 2004 90 50 2004 90 91 2004 90 98  Other vegetables prepared or preserved otherwise  2005 10 00 2005 20 20 2005 20 80 2005 40 00 2005 51 00 2005 59 00  Vegetables, fruit, nuts, fruit-peel  2006 00 31 2006 00 35 2006 00 38 2006 00 99  Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, fruit or nut puree  2007 10 91 2007 99 93  Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants  2008 11 94 2008 11 98 2008 19 19 2008 19 95 2008 19 99 2008 20 51 2008 20 59 2008 20 71 2008 20 79 2008 20 91 2008 20 99 2008 30 11 2008 30 39 2008 30 51 2008 30 59 2008 40 11 2008 40 21 2008 40 29 2008 40 39 2008 60 11 2008 60 31 2008 60 39 2008 60 59 2008 60 69 2008 60 79 2008 60 99 2008 70 11 2008 70 31 2008 70 39 2008 70 59 2008 80 11 2008 80 31 2008 80 39 2008 80 50 2008 80 70 2008 80 91 2008 80 99 2008 99 23 2008 99 25 2008 99 26 2008 99 28 2008 99 36 2008 99 45 2008 99 46 2008 99 49 2008 99 53 2008 99 55 2008 99 61 2008 99 62 2008 99 68 2008 99 72 2008 99 74 2008 99 79 2008 99 99  Fruit juices (including grape must)  2009 11 19 2009 11 91 2009 19 19 2009 19 91 2009 19 99 2009 20 19 2009 20 91 2009 30 19 2009 30 31 2009 30 39 2009 30 51 2009 30 55 2009 30 91 2009 30 95 2009 30 99 2009 40 19 2009 40 91 2009 80 19 2009 80 50 2009 80 61 2009 80 63 2009 80 73 2009 80 79 2009 80 83 2009 80 84 2009 80 86 2009 80 97 2009 90 19 2009 90 29 2009 90 39 2009 90 41 2009 90 51 2009 90 59 2009 90 73 2009 90 79 2009 90 92 2009 90 94 2009 90 95 2009 90 96 2009 90 97 2009 90 98  Other fermented beverages (for example, cider)  2206 00 10  Wine lees; argol  2307 00 19  Vegetable materials and vegetable waste  2308 90 19  Agricultural Products (3)  Live swine  0103 91 10 0103 92 11 0103 92 19  Live sheep and goats  0104 10 30 0104 10 80 0104 20 90  Live poultry, that is to say, fowls of the species  0105 11 11 0105 11 19 0105 11 91 0105 11 99 0105 12 00 0105 19 20 0105 19 90 0105 92 00 0105 93 00 0105 99 10 0105 99 20 0105 99 30 0105 99 50  Meat of swine, fresh, chilled or frozen  0203 11 10 0203 12 11 0203 12 19 0203 19 11 0203 19 13 0203 19 15 0203 19 55 0203 19 59 0203 21 10 0203 22 11 0203 22 19 0203 29 11 0203 29 13 0203 29 15 0203 29 55 0203 29 59  Meat of sheep or goats, fresh, chilled or frozen  0204 10 00 0204 21 00 0204 22 10 0204 22 30 0204 22 50 0204 22 90 0204 23 00 0204 30 00 0204 41 00 0204 42 10 0204 42 30 0204 42 50 0204 42 90 0204 43 10 0204 43 90 0204 50 11 0204 50 13 0204 50 15 0204 50 19 0204 50 31 0204 50 39 0204 50 51 0204 50 53 0204 50 55 0204 50 59 0204 50 71 0204 50 79  Meat and edible offal  0207 11 10 0207 11 30 0207 11 90 0207 12 10 0207 12 90 0207 13 10 0207 13 20 0207 13 30 0207 13 40 0207 13 50 0207 13 60 0207 13 70 0207 13 99 0207 14 10 0207 14 20 0207 14 30 0207 14 40 0207 14 50 0207 14 60 0207 14 70 0207 14 99 0207 24 10 0207 24 90 0207 25 10 0207 25 90 0207 26 10 0207 26 20 0207 26 30 0207 26 40 0207 26 50 0207 26 60 0207 26 70 0207 26 80 0207 26 99 0207 27 10 0207 27 20 0207 27 30 0207 27 40 0207 27 50 0207 27 60 0207 27 70 0207 27 80 0207 27 99 0207 32 11 0207 32 15 0207 32 19 0207 32 51 0207 32 59 0207 32 90 0207 33 11 0207 33 19 0207 33 51 0207 33 59 0207 33 90 0207 35 11 0207 35 15 0207 35 21 0207 35 23 0207 35 25 0207 35 31 0207 35 41 0207 35 51 0207 35 53 0207 35 61 0207 35 63 0207 35 71 0207 35 79 0207 35 99 0207 36 11 0207 36 15 0207 36 21 0207 36 23 0207 36 25 0207 36 31 0207 36 41 0207 36 51 0207 36 53 0207 36 61 0207 36 63 0207 36 71 0207 36 79 0207 36 90  Pig fat, free of lean meat, and poultry fat  0209 00 11 0209 00 19 0209 00 30 0209 00 90  Meat and edible meat offal, salted, in brine  0210 11 11 0210 11 19 0210 11 31 0210 11 39 0210 11 90 0210 12 11 0210 12 19 0210 12 90 0210 19 10 0210 19 20 0210 19 30 0210 19 40 0210 19 51 0210 19 59 0210 19 60 0210 19 70 0210 19 81 0210 19 89 0210 19 90 0210 90 11 0210 90 19 0210 90 21 0210 90 29 0210 90 31 0210 90 39  Milk and cream, concentrated  0402 91 11 0402 91 19 0402 91 31 0402 91 39 0402 91 51 0402 91 59 0402 91 91 0402 91 99 0402 99 11 0402 99 19 0402 99 31 0402 99 39 0402 99 91 0402 99 99   Buttermilk, curdled milk and cream, yogurt, kephir  0403 90 51 0403 90 53 0403 90 59 0403 90 61 0403 90 63 0403 90 69  Whey, whether or not concentrated  0404 10 48 0404 10 52 0404 10 54 0404 10 56 0404 10 58 0404 10 62 0404 10 72 0404 10 74 0404 10 76 0404 10 78 0404 10 82 0404 10 84  Cheese and curd  0406 10 20  0406 10 80  0406 20 90  0406 30 10  0406 30 31  0406 30 39  0406 30 90  0406 40 90  0406 90 01  0406 90 21  0406 90 50  0406 90 69  0406 90 78  0406 90 86  0406 90 87  0406 90 88  0406 90 93  0406 90 99   Birds' eggs, in shell, fresh, preserved or cooked  0407 00 11 0407 00 19 0407 00 30  Birds' eggs, not in shell, and egg yolks, fresh  0408 11 80 0408 19 81 0408 19 89 0408 91 80 0408 99 80  Natural honey  0409 00 00  Tomatoes, fresh or chilled  0702 00 15  0702 00 20  0702 00 25  0702 00 30  0702 00 35  0702 00 40  0702 00 45  0702 00 50   Cucumbers and gherkins, fresh or chilled  0707 00 10  0707 00 15  0707 00 20  0707 00 25  0707 00 30  0707 00 35  0707 00 40  07070090  Other vegetables, fresh or chilled  0709 10 10  0709 10 20  0709 20 00 0709 90 39 0709 90 75  0709 90 77  0709 90 79     Vegetables provisionally preserved  0711 20 90  Dried vegetables, whole, cut, sliced, broken  0712 90 19  Manioc, arrowroot, salep, Jerusalem artichokes  0714 10 10 0714 10 91 0714 10 99 0714 20 90  Citrus fruit, fresh or dried  0805 10 37 (2)  0805 10 38 (2)  0805 10 39 (2)  0805 10 42 (2)  0805 10 46 (2)  0805 10 82 0805 10 84 0805 10 86 0805 20 11  0805 20 13  0805 20 15  0805 20 17  0805 20 19  0805 20 21 (10)  0805 20 23 (10)  0805 20 25 (10)  0805 20 27 (10)  0805 20 29 (10)  0805 20 31  0805 20 33  0805 20 35  0805 20 37  0805 20 39   Grapes, fresh or dried  0806 10 21  0806 10 29 (4)  0806 10 30  0806 10 50  0806 10 61  0806 10 69  0806 10 93  Apricots, cherries, peaches (including nectarines)  0809 10 20  0809 10 30  0809 10 40  0809 20 11  0809 20 21  0809 20 31  0809 20 39  0809 20 41  0809 20 49  0809 20 51  0809 20 59  0809 20 61  0809 20 69  0809 20 71  0809 20 79  0809 30 21  0809 30 29  0809 30 31  0809 30 39  0809 30 41  0809 30 49  0809 40 20  0809 40 30   Other fruit, fresh  0810 10 10 0810 10 80 0810 20 10  Fruit and nuts, uncooked or cooked by steaming  0811 10 11 0811 10 19  Wheat and meslin  1001 10 00 1001 90 91 1001 90 99  Rye   1002 00 00  Barley  1003 00 10 1003 00 90  Oats  1004 00 00  Buckwheat, millet and canary seed; other cereals  1008 90 10  Wheat or meslin flour  1101 00 11 1101 00 15 1101 00 90  Cereal flours other than of wheat or meslin  1102 10 00 1102 90 10 1102 90 30 1102 90 90  Cereal groats, meal and pellets  1103 11 10 1103 11 90 1103 12 00 1103 19 10 1103 19 30 1103 19 90 1103 21 00 1103 29 10 1103 29 20 1103 29 30 1103 29 90  Cereal grains otherwise worked  1104 11 10 1104 11 90 1104 12 10 1104 12 90 1104 19 10 1104 19 30 1104 19 99 1104 21 10 1104 21 30 1104 21 50 1104 21 90 1104 21 99 1104 22 20 1104 22 30 1104 22 50 1104 22 90 1104 22 92 1104 22 99 1104 29 11 1104 29 15 1104 29 19 1104 29 31 1104 29 35 1104 29 39 1104 29 51 1104 29 55 1104 29 59 1104 29 81 1104 29 85 1104 29 89 1104 30 10  Flour, meal and powder of the dried leguminous vegetables  1106 20 10 1106 20 90  Malt, whether or not roasted  1107 10 11 1107 10 19 1107 10 91 1107 10 99 1107 20 00  Locust beans, seaweeds and other algae, sugar beet  1212 91 20 1212 91 80  Pig fat (including lard) and poultry fat  1501 00 19  Olive oil and its fractions, whether or not refined  1509 10 10 1509 10 90 1509 90 00  Other oils and their fractions  1510 00 10 1510 00 90 Degras  1522 00 31 1522 00 39  Sausages and similar products, of meat, meat offal  1601 00 91 1601 00 99  Other prepared or preserved meat, meat offal  1602 10 00 1602 20 90 1602 32 11 1602 39 21 1602 41 10 1602 42 10 1602 49 11 1602 49 13 1602 49 15 1602 49 19 1602 49 30 1602 49 50 1602 49 90 1602 50 31 1602 50 39 1602 50 80 1602 90 10 1602 90 41 1602 90 51 1602 90 69 1602 90 74 1602 90 78 1602 90 98  Other sugars, including chemically pure lactose  1702 11 00 1702 19 00  Pasta, whether or not cooked or stuffed  1902 20 30  Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, fruit or nut puree  2007 10 99 2007 91 90 2007 99 91 2007 99 98  Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants  2008 20 11 2008 20 31 2008 30 19 2008 30 31 2008 30 79 2008 30 91 2008 30 99 2008 40 19 2008 40 31 2008 50 11 2008 50 19 2008 50 31 2008 50 39 2008 50 51 2008 50 59 2008 60 19 2008 60 51 2008 60 61 2008 60 71 2008 60 91 2008 70 19 2008 70 51 2008 80 19 2008 92 16 2008 92 18 2008 99 21 2008 99 32 2008 99 33 2008 99 34 2008 99 37 2008 99 43  Fruit juices (including grape must)  2009 11 11 2009 19 11 2009 20 11 2009 30 11 2009 30 59 2009 40 11 2009 50 10 2009 50 90 2009 80 11 2009 80 32 2009 80 33 2009 80 35 2009 90 11 2009 90 21 2009 90 31    Food preparations not elsewhere specified  2106 90 51  Wine of fresh grapes, including fortified wines  2204 10 19  2204 10 99  2204 21 10 2204 21 81 2204 21 82 2204 21 98 2204 21 99 2204 29 10 2204 29 58 2204 29 75 2204 29 98 2204 29 99 2204 30 10 2204 30 92  2204 30 94  2204 30 96  2204 30 98   Undenatured ethyl alcohol  2208 20 40  Bran, sharps and other residues  2302 30 10 2302 30 90 2302 40 10 2302 40 90  Oil-cake and other solid residues  2306 90 19  Preparations of a kind used in animal feeding  2309 10 13 2309 10 15 2309 10 19 2309 10 33 2309 10 39 2309 10 51 2309 10 53 2309 10 59 2309 10 70 2309 90 33 2309 90 35 2309 90 39 2309 90 43 2309 90 49 2309 90 51 2309 90 53 2309 90 59 2309 90 70  Albumins  3502 11 90 3502 19 90 3502 20 91 3502 20 99  Agricultural Products (4)  Buttermilk, curdled milk and cream, yogurt, kephir  0403 10 51 0403 10 53 0403 10 59 0403 10 91 0403 10 93 0403 10 99 0403 90 71 0403 90 73 0403 90 79 0403 90 91 0403 90 93 0403 90 99  Butter and other fats and oils derived from milk  0405 20 10 0405 20 30  Vegetable saps and extracts; pectic substances  1302 20 10 1302 20 90  Margarine  1517 10 10 1517 90 10  Other sugars, including chemically pure lactose  1702 50 00 1702 90 10  Sugar confectionery (including white chocolate)  1704 10 11 1704 10 19 1704 10 91 1704 10 99 1704 90 10 1704 90 30 1704 90 51 1704 90 55 1704 90 61 1704 90 65 1704 90 71 1704 90 75 1704 90 81 1704 90 99  Chocolate and other food preparations  1806 10 15 1806 10 20 1806 10 30 1806 10 90 1806 20 10 1806 20 30 1806 20 50 1806 20 70 1806 20 80 1806 20 95 1806 31 00 1806 32 10 1806 32 90 1806 90 11 1806 90 19 1806 90 31 1806 90 39 1806 90 50  1806 90 60 1806 90 70 1806 90 90  Malt extract; food preparations of flour, meal  1901 10 00 1901 20 00 1901 90 11 1901 90 19 1901 90 99  Pasta, whether or not cooked or stuffed  1902 11 00 1902 19 10 1902 19 90 1902 20 91 1902 20 99 1902 30 10 1902 30 90 1902 40 10 1902 40 90  Tapioca and substitutes  1903 00 00  Prepared foods  1904 10 10 1904 10 30 1904 10 90 1904 20 10 1904 20 91 1904 20 95 1904 20 99 1904 90 10 1904 90 90  Bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits  1905 10 00 1905 20 10 1905 20 30 1905 20 90 1905 30 11 1905 30 19 1905 30 30 1905 30 51 1905 30 59 1905 30 91 1905 30 99 1905 40 10 1905 40 90 1905 90 10 1905 90 20 1905 90 30 1905 90 40 1905 90 45 1905 90 55 1905 90 60 1905 90 90  Vegetables, fruit, nuts  2001 90 40  Other vegetables  2004 10 91    Other vegetables  2005 20 10  Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants  2008 99 85 2008 99 91  Fruit juices (including grape must)  2009 80 69  Extracts, essences and concentrates, of coffee  2101 11 11 2101 11 19 2101 12 92 2101 12 98 2101 20 98 2101 30 11 2101 30 19 2101 30 91 2101 30 99  Yeasts (active or inactive)  2102 10 10 2102 10 31 2102 10 39 2102 10 90 2102 20 11  Sauces and preparations therefore; mixed condiments  2103 20 00  Ice cream and other edible ice  2105 00 10 2105 00 91 2105 00 99  Food preparations not elsewhere specified or included  2106 10 20 2106 10 80 2106 90 10 2106 90 20 2106 90 98  Waters, including mineral waters and aerated water  2202 90 91 2202 90 95 2202 90 99  Vinegar and substitutes for vinegar  2209 00 11 2209 00 19 2209 00 91 2209 00 99  Acyclic alcohols and their halogenated derivatives  2905 43 00 2905 44 11 2905 44 19 2905 44 91 2905 44 99 2905 45 00  Mixtures of odoriferous substances and mixtures  3302 10 10 3302 10 21 3302 10 29  Finishing agents, dye carriers  3809 10 10 3809 10 30 3809 10 50 3809 10 90  Prepared binders for foundry moulds or cores  3824 60 11 3824 60 19 3824 60 91 3824 60 99  Agricultural Products (5)  Cut flowers and flower buds  0603 10 15  0603 10 29  0603 10 51  0603 10 65  0603 90 00   Fruit and nuts, uncooked or cooked by steaming  0811 10 90   Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants  2008 40 51  2008 40 59  2008 40 71  2008 40 79  2008 40 91  2008 40 99  2008 50 61  2008 50 69  2008 50 71  2008 50 79  2008 50 92  2008 50 94  2008 50 99  2008 70 61  2008 70 69  2008 70 71  2008 70 79  2008 70 92  2008 70 94  2008 70 99  2008 92 59  2008 92 72  2008 92 74  2008 92 78  2008 92 98   Fruit juices (including grape must)  2009 11 99  2009 40 30  2009 70 11  2009 70 19  2009 70 30  2009 70 91  2009 70 93  2009 70 99   Wine of fresh grapes, including fortified wines  2204 21 79  2204 21 80  2204 21 83  2204 21 84   Agricultural Products (6)  Live bovine animals  0102 90 05 0102 90 21 0102 90 29 0102 90 41 0102 90 49 0102 90 51 0102 90 59 0102 90 61 0102 90 69 0102 90 71 0102 90 79  Meat of bovine animals, fresh or chilled:  0201 10 00 0201 20 20 0201 20 30 0201 20 50 0201 20 90 0201 30 00  Meat of bovine animals, frozen  0202 10 00 0202 20 10 0202 20 30 0202 20 50 0202 20 90 0202 30 10 0202 30 50 0202 30 90  Edible offal of bovine animals, swine, sheep, goats  0206 10 95 0206 29 91 0206 29 99  Meat and edible meat offal, salted, in brine  0210 20 10 0210 20 90 0210 90 41 0210 90 49 0210 90 90  Milk and cream, concentrated  0402 10 11 0402 10 19 0402 10 91 0402 10 99 0402 21 11 0402 21 17 0402 21 19 0402 21 91 0402 21 99 0402 29 11 0402 29 15 0402 29 19 0402 29 91 0402 29 99  Buttermilk, curdled milk and cream, yogurt, kephir  0403 90 11 0403 90 13 0403 90 19 0403 90 31 0403 90 33 0403 90 39  Whey, whether or not concentrated  0404 10 02 0404 10 04 0404 10 06 0404 10 12 0404 10 14 0404 10 16 0404 10 26 0404 10 28 0404 10 32 0404 10 34 0404 10 36 0404 10 38 0404 90 21 0404 90 23 0404 90 29 0404 90 81 0404 90 83 0404 90 89  Butter and other fats and oils derived from milk  0405 10 11 0405 10 30 0405 10 50 0405 10 90 0405 20 90 0405 90 10 0405 90 90  Cut flowers and flower buds  0603 10 11 0603 10 13 0603 10 21 0603 10 25 0603 10 53  Other vegetables, fresh or chilled  0709 90 60    Vegetables (uncooked or cooked by steaming or boiling)  0710 40 00  Vegetables provisionally preserved  0711 90 30  Bananas, including plantains, fresh or dried  0803 00 19  Citrus fruit, fresh or dried  0805 10 01  0805 10 05  0805 10 09  0805 10 11  0805 10 15 (2) 0805 10 19 (2) 0805 10 21 (2) 0805 10 25  0805 10 29  0805 10 31  0805 10 33  0805 10 35  0805 10 37 (9)  0805 10 38 (9)  0805 10 39 (9)  0805 10 42 (9)  0805 10 44  0805 10 46 (9)  0805 10 51 (2) 0805 10 55 (2) 0805 10 59 (2) 0805 10 61 (2) 0805 10 65 (2) 0805 10 69 (2) 0805 30 20 (2) 0805 30 30 (2) 0805 30 40 (2)  Grapes, fresh or dried  0806 10 40   Apples, pears and quinces, fresh  0808 10 51  0808 10 53  0808 10 59  0808 10 61  0808 10 63  0808 10 69  0808 10 71  0808 10 73  0808 10 79  0808 10 92  0808 10 94  0808 10 98  0808 20 31  0808 20 37  0808 20 41  0808 20 47  0808 20 51  0808 20 57  0808 20 67   Maize (corn)  1005 10 90 1005 90 00  Rice  1006 10 10 1006 10 21 1006 10 23 1006 10 25 1006 10 27 1006 10 92 1006 10 94 1006 10 96 1006 10 98 1006 20 11 1006 20 13 1006 20 15 1006 20 17 1006 20 92 1006 20 94 1006 20 96 1006 20 98 1006 30 21 1006 30 23 1006 30 25 1006 30 27 1006 30 42 1006 30 44 1006 30 46 1006 30 48 1006 30 61 1006 30 63 1006 30 65 1006 30 67 1006 30 92 1006 30 94 1006 30 96 1006 30 98 1006 40 00  Grain sorghum  1007 00 10 1007 00 90  Cereal flours other than of wheat or meslin  1102 20 10 1102 20 90 1102 30 00  Cereal groats, meal and pellets  1103 13 10 1103 13 90 1103 14 00 1103 29 40 1103 29 50  Cereal grains otherwise worked  1104 19 50 1104 19 91 1104 23 10 1104 23 30 1104 23 90 1104 23 99 1104 30 90  Starches; inulin  1108 11 00 1108 12 00 1108 13 00 1108 14 00 1108 19 10 1108 19 90 1108 20 00  Wheat gluten, whether or not dried  1109 00 00    Other prepared or preserved meat, meat offal  1602 50 10 1602 90 61  Cane or beet sugar and chemically pure sucrose  1701 11 10 1701 11 90 1701 12 10 1701 12 90 1701 91 00 1701 99 10 1701 99 90  Other sugars, including chemically pure lactose  1702 20 10 1702 20 90 1702 30 10 1702 30 51 1702 30 59 1702 30 91 1702 30 99 1702 40 10 1702 40 90 1702 60 10 1702 60 90 1702 90 30 1702 90 50 1702 90 60 1702 90 71 1702 90 75 1702 90 79 1702 90 80 1702 90 99  Vegetables, fruit, nuts and other edible parts  2001 90 30  Tomatoes prepared or preserved  2002 10 10 2002 10 90 2002 90 11 2002 90 19 2002 90 31 2002 90 39 2002 90 91 2002 90 99    Other vegetables prepared or preserved  2004 90 10  Other vegetables prepared or preserved  2005 60 00 2005 80 00  Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, fruit or nut puree  2007 10 10 2007 91 10 2007 91 30 2007 99 10 2007 99 20 2007 99 31 2007 99 33 2007 99 35 2007 99 39 2007 99 51 2007 99 55 2007 99 58  Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of plants  2008 30 55 2008 30 75 2008 92 51 2008 92 76 2008 92 92 2008 92 93 2008 92 94 2008 92 96 2008 92 97  Fruit juices (including grape must)  2009 40 93 2009 60 11  2009 60 19  2009 60 51  2009 60 59  2009 60 71  2009 60 79  2009 60 90  2009 80 71 2009 90 49 2009 90 71  Food preparations not elsewhere specified or included  2106 90 30 2106 90 55 2106 90 59  Wine of fresh grapes, including fortified wines  2204 21 94 2204 29 62 2204 29 64 2204 29 65 2204 29 83 2204 29 84 2204 29 94  Vermouth and other wine of fresh grapes  2205 10 10 2205 10 90 2205 90 10 2205 90 90  Undenatured ethyl alcohol  2207 10 00 2207 20 00  Undenatured ethyl alcohol  2208 40 10 2208 40 90 2208 90 91 2208 90 99  Bran, sharps and other residues  2302 10 10 2302 10 90 2302 20 10 2302 20 90  Residues of starch manufacture and similar residues  2303 10 11  Dextrins and other modified starches  3505 10 10 3505 10 90 3505 20 10 3505 20 30 3505 20 50 3505 20 90  Agricultural Products (7)  Cheese and curd  0406 20 10 0406 40 10 0406 40 50 0406 90 02 0406 90 03 0406 90 04 0406 90 05 0406 90 06 0406 90 07 0406 90 08 0406 90 09 0406 90 12 0406 90 14 0406 90 16 0406 90 18 0406 90 19 0406 90 23 0406 90 25 0406 90 27 0406 90 29 0406 90 31 0406 90 33 0406 90 35 0406 90 37 0406 90 39 0406 90 61 0406 90 63 0406 90 73 0406 90 75 0406 90 76 0406 90 79 0406 90 81 0406 90 82 0406 90 84 0406 90 85  Wine of fresh grapes, including fortified wines  2204 10 11 2204 10 91 2204 21 11 2204 21 12 2204 21 13 2204 21 17 2204 21 18 2204 21 19 2204 21 22 2204 21 24 2204 21 26 2204 21 27 2204 21 28 2204 21 32 2204 21 34 2204 21 36 2204 21 37 2204 21 38 2204 21 42 2204 21 43 2204 21 44 2204 21 46 2204 21 47 2204 21 48 2204 21 62 2204 21 66 2204 21 67 2204 21 68 2204 21 69 2204 21 71 2204 21 74 2204 21 76 2204 21 77 2204 21 78 2204 21 87 2204 21 88 2204 21 89 2204 21 91 2204 21 92 2204 21 93 2204 21 95 2204 21 96 2204 21 97 2204 29 12 2204 29 13 2204 29 17 2204 29 18 2204 29 42 2204 29 43 2204 29 44 2204 29 46 2204 29 47 2204 29 48 2204 29 71 2204 29 72 2204 29 81 2204 29 82 2204 29 87 2204 29 88 2204 29 89 2204 29 91 2204 29 92 2204 29 93 2204 29 95 2204 29 96 2204 29 97   Undenatured ethyl alcohol  2208 20 12 2208 20 14 2208 20 26 2208 20 27 2208 20 62 2208 20 64 2208 20 86 2208 20 87 2208 30 11 2208 30 19 2208 30 32 2208 30 38 2208 30 52 2208 30 58 2208 30 72 2208 30 78 2208 90 41 2208 90 45 2208 90 52  Footnotes (1) (16/5-15/9) (2) (1/6-15/10) (3) (1/1-31/5) Excluding Emperor variety (4) Emperor variety or (1/6-31/12)  (5) (1/1-31/3) (6) (1/10-31/12) (7) (1/4-31/12) (8) (1/1-30/9) (9) (16/10-31/5) (10) (16/9-15/5)     Appendix 8  Fishery products to which Article 6(4) of this Protocol shall temporarily not be applicable  Fish Products (1)  CN code 96  Live fish  0301 10 90 0301 92 00 0301 99 11  Fish, fresh or chilled, excluding fish fillets  0302 12 00 0302 31 10 0302 32 10 0302 33 10 0302 39 11 0302 39 19 0302 66 00 0302 69 21  Fish, frozen, excluding fish fillets  0303 10 00 0303 22 00 0303 41 11 0303 41 13 0303 41 19 0303 42 12 0303 42 18 0303 42 32 0303 42 38 0303 42 52 0303 42 58 0303 43 11 0303 43 13 0303 43 19 0303 49 21 0303 49 23 0303 49 29 0303 49 41 0303 49 43 0303 49 49 0303 76 00 0303 79 21 0303 79 23 0303 79 29  Fish fillets and other fish meat  0304 10 13 0304 20 13  Pasta, whether or not cooked or stuffed  1902 20 10  Fish Products (2)  Live fish  0301 91 10 0301 93 00 0301 99 19  Fish, fresh or chilled, excluding fish fillets  0302 11 10 0302 19 00 0302 21 10 0302 21 30 0302 22 00 0302 62 00 0302 63 00 0302 65 20 0302 65 50 0302 65 90 0302 69 11 0302 69 19 0302 69 31 0302 69 33 0302 69 41 0302 69 45 0302 69 51 0302 69 85 0302 69 86 0302 69 92 0302 69 99 0302 70 00  Fish, frozen, excluding fish fillets  0303 21 10 0303 29 00 0303 31 10 0303 31 30 0303 33 00 0303 39 10 0303 72 00 0303 73 00 0303 75 20 0303 75 50 0303 75 90 0303 79 11 0303 79 19 0303 79 35 0303 79 37 0303 79 45 0303 79 51 0303 79 60 0303 79 62 0303 79 83 0303 79 85 0303 79 87 0303 79 92 0303 79 93 0303 79 94 0303 79 96 0303 80 00  Fish fillets and other fish meat  0304 10 19 0304 10 91 0304 20 19 0304 20 21 0304 20 29 0304 20 31 0304 20 33 0304 20 35 0304 20 37 0304 20 41 0304 20 43 0304 20 61 0304 20 69 0304 20 71 0304 20 73 0304 20 87 0304 20 91 0304 90 10 0304 90 31 0304 90 39 0304 90 41 0304 90 45 0304 90 57 0304 90 59 0304 90 97  Fish, dried, salted or in brine; smoked fish  0305 42 00 0305 59 50 0305 59 70 0305 63 00 0305 69 30 0305 69 50 0305 69 90  Crustaceans, whether in shell or not, live, fresh  0306 11 10 0306 11 90 0306 12 10 0306 12 90 0306 13 10 0306 13 90 0306 14 10 0306 14 30 0306 14 90 0306 19 10 0306 19 90 0306 21 00 0306 22 10 0306 22 91 0306 22 99 0306 23 10 0306 23 90 0306 24 10 0306 24 30 0306 24 90 0306 29 10 0306 29 90  Molluscs, whether in shell or not, live, fresh  0307 10 90 0307 21 00 0307 29 10 0307 29 90 0307 31 10 0307 31 90 0307 39 10 0307 39 90 0307 41 10 0307 41 91 0307 41 99 0307 49 01 0307 49 11 0307 49 18 0307 49 31 0307 49 33 0307 49 35 0307 49 38 0307 49 51 0307 49 59 0307 49 71 0307 49 91 0307 49 99 0307 51 00 0307 59 10 0307 59 90 0307 91 00 0307 99 11 0307 99 13 0307 99 15 0307 99 18 0307 99 90  Prepared or preserved fish; caviar and caviar substitutes  1604 11 00 1604 13 90 1604 15 11 1604 15 19 1604 15 90 1604 19 10 1604 19 50 1604 19 91 1604 19 92 1604 19 93 1604 19 94 1604 19 95 1604 19 98 1604 20 05 1604 20 10 1604 20 30 1604 30 10 1604 30 90  Crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebra  1605 10 00 1605 20 10 1605 20 91 1605 20 99 1605 30 00 1605 40 00 1605 90 11 1605 90 19 1605 90 30 1605 90 90   Fish Products (3)  Live fish  0301 91 90  Fish, fresh or chilled, excluding fish fillets  0302 11 90  Fish, frozen, excluding fish fillets  0303 21 90  Fish fillets and other fish meat  0304 10 11 0304 20 11 0304 20 57 0304 20 59 0304 90 47 0304 90 49  Prepared or preserved fish; caviar and caviar substitutes  1604 13 11  Fish Products (4)  Live fish  0301 99 90  Fish, fresh or chilled, excluding fish fillets  0302 21 90 0302 23 00 0302 29 10 0302 29 90 0302 31 90 0302 32 90 0302 33 90 0302 39 91 0302 39 99 0302 40 05 0302 40 98 0302 50 10 0302 50 90 0302 61 10 0302 61 30 0302 61 90 0302 61 98 0302 64 05 0302 64 98 0302 69 25 0302 69 35 0302 69 55 0302 69 61 0302 69 75 0302 69 87 0302 69 91 0302 69 93 0302 69 94 0302 69 95  Fish, frozen, excluding fish fillets  0303 31 90 0303 32 00 0303 39 20 0303 39 30 0303 39 80 0303 41 90 0303 42 90 0303 43 90 0303 49 90 0303 50 05 0303 50 98 0303 60 11 0303 60 19 0303 60 90 0303 71 10 0303 71 30 0303 71 90 0303 71 98 0303 74 10 0303 74 20 0303 74 90 0303 77 00 0303 79 31 0303 79 41 0303 79 55 0303 79 65 0303 79 71 0303 79 75 0303 79 91 0303 79 95  Fish fillets and other fish meat  0304 10 31 0304 10 33 0304 10 35 0304 10 38 0304 10 94 0304 10 96 0304 10 98 0304 20 45 0304 20 51 0304 20 53 0304 20 75 0304 20 79 0304 20 81 0304 20 85 0304 20 96 0304 90 05 0304 90 20 0304 90 27 0304 90 35 0304 90 38 0304 90 51 0304 90 55 0304 90 61 0304 90 65  Fish, dried, salted or in brine; smoked fish  0305 10 00 0305 20 00 0305 30 11 0305 30 19 0305 30 30 0305 30 50 0305 30 90 0305 41 00 0305 49 10 0305 49 20 0305 49 30 0305 49 45 0305 49 50 0305 49 80 0305 51 10 0305 51 90 0305 59 11 0305 59 19 0305 59 30 0305 59 60 0305 59 90 0305 61 00 0305 62 00 0305 69 10 0305 69 20   Crustaceans, whether in shell or not, live, fresh  0306 13 30 0306 19 30 0306 23 31 0306 23 39 0306 29 30  Prepared or preserved fish; caviar and caviar substitutes  1604 12 10 1604 12 91 1604 12 99 1604 14 12 1604 14 14 1604 14 16 1604 14 18 1604 14 90 1604 19 31 1604 19 39 1604 20 70  Fish Products (5)  Fish, fresh or chilled, excluding fish fillets  0302 69 65 0302 69 81  Fish, frozen, excluding fish fillets  0303 78 10 0303 78 90 0303 79 81  Fish fillets and other fish meat  0304 20 83  Prepared or preserved fish; caviar and caviar substitutes  1604 13 19 1604 16 00 1604 20 40 1604 20 50 1604 20 90   Appendix 9 Neighbouring developing countries For the implementation of Article 6(12) of this Protocol, the expression ‘neighbouring developing country belonging to a coherent geographical entity’ shall refer to the following list of countries: Africa:  Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia;  Caribbean:  Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Venezuela.     Appendix 10 Products to which the provisions of Articles 6(4), (8) and (11) of this Protocol shall not be applicable CN code  Description  1701  Cane or beet sugar and chemically pure sucrose, in solid form.  1702  Other sugars, including chemically pure lactose, maltose, glucose and fructose, in solid form; sugar syrups not containing added flavouring or colouring matter; artificial honey, whether or not mixed with natural honey; caramel.  1704 90 99  Sugar confectionery (including white chocolate), not containing cocoa: –  other:  – –  other:  – – –  other:  – – – –  other:  – – – – –  other:    1806 10 30  Chocolate and other food preparations containing cocoa: –  cocoa powder, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter:  – –  containing 65 % or more but less than 80 % by weight of sucrose (including invert sugar expressed as sucrose) or isoglucose expressed as sucrose    1806 10 90  Chocolate and other food preparations containing cocoa: –  cocoa powder, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter:  – –  containing 80 % or more by weight of sucrose (including invert sugar expressed as sucrose) or isoglucose expressed as sucrose    1806 20 95  Chocolate and other food preparations containing cocoa: –  other preparations in blocks, slabs or bars weighing more than 2 kg or in liquid, paste, powder, granular or other bulk form in containers or immediate packings, of a content exceeding 2 kg:  – –  other:  – – –  other    1901 90 99  Malt extract, food preparations of flour, groats, meal, starch or malt extract, not containing cocoa or containing less than 40 % by weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included, food preparations of goods of headings 0401 to 0404 , not containing cocoa or containing less than 5 % by weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included: –  other:  – –  other:  – – –  other    2101 12 98  Extracts, essences and concentrates, of coffee, tea or maté and preparations with a basis of these products or with a basis of coffee, tea or maté; roasted chicory and other roasted coffee substitutes, and extracts, essences and concentrates thereof:  –  extracts, essences and concentrates, of coffee, and preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates or with a basis of coffee:  – –  preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates or with a basis of coffee:  – – –  other    2101 20 98  Extracts, essences and concentrates, of coffee, tea or maté and preparations with a basis of these products or with a basis of coffee, tea or maté; roasted chicory and other roasted coffee substitutes, and extracts, essences and concentrates thereof: –  extracts, essences and concentrates, of tea or maté, and preparations with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates, or with a basis of tea or maté:  – –  preparations:  – – –  other    2106 90 59  Food preparations not elsewhere specified or included: –  other:  – –  flavoured or coloured sugar syrups:  – – –  other:  – – – –  other    2106 90 98  Food preparations not elsewhere specified or included: –  other:  – –  other:  – – –  other    3302 10 29  Mixtures of odoriferous substances and mixtures (including alcoholic solutions) with a basis of one or more of these substances, of a kind used as raw materials in industry; other preparations based on odoriferous substances, of a kind used for the manufacture of beverages: –  of a kind used in the food or drink industries:  – –  of the type used in the drink industries:  – – –  preparations containing all flavouring agents characterising a beverage:  – – – –  other:  – – – – –  other      ex 1006  Rice other than     Appendix 11 Overseas countries and territories Within the meaning of this Protocol ‘overseas countries and territories’ shall mean the countries and territories listed below: (This list does not prejudge the status of these countries and territories, or future changes in their status.) 1.  Country having special relations with the Kingdom of Denmark:  2.  Overseas territories of the French Republic:    New Caledonia and Dependencies,     French Polynesia,     French Southern and Antarctic Territories,     Wallis and Futuna Islands.   3.  Territorial collectivities of the French Republic:  4.  Caribbean part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands:    Aruba,     Bonaire,     Curaçao,     Saba,     Sint Eustatius,     Sint Maarten.   5.  British overseas countries and territories:    Anguilla,     Cayman Islands,     Falkland Islands,     South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands,     Montserrat,     Pitcairn,     Saint Helena, Ascension Island, Tristan da Cunha,     British Antarctic Territory,     British Indian Ocean Territory,     Turks and Caicos Islands,     British Virgin Islands.   Appendix 12 Eligible ACP States   Antigua and Barbuda   The Commonwealth of the Bahamas   Barbados   Belize   The Republic of Botswana   The Republic of Côte D’Ivoire  The Commonwealth of Dominica   The Dominican Republic    The Republic of Fiji   The Republic of Ghana   Grenada   The Cooperative Republic of Guyana   Jamaica   The Republic of Kenya   The Kingdom of Lesotho  The Republic of Madagascar   The Republic of Mauritius   The Republic of Mozambique   The Republic of Namibia    The Independent State of Papua New Guinea   Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis    Saint Lucia   Saint Vincent and the Grenadines   The Republic of Seychelles   The Republic of Suriname   The Kingdom of eSwatini   The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago  The Republic of Zimbabwe   INTERIM PROTOCOL 2B CONCERNING THE DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF ‘ORIGINATING PRODUCTS’ AND METHODS OF ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION WITH RESPECT TO PRODUCTS IMPORTED TO CAMEROON FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM”. CONTENTS  CHAPTER  TITLE  CHAPTER I  GENERAL PROVISIONS CHAPTER II   DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF ‘ORIGINATING PRODUCTS’ CHAPTER III  TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS CHAPTER IV   PROOF OF ORIGIN CHAPTER V   ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION CHAPTER VI   CEUTA AND MELILLA CHAPTER VII   TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS Appendix I   Introductory notes to the list in Appendix II   Appendix II  List of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials in order that the product manufactured can obtain originating status Appendix III Form for movement certificate Appendix IV Origin declaration Appendix V A Supplier declaration for products having preferential origin status Appendix VI  Information Certificate Appendix VII Overseas Countries and Territories   CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS  Article 1  This Protocol 2B (referred to in this Protocol 2B as "this Protocol") specifies the rules of origin and the methods of administrative cooperation applicable to determining whether goods are considered as "originating" from the United Kingdom for the purposes of the Agreement when exported to Cameroon.     Article 2  For the purposes of this Protocol, the following definitions are applicable:  1)  ‘chapters’ and ‘headings’: the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes) used in the nomenclature which makes up the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as ‘the Harmonized System’ or ‘HS’;  2) ‘classified’: the classification of a product or material under a particular heading;  3) ‘consignment’: products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;  4) ‘manufacture’: any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;  5) ‘goods’: both materials and products;  6) ‘material’: any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the manufacture of the product;  7) ‘product’: the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;  8) ‘ex-works price’: the price paid for the product ex works to the manufacturer in the United Kingdom or in Cameroon in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;  9) “maximum proportion of non originating materials”: the maximum proportion of non originating materials allowed for it to be considered that there has been sufficient working or processing to confer the status of an originating product. It can be expressed in terms of a percentage of the net weight of the said materials used, classified in a group of chapters, a chapter, a heading or a specific sub heading;  10) ‘OCT’: the countries and territories mentioned in Appendix VII;  11) ‘territories’: include territorial waters;  12) ‘added value’: the ex-works price minus the customs value of materials imported into either the United Kingdom or Cameroon ;  13) ‘customs value’: the value as determined in accordance with the 1994 Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);  14) ‘value of materials’: the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the territory concerned;  15) ‘value of originating materials’: the value of such materials as defined in point 14 applied mutatis mutandis. CHAPTER II  DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF ‘ORIGINATING PRODUCTS’  Article 3    The following products shall be considered as originating in the United Kingdom, for the purpose of this Agreement:  (a) products wholly obtained in the United Kingdom within the meaning of Article 4 of this Protocol;  (b)products obtained in the United Kingdom incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in the United Kingdom within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol.  Article 4  1.   The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in the United Kingdom:  (a) live animals born and raised there;    (b) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their sea or ocean bed;  (c) vegetable products harvested there;    (d) products from live animals raised there;    (e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there, as well as products of aquaculture, including mariculture, where the fish are born and raised there from fresh eggs, larvae or alevin;  (f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the territorial waters of the United Kingdom by its vessels;  (g) products made aboard its factory ships exclusively from products covered by point (f);  (h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials;  (i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;  (j) products extracted from the soil or subsoil;  (k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in points (a) to (j).  2.   The terms ‘its vessels’ and ‘its factory ships’ shall apply only to vessels and factory ships:  (a) which are matriculated or registered in the United Kingdom;  (b) which sail under the flag of the United Kingdom;  (c) which are at least fifty percent (50 %) owned by nationals of the United Kingdom or a Member State of the European Union or thirty percent (30%) owned by nationals of Cameroon; or are owned by companies:  . which have their head offices and their main places of business in the United Kingdom, in a Member State of the European Union or in Cameroon; and  . which are at least fifty percent (50%) owned by the United Kingdom and/or one or more of the Member States of the European Union and/or Cameroon and/or their public entities or nationals, or at least thirty percent (30%) owned by  Cameroon and/or by its public entities or nationals; and (d) the crew satisfies the requirements specified in paragraph 3 below.  3. The crew must be made up of at least ten percent (10%) of  nationals of the United Kingdom, Cameroon or a Member State of the European Union.   Article 5  1. For the purposes of this Protocol, products which are not wholly obtained shall be considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list in Appendix II are fulfilled.   2. The conditions referred to in Appendix II indicate, for all products covered by this  Protocol, the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing these products and apply only in relation to such materials.   3. If a product, which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.  4. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in Appendix II, should not be used in the manufacture of a given product may nevertheless be used, provided that:  (a) their total value does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the product for products from the United Kingdom; and (b) the application of paragraph (a) above does not result in exceeding the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating materials.  5. The provisions of paragraph 4 above shall not apply to products falling within chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised System.  Article 6  1. The following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 5 are satisfied:  (a) operations to ensure the preservation of products in good condition during transport and storage;  (b) breaking up and assembly of packages;  (c) the washing, the cleaning, the removal of dust, the elimination of oxide, oil, paint or other coating;  (d) the ironing or pressing of textiles;  (e) simple operations of painting or polishing;  (f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing and glazing of cereals and rice;  (g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps; partial or total milling of crystalized sugar;  (h) peeling, stoning and shelling of fruits and vegetables;  (i) sharpening, simple crushing or simple cutting;  (j) riddling, sifting or screening, sorting, classifying, matching (including the making-up of sets of articles);  (k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags in simple packaging operations;  (l) affixing or printing of marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;  (m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; mixing of sugar with any other material;  (n) simple assembly of parts to constitute a complete product or the disassembly of products into parts;  (o) a combination of two or more of the operations specified in points (a) to (n);  (p) slaughter of animals.   2.   All the operations carried out in either the United Kingdom or in Cameroon on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.  Article 7  1. Materials originating in Cameroon,  the European Union and the OCT shall be considered as materials originating in the United Kingdom when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary for such materials to have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing beyond that referred to in Article 6.  2. Working or processing carried out in Cameroon, the European Union and the OCT shall be considered as having been carried out in the  United Kingdom when the materials undergo subsequent working or processing in the United Kingdom beyond that referred to in Article 6.  3. When the working or processing carried out in the United Kingdom does not go beyond the operations referred to in Article 6, the product can only be considered to be originating in the United Kingdom if the value added there is higher than the value of materials used originating in any of the other countries or territories. If that is not the case, the product is considered to originate in the country or territory that provided the highest value of originating materials used in the processing of the product.    4. In determining whether, for the purposes of paragraph 1,  materials/products originate:  (a) in the OCT or the EU, the provisions of this Protocol shall apply mutatis mutandis;   (b) in Cameroon, the provisions of Protocol 2A shall apply.    Article 8  1.   The unit of qualification for the application of this Protocol shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System. Accordingly:  (a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonised System in a single heading, the whole shall constitute the unit of qualification;  (b)when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonised System, each product shall be taken individually when this Protocol is applied.  2.   Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonised System, packaging is included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.  Article 9  Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not separately invoiced shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.  Article 10  Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised System, shall be regarded as originating when all the component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 10 per cent, for the United Kingdom, of the ex-works price of the set.  Article 11  In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:  (a) energy and fuel;    (b) plant and equipment;    (c) machines and tools;    (d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product.  CHAPTER III TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS  Article 12  1. The conditions set out in Chapter II relating to the acquisition of originating status must be fulfilled without interruption in Cameroon or in the United Kingdom, save as provided in Article 7.  2. If originating goods exported from Cameroon or the United Kingdom to another country are returned, they shall be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:  (a) the goods returned are the same goods as those exported; and  (b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.  Article 13  1.  The preferential treatment provided for in this Protocol shall apply only to products that satisfy the requirements of this Protocol, and are transported directly between the territory of Cameroon, the  United Kingdom, the OCT for the purposes of Article 7, or through the territory of the European Union without entering any other territory. However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion arise, transhipment or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition. Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of Cameroon or the United Kingdom.  2. Consignments that are transported through the territory of the European Union may undergo operations including unloading, reloading, splitting, storing, labelling, marking or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition provided they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the European Union Member State 3. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the customs authorities of Cameroon by the production of:  (a) a single transport document covering the passage from the United Kingdom through the country of transit; or  (b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:  (i) giving an exact description of the products;  (ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable, the names of the ships or the other means of transport used; and  (iii)certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or  (c) failing those, any substantiating documents.  Article 14  1.   Originating products sent from the United Kingdom for exhibition in a country other than those referred to in Article 7 and sold after the exhibition for importation into Cameroon shall benefit on importation from the provisions of this Agreement provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:  (a) an exporter has consigned those products from the United Kingdom to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;  (b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in Cameroon;  (c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and  (d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.  2. A proof of origin shall be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV and submitted to the customs authorities of Cameroon in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition shall be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the nature of the products and the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.  3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products and during which the products remain under customs control.  CHAPTER IV PROOF OF ORIGIN  Article 15  1.   Products originating in the United Kingdom shall, on importation into Cameroon, benefit from the provisions of this Agreement upon submission of either:  (a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Appendix III; or  (b) in the cases specified in Article 20 paragraph 1 below, a declaration, hereinafter referred to as the ‘origin declaration’, given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified. The text of the origin declaration appears in Appendix IV.  2.   Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 25 below, benefit from the provisions of this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above.  Article 16  1. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities or any other empowered authorities of the United Kingdom on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorised representative.  2. For that purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out both the movement certificate EUR.1 and the application form, specimens of which are given in Appendix III. Those forms shall be completed in English in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products shall be given in the box reserved for that purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line shall be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.  3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the United Kingdom, produce all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  4. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the United Kingdom if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  5. The customs authorities issuing the movement certificate EUR.1 shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. For that purpose they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate. The customs authorities issuing the movement certificate EUR.1 shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 above are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.  6. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in Box 11 of the certificate.  7. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.  Article 17  1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 16 above, a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:  (a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or  (b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate EUR.1 was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.  2. The exporter shall indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and state the reasons for his request.  3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the corresponding file.  4. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively shall be endorsed with the following phrase:  • In French ‘DELIVRE A POSTERIORI’ or • In English ‘ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY’  5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 above shall be inserted in the ‘Remarks’ box of the movement certificate EUR.1.  Article 18  1. In the event of the theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.  2. The duplicate issued in this way shall be endorsed with the following word:  • In French ‘DUPLICATA’ • In English ‘DUPLICATE’  3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 above shall be inserted in the ‘Remarks’ box of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.  4. The duplicate, which shall bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as from that date.  Article 19  1. When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in Cameroon or in the United Kingdom, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of those products elsewhere within Cameroon or the United Kingdom. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs office under the control of which the products are placed.  2. The issue of the replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1 shall be endorsed with the following words in French ‘CERTIFICAT DE REMPLACEMENT’ or in English ‘REPLACEMENT CERTIFICATE’  3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 above shall be inserted in the ‘Remarks’ box of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.   Article 20  1.   An origin declaration may be made out:  (a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 below, or  (b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products the total value of which does not exceed six thousand Euros (EUR 6 000).  2. An origin declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  3. The exporter making out an origin declaration shall at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the United Kingdom, produce all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  4. An origin declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document the declaration the text of which appears in Appendix IV of this Protocol in English using the wording set out in Appendix IV and in accordance with the domestic law of the United Kingdom. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed characters.  5. Origin declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 below shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of the exporting country a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any origin declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.  6. An origin declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in Cameroon no longer than two (02) years after the importation of the products to which it relates.  Article 21  1. The customs authorities of the United Kingdom may authorise any exporter who makes frequent shipments of products under the provisions on trade in goods of the Agreement to make out origin declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation shall offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2. The customs authorities of the United Kingdom may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.  3. The customs authorities of the United Kingdom shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation number which shall appear on the origin declaration.  4. The customs authorities of the United Kingdom shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved exporter.  5. The customs authorities of  the United Kingdom may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1 above, does not fulfil the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes incorrect use of the authorisation.  Article 22  1. A proof of origin shall be valid for ten (10) months from the date of issue in the exporting country, and must be submitted within that period to the customs authorities of Cameroon.  2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of Cameroon after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 above may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.  3. In other cases of late presentation, the customs authorities of Cameroon may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the final date.  Article 23  Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of Cameroon in accordance with its applicable procedures. Those authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin. They may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer, in English, to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the application of the provisions of this Agreement.  Article 24  Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of Cameroon, dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonised System falling within Sections XVI and XVII or heading Nos 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonised System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.  Article 25  1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, that declaration can be made on the customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.  2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.  3. Furthermore, the total value of those products may not exceed EUR 500 in the case of small packages or EUR 1 200 in the case of products forming part of travellers' personal luggage.  Article 26  1. Evidence of the originating status within the meaning of this Protocol of the materials coming from the United Kingdom, the European Union, Cameroon or the OCT shall be given by a movement certificate EUR.1 or by the supplier's declaration a specimen of which is given in Appendix V.A, given by the exporter in the State or OCT from which the materials came.  2. Evidence of the working or processing carried out in the United Kingdom, the European Union, Cameroon or in the OCT shall be given by the supplier's declaration a specimen of which appears in Appendix V.B, given by the exporter in the State or OCT from which the materials came.  3. A separate supplier's declaration shall be given by the supplier for each consignment of material on the commercial invoice relating to that shipment or in an annex to that invoice, or on a delivery note or other commercial document relating to that shipment which describes the materials concerned in sufficient detail for them to be identified.  4. The supplier's declaration may be made out on a pre-printed form.  5. The suppliers' declarations shall be signed in manuscript. However, where the invoice and the supplier's declaration are established using electronic data-processing methods, the supplier's declaration need not be signed in manuscript provided the responsible official in the supplying company is identified to the satisfaction of the customs authorities in the State where the suppliers' declarations are drawn up. Those customs authorities may lay down conditions for the implementation of this paragraph.  6. The supplier's declarations shall be submitted to the competent customs office in the exporting State that has been requested to issue the movement certificate EUR.1.  7. The supplier making out a declaration shall be expected to present at any moment, at the request of the customs authorities of the country where the declaration was made, all necessary documents establishing that the information in the said declaration is correct.   8. Suppliers' declarations made and information certificates issued before the date of entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with Cameroonian Decree No 2016/367 of 3 August 2016shall remain valid.  Article 27  The documents referred to in Articles 16(3) and 20(3) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a movement certificate  EUR.1 or an origin declaration can be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol may consist inter alia of the following:  (a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained, for example, in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;  (b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Cameroon, the United Kingdom or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 7 above where those documents are used in accordance with domestic law;  (c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in Cameroon, the United Kingdom or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 7 above, issued or made out in Cameroon, the United Kingdom or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 7 above where those documents are used in accordance with domestic law;  (d) movement certificates EUR.1  or origin declarations proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in Cameroon, the United Kingdom or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 7 above and in accordance with this Protocol.  Article 28  1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep the documents referred to in Article 16 paragraph 3 above for at least three (03) years.  2. The exporter making out an origin declaration shall keep a copy of this origin declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 20 paragraph 3 above for at least three (03) years.  3. The supplier making out a declaration shall keep a copy of this declaration as well as the invoice, delivery note or other commercial document relating to that declaration and the documents referred to in Article 26 paragraph 7 above for at least three (03) years.  4. The customs authorities of the United Kingdom issuing a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep the application form referred to in Article 16 paragraph 2 above for at least three (03) years.  5. The customs authorities of Cameroon shall keep the movement certificates EUR.1 and the origin declarations submitted to them for at least three (03) years.  Article 29  1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that that document does correspond to the products submitted.  2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause that document to be rejected if those errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in that document.  Article 30  1. For the application of Article 20(1)(b) and Article 25(3), where products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the national currencies of Cameroon, the United Kingdom or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in Article 7 equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro shall be fixed annually by each of the countries concerned.  2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 20 paragraph 1(b) or Article 25 paragraph 3 above by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the amount fixed by the country concerned.  3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that currency of the amounts expressed in euro as on the first working day of October each year. The amounts shall be communicated by 15 October and shall apply from 1 January the following year.  4. A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion of an amount expressed in euro into its national currency. The rounded-off amount may not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5%. A Country may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, before any rounding-off, results in an increase of less than 15 per cent in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a decrease in that equivalent value.  5. The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the EPA Committee at the request of the United Kingdom or Cameroon. When carrying out that review, the EPA Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For that purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in euro.  CHAPTER V ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION  Article 31  1. In order to ensure the proper application of this Agreement , Cameroon and the United Kingdom commit themselves to putting in place:  a) National measures necessary for the implementation and the respect of the rules and procedures established by this Protocol, including where need arises, the necessary measures in relation to the application of Article 7 above;   b) The bodies and administrative systems needed for the management and for adequate control of the origin of products, and the respect of all other conditions provided for by this Protocol.   2. The actions provided for in paragraph 1 above shall be notified to the respective counter-Parties.   Article 32  1. The United Kingdom shall communicate to the Cameroonian authorities the addresses of the customs authorities and other competent bodies authorised to issue and/or carry out the subsequent verification of movement certificates EUR.1, origin declarations and suppliers’ declarations, together with the specimens of the stamps used for the issuing of the said certificates and declarations.   2. Movement certificates EUR.1 as well as origin declarations and suppliers’ declarations shall be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment from the date the information is received by the Cameroonian authorities.  3. Cameroon and the United Kingdom shall mutually inform each other, with immediate effect, through the competent authorities of the United Kingdom and the Cameroon Customs Administration, of any changes in the information mentioned in paragraph 1 above.  Article 33  1. In order to ensure proper application of this Protocol, the United Kingdom and Cameroon  shall assist each other, through their respective customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of movement certificates EUR.1, origin declarations or supplier's declarations and the correctness of the information given in those documents.  2. In addition, Cameroon and the United Kingdom:  a) Shall mutually provide the assistance necessary in case of a request for the follow up of the proper management and control of this Protocol in the country concerned, including site visits;  b) Shall verify the originating status of products and the respect of other conditions provided for in this Protocol.   3. The authorities consulted shall provide the relevant information concerning the conditions under which a product has been made, indicating in particular the conditions under which the rules of origin have been complied with in Cameroon, the United Kingdom and the other countries concerned.  Article 34  1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out on the basis of risk analysis, at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.  2. The customs authorities of Cameroon shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the origin declaration, or copies of those documents to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving, where appropriate, the substantive or formal reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof or origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.  3. Verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the United Kingdom. For that purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.  4. If the customs authorities of Cameroon decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.  5. The customs authorities requesting verification shall be informed of the results of that verification as soon as possible. Those results shall indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the United Kingdom and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.  6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within six (06) months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.  7. Where the verification procedure or any other information available appears to indicate that the provisions of this Protocol are being contravened, the United Kingdom, acting on its initiative or upon request of Cameroon, shall carry out appropriate enquires, or take necessary measures for such enquiries to be carried out, with due urgency to identify and prevent such contraventions. The exporting country may, in this light, invite the importing country to participate in the said controls.   Article 35  1. Verification of suppliers' declarations may be carried out on the basis of risk analysis, at random or whenever the customs authorities of the State where such declarations have been used to issue a movement certificate EUR.1 or origin declaration, have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of the document or the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in the said documents.  2. The customs authorities to which a supplier's declaration is submitted may request the customs authorities of the State where the declaration was made to issue an information certificate, a specimen of which is given in Appendix VI. Alternatively, the customs authorities to which a supplier's declaration is submitted may request the exporter to produce an information certificate issued by the customs authorities of the State where the declaration was made.  A copy of the information certificate shall be preserved by the office which has issued it for at least three (03) years.  3. The requesting customs authorities shall be informed of the results of the verification as soon as possible, and no later than six (06) months after their request. The results shall be such as to indicate positively whether the declarations concerning the supplier’s declaration are correct and enable the determination to be made whether, and in what measure, the information in the supplier’s declaration may be taken into account to issue a movement certificate EUR.1 or origin declaration.  4. The customs authorities of the United Kingdom who issue a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep the application form mentioned above for not less than three (03) years.  5. The verification shall be carried out by customs authorities in the State where the supplier's declaration is drawn up. In this regard, they shall have the right to call for any evidence or to carry out any check on the accounts of the supplier or any other control which they consider appropriate in order to verify the correctness of any supplier's declaration.  6. Any movement certificate EUR.1 or origin declaration issued or made out on the basis of an incorrect supplier's declaration shall be considered null and void.  Article 36  1. Whenever a dispute arises from the above mentioned controls and it cannot be resolved between the customs authorities that requested the control and those responsible for conducting it, or raises a question of interpretation of this Protocol, the said dispute shall be submitted to the EPA Committee.   2. For all intents and purposes, disputes between the importer and the Customs authorities of Cameroon shall be resolved in accordance with the legislation of the said country.   Article 37  Penalties provided for by the legislation of each party shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining preferential treatment for products.    Article 38  Cameroon and the United Kingdom shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products traded under cover of a proof of origin or a supplier's declaration and which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory are not replaced by other goods and do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.  CHAPTER VI CEUTA AND MELILLA  Article 39  1. The term ‘EU’ used in this Protocol shall not cover Ceuta and Melilla.  The term ‘products originating in the EU’ shall not cover products originating in Ceuta and Melilla.  CHAPTER VII TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS  Article 40  This Protocol and its Appendices and Protocol 2-A shall be replaced by a common reciprocal regime governing the rules of origin, adopted by the EPA Committee in accordance with Article 13 paragraph 2 of the Agreement.     Article 41  Goods which comply with the provisions of this Protocol and which on the date of its entry into forceare either in transit or are in temporary storage in customs warehouses or in free zones, in Cameroon, the European Union or the United Kingdom, may benefit from the provisions of this Protocol, subject to the submission to the customs authorities of the United Kingdom , within twelve (12) months of that date, of a movement certificate EUR.1 issued retrospectively by the customs authorities of the exporting country, together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly.  Article 42  The Appendices to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.               Appendix I  Introductory notes to the list in Appendix II  Note 1:   The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or processed within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol.   Note 2:   1. First two columns in the list describe the product obtained. The first column gives the heading number or chapter number used in the Harmonised System and the second column gives the description of goods used in that system for that heading or chapter. For each entry in the first two columns a rule is specified in columns 3 or 4. Where, in some cases, the entry in the first column is preceded by an ‘ex’, this signifies that the rules in columns 3 or 4 apply only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.   2. Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 1 or a chapter number is given and the description of products in column 2 is therefore given in general terms, the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4 apply to all products which, under the Harmonised System, are classified in headings of the chapter or in any of the headings grouped together in column 1.   3. Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within a heading, each indent contains the description of that part of the heading covered by the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4.   4. Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both columns 3 and 4, the exporter may opt, as an alternative, to apply either the rule set out in column 3 or that set out in column 4. If no origin rule is given in column 4, the rule set out in column 3 has to be applied.   Note 3:   1. The provisions of Article 5 of this Protocol concerning products having acquired originating status which are used in the manufacture of other products apply regardless of whether this status has been acquired inside the factory where these products are used or in another factory in the United Kingdom or in Cameroon.   Example:   An engine of heading No 8407, for which the rule states that the value of the non-originating materials which may be incorporated may not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works price, is made from ‘other alloy steel roughly shaped by forging’ of heading No ex 7224.   If this forging has been forged in the United Kingdom from a non-originating ingot, it has already acquired originating status by virtue of the rule for heading No ex 7224 in the list. The forging can then count as originating in the value calculation for the engine regardless of whether it was produced in the same factory or in another factory in the United Kingdom. The value of the non-originating ingot is thus not taken into account when adding up the value of the non-originating materials used.  2. The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or processing required and the carrying out of more working or processing also confers originating status; conversely, the carrying out of less working or processing cannot confer originating status. This if a rule provides that non-originating material at a certain level of manufacture may be used, the use of such material at an earlier stage of manufacture is allowed and the use of such material at a later stage is not.  3. Without prejudice to Note 3.2 where a rule states that ‘materials of any heading’ may be used, materials of the same heading as the product may also be used, subject, however, to any specific limitations which may also be contained in the rule. However, the expression ‘manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No …’ means that only materials classified in the same heading as the product of a different description than that of the product as given in column 2 of the list may be used.   4. When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufactured from more than one material, this means that any one or more materials may be used. It does not require that all be used.   Example:  The rule for fabrics of heading Nos 5208 to 5212 provides that natural fibres may be used and those chemical materials, among other materials, may also be used. This does not mean that both have to be used; it is possible to use one or the other or both.  5. Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a particular material, the condition obviously does not prevent the use of other materials which, because of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See also Note 6.3 below in relation to textiles).   Example:  The rule for prepared foods of heading No 1904 which specifically excludes the use of cereals and their derivatives does not prevent the use of mineral salts, chemicals and other additives which are not products from cereals.  However, this does not apply to products which, although they cannot be manufactured from the particular materials specified in the list, can be produced from a material of the same nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.   Example:  In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made from non-woven materials, if the use of only non-originating yarn is allowed for this class of article, it is not possible to start from non-woven cloth — even if non-woven cloths cannot normally be made from yarn. In such cases, the starting material would normally be at the stage before yarn — that is the fibre stage.   6. Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the maximum value of non-originating materials that can be used, then these percentages may not be added together. In other words, the maximum value of all the non-originating materials used may never exceed the highest of the percentages given. Furthermore, the individual percentages must not be exceeded in relation to the particular materials they apply to.   Note 4:   1. The term ‘natural fibres’ is used in the list to refer to fibres other than artificial or synthetic fibres. It is restricted to the stages before spinning takes place, including waste, and, unless otherwise specified, includes fibres that have been carded, combed or otherwise processed but not spun.   2. The term ‘natural fibres’ includes horsehair of heading No 0503, silk of heading Nos 5002 and 5003 as well as the wool fibres, fine or coarse animal hair of heading Nos 5101 to 5105, the cotton fibres of heading Nos 5201 to 5203 and the other vegetable fibres of heading Nos 5301 to 5305.  3. The terms ‘textile pulp’, ‘chemical materials’ and ‘paper-making materials’ are used in the list to describe the materials not classified in Chapters 50 to 63, which can be used to manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or yarns.   4. The term ‘man-made staple fibres’ is used in the list to refer to synthetic or artificial filament tow, staple fibres or waste, of heading Nos 5501 to 5507.   Note 5:   1. Where for a given product in the list a reference is made to this note, the conditions set out in column 3 shall not be applied to any basic textile materials, used in the manufacture of this product, which, taken together, represent 10 per cent or less of the total weight of all the basic textile materials used. (See also Notes 5.3 and 5.4 below).   2. However, the tolerance mentioned in Note 5.1 may only be applied to mixed products which have been made from two or more basic textile materials.   The following are the basic textile materials:   — silk,  — wool, — coarse animal hair, — fine animal hair, — horsehair, — cotton, — paper-making materials and paper, — flax, — true hemp, — jute and other textile baste fibres, — sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave,  — coconut, abaca, ramie and other vegetable textile fibres, — synthetic man-made filaments, — artificial man-made filaments, — current conducting filaments, — synthetic man-made staple fibres of polypropylene — synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester, — synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyacrylonitrile — synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyimide, — synthetic man-made staple fibres of polytetrafluoroethylene, — synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyphenylene sulphide, — synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyvinyl chloride, — other synthetic man-made staple fibres, — artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose, — other artificial man-made staple fibres, — yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped, — yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyester whether or not gimped, — products of heading 5605 (metallised yarn) incorporating strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film, — other products of heading 5605.  Example:  A yarn of heading No 5205 made from cotton fibres of heading No 5203 and synthetic staple fibres of heading No 5506 is a mixed yarn. Therefore, non-originating synthetic staple fibres that do not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) may be used up to a weight of 10 per cent of the yarn.   Example:  A woollen fabric of heading No 5112 made from woollen yarn of heading No 5107 and synthetic yarn of staple fibres of heading No 5509 is a mixed fabric. Therefore synthetic yarn which does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) or woollen yarn that does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from natural fibres, not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning) or a combination of the two may be used provided their total weight does not exceed 10 per cent of the weight of the fabric.  Example:  Tufted textile fabric of heading No 5802 made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and cotton fabric of heading No 5210 is only a mixed product if the cotton fabric is itself a mixed fabric being made from yarns classified in two separate headings or if the cotton yarns used are themselves mixtures.   Example:  If the tufted textile fabric concerned had been made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and synthetic fabric of heading No 5407, then, obviously, the yarns used are two separate basic textile materials and the tufted textile fabric is accordingly a mixed product.   3. In the case of products incorporating ‘yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped’ this tolerance is 20 per cent in respect of this yarn.   4. In the case of products incorporating ‘strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of an adhesive between two layers of plastic film’, this tolerance is 30 per cent in respect of this strip.   Note 6:   1. In the case of those textile products, which are marked in the list by a footnote referring to this Introductory Note, textile trimmings and accessories which do not satisfy the rule set out in the list in column 3 for the made up products concerned may be used provided that their weight does not exceed 10 % of the total weight of all the textile materials incorporated.   Textile trimmings and accessories are those classified in Chapters 50 to 63. Linings and interlinings are not being regarded as trimmings or accessories.   2. Any non-textile trimmings and accessories or other materials used which contain textiles do not have to satisfy the conditions set out in column 3 even though they fall outside the scope of Note 3.5.   3. In accordance with Note 3.5, any non-originating non-textile trimmings and accessories or other product, which do not contain any textiles, may anyway, be used freely where they cannot be made from the materials listed in column 3.   For example(1), if a rule in the list says that for a particular textile item, such as a blouse, yarn must be used, this does not prevent the use of metal items, such as buttons, because they cannot be made from textile materials.   4. Where a percentage rule applies, the value of trimmings and accessories must be taken into account when calculating the value of the non-originating materials incorporated.   Note 7:   1.  For the purposes of heading Nos ex(a)  vacuum distillation;  (b)  redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process (2) ;  (c)  cracking;  (d)  reforming;  (e)  extraction by means of selective solvents;   (f)  the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;  (g)  polymerisation;  (h)  alkylation;  (i)  isomerisation.    2.  For the purposes of heading Nos(a)  vacuum distillation;  (b)  redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process (2) ;  (c)  cracking;  (d)  reforming;  (e)  extraction by means of selective solvents;  (f)  the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;  (g)  polymerisation;  (h)  alkylation;  (i)  isomerisation;  (j)  in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, desulphurisation with hydrogen resulting in a reduction of at least 85 % of the sulphur content of the products processed (ASTM D 1266-59 T method);  (k)  in respect of products falling within heading No 2710 only, deparaffining by a process other than filtering;  (l)  in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, treatment with hydrogen at a pressure of more than 20 bar and a temperature of more than 250 °C with the use of a catalyst, other than to effect desulphurisation, when the hydrogen constitutes an active element in a chemical reaction. The further treatment with hydrogen of lubricating oils of heading No ex 2710 (e.g. hydrofinishing or decolourisation) in order, more especially, to improve colour or stability shall not, however, be deemed to be a specific process;  (m)  in respect of fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, atmospheric distillation, on condition that less than 30 % of those products distils, by volume, including losses, at 300 °C by the ASTM D 86 method;  (n)  in respect of heavy oils other than gas oils and fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, treatment by means of a high-frequency electrical brush-discharge.   3.  For the purposes of heading Nos ex   (1) This example is given for the purpose of explanation only. It is not legally binding.  (2) See additional Explanatory Note 4(b) to Chapter 27 of the Combined Nomenclature.       Appendix II List of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials in order that the product manufactured can obtain originating status The products mentioned in the list may not all be covered by the Agreement. It is therefore necessary to consult the other parts of the Agreement.   HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Chapter 01  Live animals  All the animals of Chapter 1 used must be wholly obtained    Chapter 02  Meat and edible meat offal  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapters 1 and 2 used must be wholly obtained    ex Chapter 03  Fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates, except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 3 used must be wholly obtained    0304  Fish fillets and other fish meat (whether or not minced), fresh, chilled of frozen  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the product    0305  Fish, dried, salted or in brine; smoked fish, whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process; flours, meals and pellets of fish, fit for human consumption  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 0306  Crustaceans, whether in shell or not, dried, salted or in brine; crustaceans, in shell, cooked by steaming or by boiling in water, whether or not chilled, frozen, dried, salted or in brine; flours, meals and pellets of crustaceans, fit for human consumption  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 0307  Molluscs, whether in shell or not, dried, salted or in brine; aquatic invertebrates other than crustaceans and molluscs, dried, salted or in brine; flours, meals and pellets of crustaceans, fit for human consumption  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 04  Dairy produce; birds' eggs; natural honey; edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 4    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  specified or included; except for:  used must be wholly obtained  0403  Buttermilk, curdled milk and cream, yoghurt, kephir and other fermented or acidified milk and cream, whether or not concentrated or containing added sugar or other sweetening matter or flavoured or containing added fruit, nuts or cocoa  Manufacture in which: —all the materials of Chapter 4 used must be wholly obtained; —any fruit juice (except those of pineapple, lime or grapefruit) of heading No 2009 used must already be originating; and —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 05  Products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 5 used must be wholly obtained    ex 0502  Prepared pigs' or boars' bristles and hair  Cleaning, disinfecting, sorting and straightening of pigs' or boars' bristles and hair    Chapter 06  Live trees and other plants; bulbs, roots and the like; cut flowers and ornamental foliage  Manufacture in which: —all the materials of Chapter 6 used must be wholly obtained; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed   40 %   of   the ex-works price of the product    Chapter 07  Edible vegetables and certain roots and tubers  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 7 used must be wholly obtained    Chapter 08  Edible fruit and nuts; peel of citrus fruits or melons  Manufacture in which: —all the fruit and nuts used must be wholly obtained; and —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the value of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 09  Coffee, tea, maté and spices; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 9    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  used must be wholly obtained  0901  Coffee, whether or not roasted or decaffeinated; coffee husks and skins; coffee substitutes containing coffee in any proportion  Manufacture from materials of any heading    0902  Tea, whether or not flavoured  Manufacture from materials of any heading    ex 0910  Mixtures of spices  Manufacture from materials of any heading    Chapter 10  Cereals  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 10 used must be wholly obtained    ex Chapter 11  Products of the milling industry; malt; starches; inulin; wheat gluten; except for:  Manufacture in which all the cereals, edible vegetables, roots and tubers of heading No 0714 or fruit used must be wholly obtained    ex 1106  Flour, meal and powder of the dried, shelled leguminous vegetables of heading No 0713  Drying and milling of leguminous vegetables of heading No 0708    Chapter 12  Oil seeds and oleaginous fruits; miscellaneous grains, seeds and fruit; industrial or medicinal plants; straw and fodder  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 12 used must be wholly obtained    1301  Lac; natural gums, resins, gum- resins and oleoresins (for example, balsams)  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of heading No 1301 used may not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    1302  Vegetable saps and extracts; pectic substances, pectinates and pectates; agar-agar and other mucilage's and thickeners, whether or not modified, derived from vegetable products:      –Mucilage's and thickeners modified, derived from vegetable products  Manufacture from non- modified mucilage's and thickeners    –Other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Chapter 14  Vegetable plaiting materials; vegetable products not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 14 used must be wholly obtained    ex Chapter 15  Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products; prepared edible fats; animals or vegetable waxes; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    1501  Pig fat (including lard) and poultry fat, other than that of heading No 0209 or 1503:      – Fats from bones or waste  Manufacture from materials of any heading except those of heading Nos 0203, 0206 or 0207 or bones of heading No 0506    – Other  Manufacture from meat or edible offal of swine of heading No 0203 or 0206 or of meat and edible offal of poultry of heading No 0207    1502  Fats of bovine animals, sheep or goats, other than those of heading No 1503      – Fats from bones or waste  Manufacture from materials of any heading except those of heading Nos 0201, 0202, 0204 or 0206 or bones of heading No 0506    – Other  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 2 used must be wholly obtained    1504  Fats and oils and their fractions, of fish or marine mammals, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified:      – Solid fractions  Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading No 1504    – Other  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapters 2 and 3 used must be wholly obtained    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 1505  Refined lanolin   Manufacture from crude wool grease of heading No 1505    1506  Other animals fats and oils and their fractions, whether or not refined, but not chemically modified:      – Solid fractions  Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading No 1506    –Other  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 2 used must be wholly obtained    1507 to 1515  Vegetable oils and their fractions:      –Soya, ground nut, palm, copra, palm kernel, babassu, tung and oiticica oil, myrtle wax and Japan wax, fractions of jojoba oil and oils for technical or industrial uses other than the manufacture of foodstuffs for human consumption  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    –Other  Manufacture in which all the vegetable materials used must be wholly obtained    1516   Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their fractions, partly or wholly hydrogenated, interesterified, reesterified or elaidinised, whether or not refined, but not further prepared  Manufacture in which: —all the materials of Chapter 2 used must be wholly obtained; —all the vegetable materials used must be wholly obtained. However, materials of headings 1507, 1508, 1511 and 1513 may be used    1517  Margarine; edible mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats or oils or of fractions of different fats or oils of this Chapter, other than edible fats or oils or their fractions of heading No 1516  Manufacture in which: —all the materials of Chapters 2 and 4 used must be wholly obtained; —all the vegetable materials used must be wholly obtained. However, materials of headings 1507, 1508, 1511 and 1513 may be used    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 16  Preparations of meat, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates; except for:  Manufacture from animals of Chapter 1.    1604 and 1605  Prepared or preserved fish; caviar and caviar substitutes prepared from fish eggs; Crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates, prepared or preserved  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 3 used does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 17  Sugars and sugar confectionery; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 1701  Cane or beet sugar and chemically pure sucrose, in solid form, flavoured or coloured  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    1702  Other sugars, including chemically pure lactose, maltose, glucose and fructose, in solid form; sugar syrups not containing added flavouring or colouring matter; artificial honey, whether or not mixed with natural honey; caramel:      –Chemically pure maltose and fructose  Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading No 1702    –Other sugars in solid form, flavoured or coloured  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    –Other  Manufacture in which all the materials used must already be originating    ex 1703  Molasses resulting from the extraction or refining of sugar, flavoured or coloured  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    1704  Sugar confectionery (including white chocolate), not containing cocoa  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  other than that of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the  ex-works price of the product  Chapter 18  Cocoa and cocoa preparations  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    1901  Malt extract; food preparations of flour, meal, starch or malt extract, not containing cocoa or containing less than 40 % by weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included; food preparations of goods of heading Nos 0401 to 0404, not containing cocoa or containing less than 5 % by weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included:      – Malt extract  Manufacture from cereals of Chapter 10    –Other  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    1902  Pasta, whether or not cooked or stuffed (with meat or other substances) or otherwise prepared, such as spaghetti, macaroni, noodles, lasagne, gnocchi, ravioli, cannelloni;      HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  couscous, whether or not prepared:  –Containing 20 % or less by weight of meat, meat offal, fish, crustaceans or molluscs  Manufacture in which all the cereals and derivatives (except durum wheat and its derivatives) used must be wholly obtained    –Containing more than 20 % by weight of meat, meat offal, fish, crustaceans or molluscs  Manufacture in which: —all cereals and derivatives (except durum wheat and its derivatives) used must be wholly obtained; —all the materials of Chapters 2 and 3 used must be wholly obtained    1903  Tapioca and substitutes therefore prepared from starch, in the form of flakes, grains, pearls, siftings or in similar forms  Manufacture from materials of any heading except potato starch of heading No 1108    1904  Prepared foods obtained by the swelling or roasting of cereals or cereal products (for example, corn flakes); cereals (other than maize (corn)) in grain form or in the form of flakes or other worked grains (except flour and meal), pre- cooked, or otherwise prepared, not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture: —from materials not classified within heading No 1806; —in which all the cereals and flour (except durum wheat and its derivates and Zea indurata maize) used must be wholly obtained(1); and —in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    1905  Bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits and other bakers' wares, whether or not containing cocoa; communion wafers, empty cachets of a kind suitable for pharmaceutical use, sealing wafers, rice paper and similar products  Manufacture from materials of any heading except those of Chapter 11    ex Chapter 20  Preparations of vegetables, fruit, nuts or other parts of plants; except for:  Manufacture in which all the fruit, nuts or vegetables used must be wholly obtained    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 2001  Yams, sweet potatoes and similar edible parts of plants containing 5 % or more by weight of starch, prepared or preserved by vinegar or acetic acid   Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 2004 and ex 2005  Potatoes in the form of flour, meal or flakes, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    2006  Vegetables, fruit, nuts, fruit-peel and other parts of plants, preserved by sugar (drained, glacé or crystallised)  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    2007  Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, fruit or nut purée and fruit or nut pastes, being cooked preparations, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 2008  –Nuts, not containing added sugar or spirit  Manufacture in which the value of the originating nuts and oil seeds of heading Nos 0801, 0802 and 1202 to 1207 used exceeds 60 % of the ex- works price of the product    –Peanut butter; mixtures based on cereals; palm hearts; maize (corn)  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    –Other except for fruit and nuts cooked otherwise than  by steaming or boiling in water, not containing added sugar, frozen  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  2009  Fruit juices (including grape must) and vegetable juices, unfermented and not containing added spirit, whether or not containing added sugar or other sweetening matter  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product     ex Chapter 21  Miscellaneous edible preparations; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    2101  Extracts, essences and concentrates, of coffee, tea or maté and preparations with a basis of these products or with a basis of coffee, tea or maté; roasted chicory and other roasted coffee substitutes, and extracts, essences and concentrates thereof  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —all the chicory used must be wholly obtained    2103  Sauces and preparations therefore; mixed condiments and mixed seasonings; mustard flour and meal and prepared mustard:      –Sauces and preparations therefore; mixed condiments and mixed seasonings  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, mustard flour or meal or prepared mustard may be used    –Mustard flour and meal and prepared mustard  Manufacture from materials of any heading    ex 2104  Soups and broths and preparations therefore  Manufacture from materials of any heading except prepared or preserved vegetables of heading Nos 2002 to 2005    2106  Food preparations not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product;    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 22  Beverages, spirits and vinegar; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —all the grapes or any material derived from grapes used must be wholly obtained    2202  Waters, including mineral waters and aerated waters, containing added sugar or other sweetening matter or flavoured, and other non-alcoholic beverages, not including fruit or vegetable juices of heading No 2009  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 17 used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product; —any fruit juice used (except for  pineapple, lime and grapefruit juices) must already be originating    2207  Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume of 80 % vol. or higher; ethyl alcohol and other spirits, denatured, of any strength.  Manufacture: —using materials not classified in headings 2207 or 2208, —in which all the grapes or any materials derived from grapes used must be wholly obtained or if all the other materials used are already originating, arrack may be used up to  a limit of 5 % by volume    2208  Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume of less than 80 % vol.; spirits, liqueurs and other spirituous beverages  Manufacture: —from materials not classified within heading Nos 2207 or 2208, —in which all the grapes or any material derived from grapes used must be wholly obtained or if all the other materials used    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  are already originating, arrack may be used up to a limit of 5 % by volume  ex Chapter 23  Residues and waste from the food industries; prepared animal fodder; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 2301  Whale meal; flours, meals and pellets of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic invertebrates, unfit for human consumption  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapters 2 and 3 used must be wholly obtained    ex 2303  Residues from the manufacture of starch from maize (excluding concentrated steeping liquors), of a protein content, calculated on the dry product, exceeding 40 % by weight  Manufacture in which all the maize used must be wholly obtained    ex 2306  Oil cake and other solid residues resulting from the extraction of olive oil, containing more than 3 % of olive oil  Manufacture in which all the olives used must be wholly obtained    2309  Preparations of a kind used in animal feeding  Manufacture in which: —all the cereals, sugar or molasses, meat or milk used must already be originating; —all the materials of Chapter 3 used must be wholly obtained    ex Chapter 24  Tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials of Chapter 24 used must be wholly obtained    2402  Cigars, cheroots, cigarillos and cigarettes, of tobacco or of tobacco substitutes  Manufacture in which at least 70 % by weight of the unmanufactured tobacco or tobacco refuse of heading No 2401 used must already be originating    ex 2403  Smoking tobacco  Manufacture in which at least 70 % by weight of the unmanufactured tobacco or tobacco refuse of heading No 2401 used must already be originating    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 25  Salt; sulphur; earths and stone; plastering materials, lime and cement; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 2504  Natural crystalline graphite, with enriched carbon content, purified and ground  Enriching of the carbon content, purifying and grinding of crude crystalline graphite    ex 2515  Marble, merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape, of a thickness not exceeding 25cm  Cutting, by sawing or otherwise, of marble (even if already sawn) of a thickness exceeding 25 cm     ex 2516  Granite, porphyry, basalt, sandstone and other monumental and building stone, merely cut, by sawing or otherwise, into blocks or slabs of a rectangular (including square) shape, of a thickness not exceeding 25 cm  Cutting, by sawing or otherwise, of stone (even if already sawn) of a thickness exceeding 25 cm    ex 2518  Calcined dolomite  Calcinations of dolomite not calcined    ex 2519  Crushed natural magnesium carbonate (magnetite), in hermetically-sealed containers, and magnesium oxide, whether or not pure, other than fused magnesia or dead-burned (sintered) magnesia  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, natural magnesium carbonate (magnetite) may be used     ex 2520  Plasters specially prepared for dentistry  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 2524  Natural asbestos fibres  Manufacture from asbestos concentrate    ex 2525  Mica powder  Grinding of mica or mica waste    ex 2530  Earth colours, calcined or powdered  Calcinations or grinding of earth colours    Chapter 26  Ores, slag and ash  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 27  Mineral fuels, mineral oils and products of their distillation; bituminous substances; mineral waxes; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 2707  Oils in which the weight of the aromatic constituents exceeds that of the non-aromatic constituents, being oils similar to mineral oils obtained by distillation of high temperature coal tar, of which more than 65 % by volume distils at a temperature of up to 250 °C (including mixtures of petroleum spirit and benzole), for use as power or heating fuels  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(2)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 2709  Crude oils obtained from bituminous minerals  Destructive distillation of bituminous materials    2710  Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous materials, other than crude; preparations not elsewhere specified or included, containing by weight 70 % or more of petroleum oils or of oils obtained from bituminous materials, these oils being the basic constituents of the preparations  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(3)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    2711  Petroleum gases and other gaseous hydrocarbons  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(3)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  the ex-works price of the product  2712  Petroleum jelly; paraffin wax, microcrystalline petroleum wax, slack wax, ozokerite, lignite wax, peat wax, other mineral waxes and similar products obtained by synthesis or by other processes, whether or not coloured   Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (3)   or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    2713  Petroleum coke, petroleum bitumen and other residues of petroleum oils or of oils obtained from bituminous materials  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(2)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product    2714  Bitumen and asphalt, natural; bituminous or oil shale and tar sands; asphaltites and asphaltic rocks  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es) (2)   or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product    2715  Bituminous mixtures based on natural asphalt, on natural bitumen, on petroleum bitumen, on mineral tar or on mineral tar  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(2)     HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  pitch (for example, bituminous mastics, cut-backs)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 28  Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorganic compounds of precious metals, of rare-earth metals, of radioactive elements or of isotopes; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 2805  ‘Mischmetall’  Manufacture by electrolytic or thermal treatment in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 2811  Sulphur trioxide  Manufacture from sulphur dioxide  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 2833  Aluminium sulphate  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 2840  Sodium perborate  Manufacture from disodium tetraborate pentahydrate  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 29  Organic chemicals; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   ex 2901  Acyclic hydrocarbons for use as power or heating fuels  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(2)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product    ex 2902  Cyclanes and cyclenes (other than azulenes), benzene, toluene, xylenes, for use as power or heating fuels  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(2)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used, provided their value does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product    ex 2905  Metal alcoholates of alcohols of this heading and of ethanol  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 2905. However, metal alcoholates of this heading may be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  2915  Saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids and their anhydrides, halides, peroxides  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 %  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  and peroxyacids; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  the materials of headings Nos 2915 and 2916 used may not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product  of the ex-works price of the product  ex 2932  –Internal ethers and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of heading No 2909 used may not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  –Cyclic acetals and internal hemiacetals and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives  Manufacture from materials of any heading  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  2933  Heterocyclic compounds with nitrogen hetero-atom(s) only  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings Nos 2932 and 2933 used may not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  2934  Nucleic acids and their salts; other heterocyclic compounds  Manufacture from materials of any heading. However, the value of all the materials of headings Nos 2932, 2933 and 2934 used may not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 30  Pharmaceutical products; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  3002  Human blood; animal blood prepared for therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic uses; antisera and other blood fractions and modified immunological products, whether or not obtained by means of biotechnological processes; vaccines, toxins, cultures of micro-organisms (excluding yeasts) and similar products:      –Products consisting of two or more constituents which have been mixed together for therapeutic or prophylactic uses or unmixed products for these uses, put up in measured doses or in forms or packing's for retail sale  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product    –Other:      ––human blood  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product    –animal blood prepared for –therapeutic or prophylactic uses  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product    –blood fractions other than  –antisera, haemoglobin, blood globulins and serum globulins  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  the ex-works price of the product  haemoglobin, blood globulins and serum globulins  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product    –– other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 3002. The materials of this description may also be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product    3003 and 3004  Medicaments (excluding goods of heading No 3002, 3005 or 3006):      –Obtained from amikacin of heading No 2941  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials of heading No 3003 or 3004 may be used provided their value, taken together, does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  –Other  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product. However, materials of heading No 3003 or 3004 may be used provided their value, taken together, does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 31  Fertilisers; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3105  Mineral or chemical fertilisers containing two or three of the fertilising elements nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium; other fertilisers; goods of this Chapter, in tablets or similar forms or in packages of a gross weight not exceeding 10 kg, except for: —sodium nitrate —calcium cyanamide —potassium sulphate —magnesium potassium sulphate  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 32  Tanning or dyeing extracts; tannins and their derivatives; dyes, pigments and other colouring matter; paints and varnishes; putty and other mastics; inks; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  the ex- works price of the product   ex 3201  Tannins and their salts, ethers, esters and other derivatives  Manufacture from tanning extracts of vegetable origin  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  3205  Colour lakes; preparations as specified in Note 3 to this Chapter based on colour lakes(4)   Manufacture from materials of any heading, except headings Nos 3203, 3204 and 3205. However, materials from heading No 3205 may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 33  Essential oils and resinoids; perfumery, cosmetic or toilet preparations; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  3301  Essential oils (terpeneless or not), including concretes and absolutes; resinoids; extracted oleoresins; concentrates of essential oils in fats, in fixed oils, in waxes or the like, obtained by effleurage or maceration; terpenic by-products of the deterpenation of essential oils; aqueous distillates and aqueous solutions of essential oils  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including materials of a different ‘group’(5) in this heading. However, materials of the same group may be used, provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)    ex Chapter 34  Soap, organic surface-active agents, washing preparations, lubricating preparations, artificial waxes, prepared waxes, polishing or scouring preparations, candles and similar articles, modelling pastes, ‘dental waxes’ and dental preparations with a basis of plaster; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3403  Lubricating preparations containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals, provided they represent less than 70 % by weight  Operations of refining and/or one or more specific process(es)(2)  or Other operations in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product    3404  Artificial waxes and prepared waxes:      –With a basis of paraffin, petroleum waxes, waxes obtained from bituminous minerals, slack wax or scale wax  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product     HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  – Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except: —hydrogenated oils having the character of waxes of heading No 1516; —fatty acids not chemically defined or industrial fatty alcohols having the character of waxes of heading No 3823; —materials of heading No 3404 However, these materials may be used provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 35  Albuminoidal substances; modified starches; glues; enzymes; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  3505  Dextrins and other modified starches (for example, pregelatinised or esterified starches); glues based on starches, or on dextrins or other modified starches:      – Starch ethers and esters  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 3505  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  – Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except those of heading No 1108  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3507  Prepared enzymes not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 %    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  of the ex-works price of the product  Chapter 36  Explosives; pyrotechnic products; matches; pyrophoric alloys; certain combustible preparations  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 37  Photographic or cinematographic goods; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  3701  Photographic plates and film in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, of any material other than paper, paperboard or textiles; instant print film in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, whether or not in packs:      –Instant print film for colour photography, in packs  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than heading Nos 3701 or 3702. However, materials from heading No 3702 may be used provided their value does not exceed 25 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  – Other  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than heading No 3701 or 3702. However, materials from heading Nos 3701 and 3702 may be used provided their value taken together, does  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product  3702  Photographic film in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of any material other than paper, paperboard or textiles; instant print film in rolls, sensitised, unexposed  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than heading Nos 3701 or 3702  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  3704  Photographic plates, film paper, paperboard and textiles, exposed but not developed  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than heading Nos 3701 to 3704  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 38  Miscellaneous chemical products; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 20 % of the ex- works price of the product   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3801  –Colloidal graphite in suspension in oil and semi colloidal graphite; carbonaceous pastes for electrodes  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    –Graphite in paste form, being a mixture of more than 30 % by weight of graphite with mineral oils  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading No 3403 used does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3803  Refined tall oil  Refining of crude tall oil  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3805  Spirits of sulphate turpentine, purified  Purification by distillation or refining of raw spirits of sulphate turpentine  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3806  Ester gums  Manufacture from resin acids  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 %  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3807  Wood pitch (wood tar pitch)  Distillation of wood tar  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  3808  Insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, anti- sprouting products and plant-growth regulators, disinfectants and similar products, put up in forms or packing's for retail sale or as preparations or articles (for example, sulphur-treated bands, wicks and candles, and fly-papers)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the products    3809  Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or fixing of dyestuffs and other products and preparations (for example, dressings and mordant's), of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or like industries, not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the products    3810  Pickling preparations for metal surfaces; fluxes and other auxiliary preparations for soldering, brazing or welding; soldering, brazing or welding powders and pastes consisting of metal and other materials; preparations of a kind used as cores or coatings for welding electrodes or rods  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the products    3811  Anti-knock preparations, oxidation inhibitors, gum inhibitors, viscosity improvers, anti-corrosive preparations and other prepared additives, for mineral oils (including gasoline) or for other liquids used for the same purposes as mineral oils:      –Prepared additives for lubricating oil, containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading No 3811 used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    – Other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 %    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  of the ex-works price of the product  3812  Prepared rubber accelerators; compound plasticizers for rubber or plastics, not elsewhere specified or included; anti-oxidising preparations and other compound stabilisers for rubber or plastics  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3813  Preparations and charges for fire- extinguishers; charged fire- extinguishing grenades  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3814  Organic composite solvents and thinners, not elsewhere specified or included; prepared paint or vanish removers  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3818  Chemical elements doped for use in electronics, in the form of discs, wafers or similar forms; chemical compounds doped for use in electronics  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3819  Hydraulic brake fluids and other prepared liquids for hydraulic transmission, not containing or containing less than 70 % by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3820  Anti-freezing preparations and prepared de-icing fluids  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3822  Diagnostic or laboratory reagents on a backing and prepared diagnostic or laboratory reagents, whether or not on a backing, other than those of heading No 3002 or 3006  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3823  Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids; acid oils from refining; industrial fatty alcohols.      –Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids, acid oils from refining  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  other than that of the product  – Industrial fatty alcohols  Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading No 3823    3824  Prepared binders for foundry moulds or cores; chemical products and preparations of the chemical or allied industries (including those consisting of mixtures of natural products), not elsewhere specified or included; residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included:      The following of this heading: – Prepared binders for foundry         – moulds or cores based on natural resinous products – Naphthenic acids, their water        – insoluble salts and their esters – Sorbitol other than that of          – heading No 2905 –Petroleum sulphonates, excluding                                                      – petroleum sulphonates of alkali metals, of ammonium or of ethanolamine's; thiophenated sulphonic acids of oils obtained from bituminous minerals, and their salts – – Ion exchangers – – Getters for vacuum tubes – Alkaline iron oxide for the                 – purification of gas – Ammoniacal gas liquors and    – spent oxide produced in coal gas purification– Sulphonaphthenic acids, their – water insoluble salts and their esters – – Fusel oil and Dippel's oil – Mixtures of salts having different                                                  – anions  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product.  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  – Copying pastes with a basis of – gelatine, whether or not on a paper or textile backing  – Other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    3901 to 3915   Plastics in primary forms, waste, parings and scrap, of plastic; except for heading Nos ex 3907 and 3912 for which the rules are set out below:      –Addition homopolymerisation products in which a single monomer contributes more than  99 % by weight to the total polymer content  Manufacture in which: —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50% of the ex- works price of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product(6)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  – Other  Manufacture in which the value of the materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product(6)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3907  –Copolymer, made from polycarbonate and acrylonitrile- butadiene-styrenecopolymer (ABS)  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, materials classified within the same heading may be used provided their value does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product(6)      – Polyester  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product and/or manufacture from polycarbonate of tetrabromo-(bisphenol A)    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  3912  Cellulose and its chemical derivatives, not elsewhere specified or included, in primary forms  Manufacture in which the value of any materials classified in the same heading as the product does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product    3916 to 3921  Semi-manufactures and articles of plastics; except for headings Nos ex 3916, ex 3917, ex 3920 and ex 3921, for which the rules are set out below:      –Flat products, further worked than only surface-worked or cut into forms other than rectangular (including square); other products, further worked than only surface- worked  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  – Other:      –Addition homopolymerisation –products in which a single monomer contributes more than 99 % by weight to the total polymer content  Manufacture in which: —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product; —the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product(6)    Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  – – Other  Manufacture in which the value of any materials of Chapter 39 used does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product(6)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 3916 and ex 3917  Profile shapes and tubes  Manufacture in which: —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 50 % of the ex- works price of the product; —the value of any materials classified within the same heading as the product does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 3920  – Ionomer sheet or film  Manufacture from a thermoplastic partial salt which is a copolymer of ethylene and metacrylic acid partly neutralised with metal ions, mainly zinc and sodium  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  –Sheets of regenerated cellulose, polyamides or polyethylene  Manufacture in which the value of any materials classified in the same heading as the product does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product    ex 3921  Foils of plastic, metallised  Manufacture from highly transparent polyester foils with a thickness of less than 23 micron(7)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  3922 to 3926  Articles of plastics  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 40  Rubber and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 4001  Laminated slabs of crepe rubber for shoes  Lamination of sheets of natural rubber    4005  Compounded rubber, unvulcanised, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used, except natural rubber, does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    4012  Retreaded or used pneumatic tyres of rubber; solid or cushion tyres, interchangeable tyre treads and tyre flaps, of rubber:      –Retreaded pneumatic, solid or cushion tyres, of rubber  Retreading of used tyres    – Other  Manufacture from materials of any heading, except those of heading Nos 4011 or 4012    ex 4017  Articles of hard rubber  Manufacture from hard rubber    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 41  Raw hides and skins (other than furskins) and leather; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 4102  Raw skins of sheep or lambs, without wool on  Removal of wool from sheep or lamb skins, with wool on    4104 to 4107  Leather, without hair or wool, other than leather of heading Nos 4108 or 4109  Retanning of pre-tanned leather  or  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    4109  Patent leather and patent laminated leather; metallised leather  Manufacture from leather of heading Nos 4104 to 4107 provided its value does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    Chapter 42  Articles of leather; saddlery and harness; travel goods, handbags and similar containers; articles of animal gut (other than silk worm gut)  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 43  Furskins and artificial fur; manufactures thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 4302  Tanned or dressed furskins, assembled:      –Plates, crosses and similar forms  Bleaching or dyeing, in addition to cutting and assembly of non-assembled tanned or dressed furskins    – Other  Manufacture from non- assembled, tanned or dressed furskins    4303  Articles of apparel, clothing accessories and other articles of furskin  Manufacture from non- assembled tanned or dressed furskins of heading No 4302    ex Chapter 44  Wood and articles of wood; wood charcoal; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  other than that of the product  ex 4403  Wood roughly squared  Manufacture from wood in the rough, whether or not stripped of its bark or merely roughed down    ex 4407  Wood sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, of a thickness exceeding 6 mm, planed, sanded or finger-jointed  Planning, sanding or finger- jointing    ex 4408  Veneer sheets and sheets for plywood, of a thickness not exceeding 6 mm, spliced, and other wood sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled of a thickness not exceeding 6 mm, planed, sanded or finger-jointed  Splicing, planning, sanding or finger-jointing    ex 4409  Wood continuously shaped along any of its edges or faces, whether or not planed, sanded or finger-jointed:      – Sanded or finger-jointed  Sanding or finger-jointing    – Beadings and mouldings  Beading or moulding    ex 4410 to ex 4413  Beadings and mouldings, including moulded skirting and other moulded boards  Beading or moulding    ex 4415  Packing cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar packing's, of wood  Manufacture from boards not cut to size    ex 4416  Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and other coopers' products and parts thereof, of wood  Manufacture from riven staves, not further worked than sawn on the two principal surfaces    ex 4418  –Builders' joinery and carpentry of wood  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, cellular wood panels, shingles and shakes may be used    – Beadings and mouldings  Beading or moulding    ex 4421  Match splints; wooden pegs or pins for footwear  Manufacture from wood of any heading except drawn wood of heading No 4409    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex Chapter 45  Cork and articles of cork; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    4503  Articles of natural cork  Manufacture from cork of heading No 4501    Chapter 46  Manufactures of straw, of esparto or of other plaiting materials; basket ware and wickerwork  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    Chapter 47  Pulp of wood or of other fibrous cellulosic material; recovered (waste and scrap) paper or paperboard  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 48  Paper and paperboard; articles of paper pulp, of paper or of paperboard; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 4811  Paper and paperboard, ruled, lined or squared only  Manufacture from paper- making materials of Chapter 47    4816  Carbon paper, self-copy paper and other copying or transfer papers (other than those of heading No 4809), duplicator stencils and offset plates, of paper, whether or not put up in boxes  Manufacture from paper- making materials of Chapter 47    4817  Envelopes, letter cards, plain postcards and correspondence cards, of paper or paperboard; boxes, pouches, wallets and writing compendiums, of paper or paperboard, containing an assortment of paper stationery  Manufacturing in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials   used   does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product    ex 4818  Toilet paper  Manufacture from paper- making materials of Chapter 47    ex 4819  Cartons, boxes, cases, bags and other packing containers, of paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding or webs of cellulose fibres  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed   40 %   of   the ex-works price of the product  ex 4820  Letter pads  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 4823  Other paper, paperboard, cellulose wadding and webs of cellulose fibres, cut to size or shape  Manufacture from paper- making materials of Chapter 47    ex Chapter 49  Printed books, newspapers, pictures and other products of the printing industry; manuscripts, typescripts and plans; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    4909  Printed or illustrated postcards; printed cards bearing personal greetings, messages or announcements, whether or not illustrated, with or without envelopes or trimmings  Manufacture from materials not classified within heading Nos 4909 or 4911    4910  Calendars of any kind, printed, including calendar blocks:      –Calendars of the ‘perpetual’ type or with replaceable blocks mounted on bases other than paper or paperboard  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed   40 %   of   the ex- works price of the product    – Other  Manufacture from materials not classified in heading Nos 4909 or 4911    ex Chapter 50  Silk; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 5003  Silk waste (including cocoons unsuitable for reeling, yarn  Carding or combing of silk waste    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  waste and garneted stock), carded or combed  5004 to ex 5006  Silk yarn and yarn spun from silk waste  Manufacture from(8): —raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —other natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials    5007  Woven fabrics of silk or of silk waste:  Manufacture from yarn(8)   Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 51  Wool, fine or coarse animal hair; horsehair yarn and woven fabric; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    5106 to 5110   Yarn of wool, of fine or coarse animal hair or of horsehair  Manufacture from(8): —raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials    5111 to 5113  Woven fabrics of wool, of fine or coarse animal hair or of horsehair:  Manufacture from yarn(8)    Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting,  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 52  Cotton; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    5204 to 5207  Yarn and thread of cotton  Manufacture from(8): —raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials    5208 to 5212  Woven fabrics of cotton:  Manufacture from yarn(8)   Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 53  Other vegetable textile fibres; paper yarn and woven fabrics of paper yarn; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    5306 to 5308  Yarn of other vegetable textile fibres; paper yarn  Manufacture from(8): —raw silk or silk waste Carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning,     HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  —natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials  5309 to 5311  Woven fabrics of other vegetable textile fibres; woven fabrics of paper yarn:  Manufacture from yarn(8)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 % of the ex-works price of the product  5401 to 5406  Yarn, monofilament and thread of man-made filaments  Manufacture from(8): —raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or —paper-making materials    5407 and 5408  Woven fabrics of man-made filament yarn:  Manufacture from yarn(8)  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  5501 to 5507  Man-made staple fibres  Manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  5508 to 5511  Yarn and sewing thread of man- made staple fibres  Manufacture from(8) : —raw silk or silk waste carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or —paper-making materials    5512 to 5516  Woven fabrics of man-made staple fibres:  Manufacture from yarn(8)   Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 56  Wadding, felt and non-wovens; special yarns; twine, cordage, ropes and cables and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture from (8): —coir yarn, —natural fibres, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or —paper making materials    5602  Felt, whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated:      –Needle loom felt  Manufacture from(8): — natural fibres, —chemical materials or textile pulp    –Other  Manufacture from(8): — natural fibres, —man-made staple  fibres, or —chemical materials or textile pulp    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  5604  Rubber thread and cord, textile covered; textile yarn, and strip and the like of heading No 5404 or 5405, impregnated, coated, covered or sheathed with rubber or plastics:      Rubber thread and cord, textile covered  Manufacture from rubber thread or cord, not textile covered     –Other  Manufacture from(8): —natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise processed for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or — paper-making materials    5605  Metallised yarn, whether or not gimped, being textile yarn, or strip or the like of heading No  5404 or 5405, combined with metal in the form of thread, strip or powder or covered with metal    Manufacture from(8):  — natural fibres, —man-made  staple  fibres not carded or combed or otherwise processed for spinning, —chemical materials or textile pulp, or —paper-making materials    5606  Gimped yarn, and strip and the like of heading No 5404 or 5405, gimped (other than those of heading No 5605 and gimped horsehair yarn); chenille yarn (including flock chenille yarn; loop wale-yarn   Manufacture from(8): —natural fibres,  —man-made staple fibres not carded or combed or otherwise processed for spinning,  —chemical materials or textile pulp, or —paper-making materials    Chapter 57  Carpets and other textile floor coverings:      –  Of needle loom felt  Manufacture from(8):  — natural fibres, or —chemical materials or textile pulp However jute fabric may be used as backing    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  – Of  other felt  Manufacture from(8): —natural fibres not carded or combed or otherwise processed for spinning, or —chemical materials or textile pulp    – Other  Manufacture from yarn(8). However jute fabric may be used as backing However jute fabric may be used as backing    ex Chapter 58  Special woven fabrics; tufted textile fabrics; lace; tapestries; trimmings; embroidery; except for:   Manufacture from yarn(8)   Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47.5 % of the ex-works price of the product  5805  Hand-woven tapestries of the types gobelins, Flanders, aubusson, Beauvais and the like, and needle- worked tapestries (for example, petit point, cross stitch), whether or not made up  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    5810  Embroidery in the piece, in strips or in motifs  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    5901  Textile fabrics coated with gum or amylaceous substances, of a kind used for the outer covers of books or the like; tracing cloth; prepared painting canvas; buckram and similar stiffened textile fabrics of a kind used for hat foundations  Manufacture from yarn    5902  Tyre cord fabric of high tenacity yarn of nylon or other polyamides, polyesters or viscose rayon:  Manufacture from yarn    5903  Textile fabrics impregnated, coated, covered or laminated  Manufacture from yarn  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  with plastics, other than those of heading No 5902  as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, razing, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  5904  Linoleum, whether or not cut to shape; floor coverings consisting of a coating or covering applied on a textile backing, whether or not cut to shape  Manufacture from yarn(8)     5905  Textile wall coverings:  Manufacture from yarn  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  5906  Rubberised textile fabrics, other than those of heading No 5902:  Manufacture from yarn    5907  Textile fabrics otherwise impregnated, coated or covered; painted canvas being theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths or the like  Manufacture from yarn  Printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, razing, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted fabric used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  5908  Textile wicks, woven, plaited or knitted, for lamps, stoves, lighters, candles or the like; incandescent gas mantles and tubular knitted gas mantle fabric      HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  therefore, whether or not impregnated:  –Incandescent gas mantles, impregnated  Manufacture from tubular knitted gas mantle fabric    –Other  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    5909 to 5911  Textile articles of a kind suitable for industrial use:      –Polishing discs or rings other than of felt of heading No 5911  Manufacture from yarn or waste fabrics or rags of heading No 6310    –Woven fabrics, of a kind commonly used in papermaking or other technical uses, felted or not, whether or not impregnated or coated, tubular or endless with single or multiple warp and/or weft, or flat woven with multiple warp and/or weft of heading No 5911  Manufacture from yarn(8):    –Other  Manufacture from yarn(8):    Chapter 60  Knitted or crocheted fabrics  Manufacture from yarn(8):    Chapter 61  Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, knitted or crocheted:      –Obtained by sewing together or otherwise assembling, two or more pieces of knitted or crocheted fabric which have been either cut to form or obtained directly to form  Manufacture from fabric    –Other  Manufacture from yarn(8):    Ex Chapter 62  Articles of apparel and clothing accessories, not knitted or crocheted; except for:  Manufacture from fabric    6213 and 6214  Handkerchiefs, shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils and the like:      – Embroidered  Manufacture from yarn(8)(9)  Manufacture from unembroidered fabric provided the value of the  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product(8)  –Other  Manufacture from yarn(8)(9)  Making up followed by printing accompanied by at least two preparatory or finishing operations (such as scouring, bleaching, mercerising, heat setting, raising, calendaring, shrink resistance processing, permanent finishing, decatising, impregnating, mending and burling) where the value of the unprinted goods of heading Nos 6213 and 6214 used does not exceed 47,5 % of the ex-works price of the product  6217  Other made up clothing accessories; parts of garments or of clothing accessories, other than those of heading No 6212:      – Embroidered  Manufacture from yarn(8)  Manufacture from unembroidered fabric provided the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product(8)   –Fire-resistant equipment of fabric covered with foil of aluminised polyester  Manufacture from yarn(8)  Manufacture from uncoated fabric provided the value of the uncoated fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product(8)   –Interlinings for collars and cuffs, cut out  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed   30 %   of   the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 63  Other made-up textile articles; sets; worn clothing and worn textile articles; rags; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  6301 to 6304  Blankets, travelling rugs, bed linen etc.; curtains etc.; other furnishing articles:      – Of felt, of non-wovens  Manufacture from(8): —fibres, or —chemical materials or textile pulp    –Other:      –Embroidered  Manufacture from yarn(9) (10)  Manufacture from unembroidered fabric (other than knitted or crocheted) provided the value of the unembroidered fabric used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  -Other  Manufacture from yarn(8)(9)     6305  Sacks and bags, of a kind used for the packing of goods  Manufacture from yarn(8):    6306  Tarpaulins, awnings and sunblinds; tents; sails for boats, sailboards or land craft; camping goods:  Manufacture from fabric    6307  Other made-up articles, including dress patterns  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    6308  Sets consisting of woven fabric and yarn, whether or not with accessories, for making up into rugs, tapestries, embroidered table cloths or serviettes, or similar textile articles, put up in packings for retail sale  Each item in the set must satisfy the rule which would apply to it if it were not included in the set. However, non-originating articles may be incorporated provided their total value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the set    ex Chapter 64  Footwear, gaiters and the like; except for:  Manufacture from materials of any heading except for assemblies of uppers affixed to inner soles or to other sole components of heading No 6406    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  6406  Parts of footwear (including uppers whether or not attached to soles other than outer soles); removable in-soles, heel cushions and similar articles; gaiters, leggings and similar articles, and parts thereof  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 65  Headgear and parts thereof, except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    6503  Felt hats and other felt headgear, made from the hat bodies, hoods or plateaux of heading No 6501, whether or not lined or trimmed  Manufacture from yarn or textile fibres(9)     6505  Hats and other headgear, knitted or crocheted, or made up from lace, felt or other textile fabric, in the piece (but not in strips), whether or not lined or trimmed; hair-nets of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed  Manufacture from yarn or textile fibres(9)     ex Chapter 66  Umbrellas, sun umbrellas, walking- sticks, seat-sticks, whips, riding- crops, and parts thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    6601  Umbrellas and sun umbrellas (including walking-stick umbrellas, garden umbrellas and similar umbrellas)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    Chapter 67  Prepared feathers and down and articles made of feathers or of down; artificial flowers; articles of human hair  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 68  Articles of stone, plaster, cement, asbestos, mica or similar materials; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 6803  Articles of slate or of agglomerated slate  Manufacture from worked slate    ex 6812  Articles of asbestos; articles of mixtures with a basis of asbestos or of mixtures with a  Manufacture from materials of any heading    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  basis of asbestos and magnesium carbonate  ex 6814  Articles of mica, including agglomerated or reconstituted mica, on a support of paper, paperboard or other materials  Manufacture from worked mica (including agglomerated or reconstituted mica)    Chapter 69  Ceramic products  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 70  Glass and glassware; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 7003, ex 7004 and ex 7005  Glass with a non-reflecting layer  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7001    7006  Glass of heading No 7003, 7004 or 7005, bent, edge worked, engraved, drilled, enamelled or otherwise worked, but not framed or fitted with other materials:      –glass plate substrate coated with dielectric thin film, semi conductor grade, in accordance with SEMII standards(11)  Manufacture materials of heading No 7006    – other  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7001    7007  Safety glass, consisting of toughened (tempered) or laminated glass  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7001    7008  Multiple-walled insulating units of glass  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7001    7009  Glass mirrors, whether or not framed, including rear-view mirrors  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7001    7010  Carboys, bottles, flasks, jars, pots, phials, ampoules and other containers, of glass, of a kind used for the conveyance or packing of goods; preserving jars of glass; stoppers, lids and other closures, of glass  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product or    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Cutting of glassware, provided the value of the uncut glassware does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  7013  Glassware of a kind used for table, kitchen, toilet, office, indoor decoration or similar purposes (other than that of heading No 7010 or 7018)  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product or Cutting of glassware, provided the value of the uncut glassware does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product or Hand-decoration (with the exception of silk-screen printing) of hand-blown glassware, provided the value of the hand-blown glassware does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 7019  Articles (other than yarn) of glass fibres  Manufacture from: —uncoloured slivers, rovings, yarn or chopped strands, or —glass wool    ex Chapter 71  Natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi precious stones, precious metals, metals clad with precious metal, and articles thereof; imitation jewellery; coin; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 7101  Natural or cultured pearls, graded and temporarily strung for convenience of transport  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 7102, ex 7103 and ex 7104  Worked precious or semi precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed)  Manufacture from unworked precious or semi precious stones    7106, 7108 and 7110  Precious metals:      – Unwrought  Manufacture from materials not classified    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  within heading No 7106, 7108 or 7110  or Electrolytic, thermal or chemical separation of precious metals of heading No 7106, 7108 or 7110 or Alloying of precious metals of heading No 7106, 7108 or 7110 with each other or with base metals  –Semi-manufactured or in powder form  Manufacture from unwrought precious metals    ex 7107, ex 7109 and ex 7111  Metals clad with precious metals, semi manufactured  Manufacture from metals clad with precious metals, unwrought    7116  Articles of natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    7117  Imitation jewellery  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product or      Manufacture from base metal parts, not plated or covered with precious metals, provided the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product    ex Chapter 72  Iron and steel; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    7207  Semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7201, 7202, 7203, 7204 or 7205    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  7208 to 7216  Flat-rolled products, bars and rods, angles, shapes and sections of iron or non-alloy steel  Manufacture from ingots or other primary forms of heading No 7206    7217  Wire of iron or non-alloy steel  Manufacture from semi finished materials of heading No 7207    ex 7218, 7219 to 7222  Semi-finished products, flat-rolled products, bars and rods, angles, shapes and sections of stainless steel  Manufacture from ingots or other primary forms of heading No 7218    7223  Wire of stainless steel  Manufacture from semi finished materials of heading No 7218    ex 7224, 7225 to 7228  Semi-finished products, flat-rolled products, hot-rolled bars and rods, in irregularly wound coils; angles, shapes and sections, of other alloy steel; hollow drill bars and rods, of alloy or non-alloy steel  Manufacture from ingots or other primary forms of heading No 7206, 7218 or  7224    7229  Wire of other alloy steel  Manufacture from semi finished materials of heading No 7224    ex Chapter 73  Articles of iron or steel; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 7301  Sheet piling  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7206    7302  Railway or tramway track construction materials of iron or steel, the following: rails, checkrails and rack rails, switch blades, crossing frogs, point rods and other crossing pieces, sleepers (cross- ties), fish-plates, chairs, chair wedges, sole pates (base plates), rail clips, bedplates, ties and other material specialised for jointing or fixing rails  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7206    7304, 7305 and 7306  Tubes, pipes and hollow profiles, of iron (other than cast iron) or steel  Manufacture from materials of heading No 7206, 7207, 7218 or 7224    ex 7307  Tube or pipe fittings of stainless steel (ISO No X5CrNiMo  Turning, drilling, reaming, threading, deburring and sandblasting of forged    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  1712), consisting of several parts  blanks the value of which does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  7308  Structures (excluding prefabricated buildings of heading No 9406) and parts of structures (for example, bridges and bridge-sections, lock-gates, towers, lattice masts, roofs, roofing frame-works, doors and windows and their frames and thresholds for doors, shutters, balustrades, pillars and columns), of iron or steel; plates, rods, angles, shapes, sections, tubes and the like, prepared for use in structures, of iron or steel  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, welded angles, shapes and sections of heading No 7301 may not be used    ex 7315  Skid chain  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading No 7315 used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 74  Copper and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    7401  Copper mattes; cement copper (precipitated copper)  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    7402  Unrefined copper; copper anodes for electrolytic refining  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    7403  Refined copper and copper alloys, unwrought:      – Refined copper  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  other than that of the product  –Copper alloys and refined copper containing other elements  Manufacture from refined copper, unwrought, or waste and scrap of copper    7404  Copper waste and scrap  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    7405  Master alloys of copper  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 75  Nickel and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed   40 %   of   the ex-works price of the product    7501 to 7503  Nickel mattes, nickel oxide sinters and other intermediate products of nickel metallurgy; unwrought nickel; nickel waste and scrap  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 76  Aluminium and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    7601  Unwrought aluminium  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; and —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product or    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  Manufacture by thermal or electrolytic treatment from unalloyed aluminium or waste and scrap of aluminium  7602  Aluminium waste or scrap  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 7616  Aluminium articles other than gauze, cloth, grill, netting, fencing, reinforcing fabric and similar materials (including endless bands) of aluminium wire, and expanded metal of aluminium  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product. However, gauze, cloth, grill, netting, fencing, reinforcing fabric and similar materials (including endless bands) of aluminium wire, or expanded metal of aluminium may be used;  —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of  the ex-works price of the product    Chapter 77  Reserved for possible future use in HS      ex Chapter 78  Lead and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product;  —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product    7801  Unwrought lead:      – Refined lead  Manufacture from ‘bullion’ or ‘work’ lead    –Other  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading No 7802 may not be used    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  7802  Lead waste and scrap  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 79  Zinc and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of  the ex-works price of the product    7901  Unwrought zinc  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading No 7902 may not be used    7902  Zinc waste and scrap  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 80  Tin and articles thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    8001  Unwrought tin  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, waste and scrap of heading No 8002 may not be used    8002 and 8007  Tin waste and scrap; other articles of tin  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    Chapter 81  Other base metals; cermets; articles thereof:      HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  –Other base metals, wrought; articles thereof  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials classified within the same heading as the product used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    –Other  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex Chapter 82  Tools, implements, cutlery, spoons and forks, of base metal; parts thereof of base metal; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    8206  Tools of two or more of the heading Nos 8202 to 8205, put up in sets for retail sale  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than heading Nos 8202 to 8205. However, tools of heading Nos 8202 to 8205 may be incorporated into the set provided their value does not exceed 10 % of the ex- works price of the set    8207  Interchangeable tools for hand tools, whether or not power- operated, or for machine-tools (for example, for pressing, stamping, punching, tapping, threading, drilling, boring, broaching, milling, turning, or screw driving), including dies for drawing or extruding metal, and rock drilling or earth boring tools  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product    8208  Knives and cutting blades, for machines or for mechanical appliances  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of   the ex-works price of the product    ex 8211  Knives with cutting blades, serrated or not (including  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  pruning knives), other than knives of heading No 8208  product. However, knife blades and handles of base metal may be used   8214  Other articles of cutlery (for example, hair clippers, butchers' or kitchen cleavers, choppers and mincing knives, paper knives); manicure or pedicure sets and instruments (including nail files)  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, handles of base metal may be used     8215  Spoons, forks, ladles, skimmers, cake-servers, fish-knives, butter- knives, sugar tongs and similar kitchen or tableware  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, handles of base metal may be used     ex Chapter 83  Miscellaneous articles of base metal; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 8302  Other mountings, fittings and similar articles suitable for buildings, and automatic door closers   Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, the other materials of heading No 8302 may be used provided their value does not exceed 15 % of the ex- works price of the product    ex 8306  Statuettes and other ornaments, of base metal  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, the other materials of heading No 8306 may be used provided their value does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product    ex Chapter 84  Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product  ex 8401  Nuclear fuel elements  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the final product    8402  Steam or other vapour generating boilers (other than central heating hot water boilers capable also of producing low pressure steam); super heated water boilers  Manufacture in which:  —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of   the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the product  8403 and 8404  Central heating boilers other than those of heading No 8402 and auxiliary plant for central heating boilers  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than heading No 8403 or 8404  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  8406  Steam turbines and other vapour turbines  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8407  Spark-ignition reciprocating or rotary internal combustion piston engines  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8408  Compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi diesel engines)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8409  Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the engines of heading No 8407 or 8408  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8411  Turbo-jets, turbo propellers and other gas turbines  Manufacture in which:  —all the materials used areclassified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  exceed 30 % of   the ex-works price of the product  8412  Other engines and motors  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 8413  Rotary positive displacement pumps  Manufacture in which:  —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 8414  Industrial fans, blowers and the like   Manufacture in which:  —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of   the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8415  Air conditioning machines, comprising a motor-driven fan and elements for changing the temperature and humidity, including those machines in which the humidity cannot be separately regulated  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8418  Refrigerators, freezers and other refrigerating or freezing equipment, electric or other; heat pumps other than air conditioning machines of heading No 8415  Manufacture in which:  —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product; —the value of all the non- originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex- works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex 8419  Machines for wood, paper pulp and paperboard industries  Manufacture:  —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product   8420  Calendaring or other rolling machines, other than for metals or glass, and cylinders therefore    Manufacture:  —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8423  Weighing machinery (excluding balances of a sensitivity of 5 cg or better), including weight operated counting or checking machines; weighing machine weights of all kinds  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8425 to 8428  Lifting, handling, loading or unloading machinery  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8431 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8429  Self-propelled bulldozers, angle dozers, graders, levellers, scrapers, mechanical shovels, excavators, shovel loaders,      HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  tamping machines and road rollers:  –Road rollers  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    –Other  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8431 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8430  Other moving, grading, levelling, scraping, excavating, tamping, compacting, extracting or boring machinery, for earth, minerals or ores; pile-drivers and pile-extractors; snow-ploughs and snow-blowers  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the value of the materials classified within heading No 8431 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8439  Machinery for making pulp of fibrous cellulosic material or for making or finishing paper or paperboard  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8441  Other machinery for making up paper pulp, paper or paperboard, including cutting machines of all kinds  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within the same heading as the product are only used up to a value of 20 % of the ex-works price of the product  8444 to 8447  Machines of these headings for use in the textile industry  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 8448  Auxiliary machinery for use with machines of headings Nos 8444 and 8445  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8452  Sewing machines, other than book-sewing machines of heading No 8440; furniture, bases and covers specially designed for sewing machines; sewing machine needles:      –Sewing machines (lock  stitch only) with heads of a weight not exceeding 16 kg without motor or 17 kg with motor  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used in assembling the head (without motor) does not exceed the value of the originating materials used; —the thread tension, crochet and zigzag mechanisms used are already originating    –Other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-    8456 to 8466  Machine-tools and machines and their parts and accessories of headings Nos 8456 to 8466  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8469 to 8472  Office machines (for example, typewriters, calculating  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  machines, automatic data processing machines, duplicating machines, stapling machines)  used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8480  Moulding boxes for metal foundry; mould bases; moulding patterns; moulds for metal (other than ingot moulds), metal carbides, glass, mineral materials, rubber or plastics  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    8482  Ball or roller bearings  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8484  Gaskets and similar joints of metal sheeting combined with other material or of two or more layers of metal; sets or assortments of gaskets and similar joints, dissimilar in composition, put up in pouches, envelopes or similar packing's; mechanical seals  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8485  Machinery parts, not containing electrical connectors, insulators, coils, contacts or other electrical features, not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 85  Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles; except for:  Manufacture in which —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8501  Electric motors and generators (excluding generating sets)  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8503 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  8502  Electric generating sets and rotary converters  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8501 or 8503, taken together, are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 8504  Power supply units for automatic data-processing machines  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 8518  Microphones and stands therefore; loudspeakers, whether or not mounted in their enclosures; audio-frequency electric amplifiers; electric sound amplifier sets  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; and —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8519  Turntables (record-decks), record-players, cassette- players and other sound reproducing apparatus, not incorporating a sound recording device  Manufacture:  —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8520  Magnetic tape recorders and other sound recording apparatus, whether or not  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 %  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  incorporating a sound reproducing device  exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the  of the ex-works price of the product  8521  Video recording or reproducing apparatus, whether or not incorporating a video tuner  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8522  Parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of heading Nos 8519 to 8521  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8523  Prepared unrecorded media for sound recording or similar recording of other phenomena, other than products of Chapter 37  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8524  Records, tapes and other recorded media for sound or other similarly recorded phenomena, including matrices and masters for the production of records, but excluding products of Chapter 37:      –Matrices and masters for the production of records  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    –Other  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8523 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  ex-works price of the product  8525  Transmission apparatus for radio-telephony, radio-telegraphy, radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not incorporating reception apparatus or sound recording or reproducing apparatus; television cameras; still image video cameras and other video camera recorders  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8526  Radar apparatus, radio navigational aid apparatus and radio remote control apparatus  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8527  Reception apparatus for radio-telephony, radio-telegraphy or radio broadcasting, whether or not combined, in the same housing, with sound recording or reproducing apparatus or a clock  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8528  Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus; video monitors and video projectors  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8529  Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of heading Nos 8525 to 8528:      –Suitable for use solely or principally with video recording or reproducing apparatus  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 %    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  of the ex-works price of the product  –Other  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8535 and 8536  Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making connections to or in electrical circuits  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8538 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8537  Boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases, equipped with two or more apparatus of heading No 8535 or 8536, for electric control or the distribution of electricity, including those incorporating instruments or apparatus of Chapter 90, and numerical control apparatus, other than switching apparatus of heading No 8517  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8538 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 8541  Diodes, transistors and similar semi conductor devices, except wafers not yet cut into chips  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  8542  Electronic integrated circuits and micro assemblies  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 %  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 8541 or 8542, taken together, are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  of the ex-works price of the product  8544  Insulated (including enamelled or anodised) wire, cable (including coaxial cable) and other insulated electric conductors, whether or not fitted with connectors; optical fibre cables, made up of individually sheathed fibres, whether or not assembled with electric conductors or fitted with connectors  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8545  Carbon electrodes, carbon brushes, lamp carbons, battery carbons and other articles of graphite or other carbon, with or without metal, of a kind used for electrical purposes  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8546  Electrical insulators of any material  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8547  Insulating fittings for electrical machines, appliances or equipment, being fittings wholly of insulating materials apart from any minor components of metal (for example, threaded sockets) incorporated during moulding solely for purposes of assembly other than insulators of heading No 8546; electrical conduit tubing and joints therefore, of base metal lined with insulating material   Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8548  Waste and scrap of primary cells, primary batteries and electric accumulators; spent primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric accumulators; electrical parts of machinery or apparatus, not  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter  ex Chapter 86  Railway or tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts thereof; railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings and parts thereof; mechanical (including electro-mechanical) traffic signalling equipment of all kinds; except for:  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8608  Railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings; mechanical (including electro-mechanical) signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields; parts of the foregoing  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 87  Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling-stock, and parts and accessories thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    8709  Works trucks, self-propelled, not fitted with lifting or handling equipment, of the type used in factories, warehouses, dock areas or airports for short distance transport of goods; tractors of the type used on railway station platforms; parts of the foregoing vehicles  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8710  Tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles, motorised, whether or not fitted with weapons, and parts of such vehicles  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8711  Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles fitted with an auxiliary motor, with or without side-cars; side-cars:      HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  –With reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity:      – –Not exceeding 50 cc  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product    – –Exceeding 50 cc  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  –Other  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 8712  Bicycles without ball bearings  Manufacture from materials not classified in heading No 8714  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  8715  Baby carriages and parts thereof  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of   the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  8716  Trailers and semi trailers; other vehicles, not mechanically propelled; parts thereof  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product;  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 88  Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 8804  Rotochutes  Manufacture from materials of any heading including other materials of heading No 8804  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  8805  Aircraft launching gear; deck- arrestor or similar gear; ground flying trainers; parts of the foregoing articles  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Chapter 89  Ships, boats and floating structures  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, hulls of heading No 8906 may not be used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 90  Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking, precision, medical or surgical instruments and apparatus; parts and accessories thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials   used   does not exceed 30 % of the ex- works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  9001  Optical fibres and optical fibre bundles; optical fibre cables other than those of heading No 8544; sheets and plates of polarising material; lenses (including contact lenses), prisms, mirrors and other optical elements, of any material, unmounted, other than such elements of glass not optically worked  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9002  Lenses, prisms, mirrors and other optical elements, of any material, mounted, being parts  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 %    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  of or fittings for instruments or apparatus, other than such elements of glass not optically worked  of the ex-works price of the product  9004  Spectacles, goggles and the like, corrective, protective or other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 9005  Binoculars, monocular, other optical telescopes, and mountings therefore, except for astronomical refracting telescopes and mountings therefore  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 9006  Photographic (other than cinematographic) cameras; photographic flashlight apparatus and flashbulbs other than electrically ignited flashbulbs  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  9007  Cinematographic cameras and projectors, whether or not incorporating sound recording or reproducing apparatus  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  of the originating materials used  9011  Compound optical microscopes, including those for photomicrography, cinephotomicrography or micro projection  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 9014  Other navigational instruments and appliances  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9015  Surveying (including photogram metrical surveying), hydrographic, oceanographic, hydrological, meteorological or geophysical instruments and appliances, excluding compasses; rangefinders  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9016  Balances of a sensitivity of 5 cg or better, with or without weights  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9017  Drawing, marking-out or mathematical calculating instruments (for example, drafting machines, pantographs, protractors, drawing sets, slide rules, disc calculators); instruments for measuring length, for use in the hand (for example, measuring rods and tapes, micrometers, callipers), not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9018  Instruments and appliances used in medical, surgical, dental or veterinary sciences, including scintigraphic apparatus, other      HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  electro-medical apparatus and sight-testing instruments:  –Dentists' chairs incorporating dental appliances or dentists' spittoons  Manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No 9018  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  –Other  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  9019  Mechano-therapy appliances; massage apparatus; psychological aptitude-testing apparatus; ozone therapy, oxygen therapy, aerosol therapy, artificial respiration or other therapeutic respiration apparatus  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed   30 %   of   the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  9020  Other breathing appliances and gas masks, excluding protective masks having neither mechanical parts nor  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 25 % of the ex-works price of the product  9024  Machines and appliances for testing the hardness, strength, compressibility, elasticity or other mechanical properties of materials (for example, metals, wood, textiles, paper, plastics)  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9025  Hydrometers and similar floating instruments, thermometers, pyrometers, barometers, hygrometers and psychrometers, recording or not, and any combination of these instruments  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9026  Instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking the flow, level, pressure or other variables of liquids or gases (for example, flow meters, level gauges, manometers, heat meters), excluding instruments and apparatus of heading No 9014, 9015, 9028 or 9032  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9027  Instruments and apparatus for physical or chemical analysis (for example, Polari meters, refract meters, spectrometers, gas or smoke analysis apparatus); instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking viscosity, porosity, expansion, surface tension or the like; instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking quantities of heat, sound or light (including exposure meters); microtomes  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9028  Gas, liquid or electricity supply or production meters, including calibrating meters therefore:      – Parts and accessories  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    – Other  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  9029  Revolution counters, production counters, taximeters, mileometers, pedometers and the like; speed indicators and tachometers, other than those of heading Nos 9014 or 9015; stroboscopes  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9030  Oscilloscopes, spectrum analysers and other instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking electrical quantities,  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 %    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  excluding meters of heading No 9028; instruments and apparatus for measuring or detecting alpha, beta, gamma, X-ray, cosmic or other ionising radiations  of the ex-works price of the product  9031  Measuring or checking instruments, appliances and machines, not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter; profile projectors  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9032  Automatic regulating or controlling instruments and apparatus  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9033  Parts and accessories (not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter) for machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus of Chapter 90  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 91  Clocks and watches and parts thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    9105  Other clocks  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  9109  Clock movements, complete and assembled  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where the value of all the non-originating materials used does not exceed the value of the originating materials used  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  9110  Complete watch or clock movements, unassembled or partly assembled (movement sets); incomplete watch or clock  Manufacture: —in which the value of all the materials used does not  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 %  HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  movements, assembled; rough watch or clock movements  exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product; —where, within the above limit, the materials classified within heading No 9114 are only used up to a value of 10 % of the ex-works price of the product  of the ex-works price of the product  9111  Watch cases and parts thereof  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  9112  Clock cases and cases of a similar type for other goods of this Chapter, and parts thereof  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product  9113  Watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets, and parts thereof:      –Of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated, or of metal clad with precious metal  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    –Other  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    Chapter 92  Musical instruments; parts and accessories of such articles  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    Chapter 93  Arms and ammunition; parts and accessories thereof  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 %    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  of the ex-works price of the product  ex Chapter 94  Furniture; bedding, mattresses, mattress supports, cushions and similar stuffed furnishings; lamps and lighting fittings, not elsewhere specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and the like; prefabricated buildings; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  ex 9401 and ex 9403  Base metal furniture, incorporating unstuffed cotton cloth of a weight of 300 g/m2 or less  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified in a heading other than that of the product  or Manufacture from cotton cloth already made up in a form ready for use of heading No 9401 or 9403, provided: —its value does not exceed 20 % of the ex-works price of the product; —all the other materials used are already originating and are classified in a heading other than heading No 9401 or 9403  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product  9405  Lamps and lighting fittings including searchlights and spotlights and parts thereof, not elsewhere specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and the like, having a permanently fixed light source, and parts thereof not elsewhere specified or included  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    9406  Prefabricated buildings  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex Chapter 95  Toys, games and sports requisites; parts and accessories thereof; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  9503  Other toys; reduced-size (‘scale’) models and similar recreational models, working or not; puzzles of all kinds  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product; —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 9506  Golf clubs and parts thereof  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, roughly shaped blocks for making golf club heads may be used    ex Chapter 96  Miscellaneous manufactured articles; except for:  Manufacture in which all the materials used is classified within a heading other than that of the product    ex 9601 and ex 9602  Articles of animal, vegetable or mineral carving materials  Manufacture from ‘worked’ carving materials of the same heading    ex 9603  Brooms and brushes (except for besoms and the like and brushes made from marten or squirrel hair), hand-operated mechanical floor sweepers, not motorised, paint pads and rollers, squeegees and mops  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price of the product    9605  Travel sets for personal toilet, sewing or shoe or clothes cleaning  Each item in the set must satisfy the rule, which would apply to it if it were not included in the set. However, non-originating articles may be incorporated, provided their total value does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the set    9606  Buttons, press-fasteners, snap- fasteners and press-studs, button moulds and other parts of these articles; button blanks  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product;  —the value of all the materials used does not    HS heading No  Description of  Working or processing carried out on non (1)  (2)  (3) or (4)  exceed 40 % of the ex- works price of the product  9608  Ball-points pens; felt-tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers; fountain pens, stylograph pens and other pens; duplicating stylos; propelling or sliding pencils; penholders, pencil-holders and similar holders; parts (including caps and clips) of the foregoing articles, other than those of heading No 9609  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product. However, nibs or nib-points classified within the same heading may be used    9612  Typewriter or similar ribbons, inked or otherwise prepared for giving impressions, whether or not on spools or in cartridges; ink-pads, whether or not inked, with or without boxes  Manufacture in which: —all the materials used are classified within a  heading other than that of the product;  —the value of all the materials used does not exceed 40 % of   the ex-works price of the product    ex 9613  Lighters with piezo-igniter  Manufacture in which the value of all the materials of heading No 9613 used does not exceed 30 % of the ex-works price of the product    ex 9614  Smoking pipes and pipe bowls  Manufacture from roughly shaped blocks    Chapter 97  Works of art, collectors' pieces and antiques  Manufacture in which all the materials used are classified within a heading other than that of the product                (1)  The exception concerning the Zea indurate maize is applicable until 31.12.2002. (2)   For the special conditions relating to 'specific processes' see Introductory Notes 7.1 and 7.3. (3)   For the special conditions relating to 'specific processes' see Introductory Note 7.2. (4)   Note 3 to Chapter 32 says that these preparations are those of a kind used for colouring any material or used as ingredients in the manufacturing of colouring preparations, provided they are not classified in another heading in Chapter 32. (5)   A 'group' is regarded as any part of the heading separated from the rest by a semi colon.  (6)   In the case of the products composed of materials classified within both heading Nos 3901 to 3906, on the one hand, and within heading Nos 3907 to 3911, on the other hand, this restriction only applies to that group of materials which predominates by weight in the product.  (7)   The following foils shall be considered as highly transparent: foils, the optical dimming of which – measured according to ASTM-D 1003 by Gardner Hazemeter (i.e. Hazefactor) – is less than 2 percent. (8)  For special conditions relating to products made of a mixture of textile materials, see Introductory Note 5.  (9)   See Introductory Note 6.  (10)  For knitted or crocheted articles, not elastic or rubberized, obtained by sewing or assembly pieces of knitted or crocheted fabrics (cut out or knitted directly to shape), see Introductory Note 6. (11) SEMII-Semiconductor Equipment and Materials Institute Incorporate    Appendix III Form for movement certificate  1.Movement certificates EUR.1 shall be made out on the form of which a specimen appears in this Appendix. This form shall be used and be printed in one or more of the official languages in which the Agreement is drawn up. Certificates that are handwritten shall be completed in ink and in capital letters.  2.Each certificate shall measure 210 . 297 millimetres, a tolerance of up to plus 8mm or minus 5 mm in the length may be allowed. The paper used must be white, sized for writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 60 grams per square meter. It shall have a printed green guilloche pattern background making any falsification by mechanical or chemical means apparent to the eye.  3.The exporting State may reserve the right to print the certificates itself or may have them printed by approved printers. In the latter case each certificate must include a reference to such approval. Each certificate must bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified. It shall also bear a serial number, either printed or not, by which it can be identified.       MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE   1.    See notes overleaf before completing this form   2.  Certificate used in preferential trade between            and          (insert appropriate countries, groups of countries or territories concerned)   3.  Consignee (name, full address, country)(optional)     4.  Countries, groups of countries or territories in which the products are  considered as originating       5.  Countries, groups of countries or territories of  destination         6.  Transport details (optional)                 7.  Remarks                 8.  Item number; marks, numbers, number and kind of package (1); description of goods                        9. Gross mass (kg) or other measure (l,  m., etc.)                                             10. Invoices     (optional)                                               11. CUSTOMS ENDORSEMENT     Declaration certified      Export document (2)     Form to use  .......................................... N° .....................     Customs office ...............................................................     Issuing country or territory    . ......................................................................................   Date ...............................................................................   . ......................................................................................     (Signature)                   Stamp           12. DECLARATION BY THE EXPORTER     I, the undersigned, declare that the goods described above meet the conditions required for the issue of this certificate.          Place and date ...................................................       . ..........................................................................     (Signature)   (1) If goods are not packed, indicate number of articles or state ‘In bulk’ as appropriate  (2) Complete only where the regulation of the exporting country or territory require  1. Certificates must not contain erasures or words written over one another. Any alteration must be made by deleting the incorrect particulars and adding any necessary corrections. Any such alterations must be initialled by the person who completed the certificate and endorsed by the customs authorities of the issuing country or territory.   2. No spaces must be left between the items entered on the certificate and each item must be preceded by and item number. A horizontal line must be drawn immediately below the last item. Any unused space must be struck through in such a manner as to make any later additions impossible.   3. Goods must be described in accordance with commercial practice with sufficient detail to enable them to be identified.     13. Request for verification 14. Result of verification    Verification carried out shows that this certificate (*)           Was issued by the customs office indicated and that the information   contained therein are accurate.       Does not meet the requirements as to authenticity and accuracy (see remarks appended).               ......................................................................................................................     (Place and date)     ..............................................................  Stamp             ............................. .......................................   ............................. (Signature)  ________________________  (*) Insert X in the appropriate box.   Verification of the authenticity and accuracy of this certificate is requested.         ......................................................................................................................     (Place and date)     ..............................................................  Stamp             ............................. .......................................   ............................. (Signature)       NOTES    APPLICATION FOR A MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE   1.   Exporter   See notes overleaf before completing this form   2.  Certificate used in preferential trade between            and          (insert appropriate countries, groups of countries or territories concerned)   3.     Consignee (name, full address, country)(optional)   4.  Countries, groups of countries or territories in which the products are  considered as originating       5.  Countries, groups of countries or territories of  destination         6.                 Transport details (optional)   7.  Remarks                 8.                                               Item number; marks, numbers, number and kind of package (1); description of goods    9. Gross mass (kg) or other measure (l,  m., etc.)                                             10. Invoices     (optional)                                                     (1) If goods are not packed, indicate number of articles or state ‘In bulk’ as appropriate      DECLARATION BY THE EXPORTER       I, the undersigned, exporter of the goods described overleaf,     DECLARE   that the goods meet the conditions required for the issue of the attached certificate;   SPECIFY    as follows the circumstances which have enabled these goods to meet the above conditions:          .......................................................................................................................................................................           .......................................................................................................................................................................           .......................................................................................................................................................................             .......................................................................................................................................................................    SUBMIT     the following supporting documents (1):          .......................................................................................................................................................................           .......................................................................................................................................................................           .......................................................................................................................................................................           .......................................................................................................................................................................      UNDERTAKE  to submit, at the request of the appropriate authorities, any supporting evidence which these authorities may require for the purpose of issuing the attached certificate, and undertake, if required, to agree to any inspection of my accounts or any check on the processes of manufacture of the above goods, carried out by the said authorities;     REQUEST  the issue of the attached certificate for these goods.           ..........................................................................................................        (Place and date)       ..........................................................................................................        (Signature)       (1)  For example: import documents, movement certificates, manufacturer’s declarations, etc. referring to the products used in manufacture or to the goods re-exported in the same state.      Appendix IV Origin Declaration  The origin declaration, the text of which is given below, must be made out in accordance with the footnotes. However, the footnotes do not have to be reproduced.  English version   The exporter of the products covered by this document (customs authorisation No … (1)) declares that, except where otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of … (2) preferential origin.  French version  L'exportateur des produits couverts par le présent document (autorisation douanière no … (1)) déclare que, sauf indication claire du contraire, ces produits ont l'origine préférentielle … (2).  … (3)  (Place and date)  … (4)  (Signature of the exporter; in addition the name of the person signing the declaration has to be indicated in clear script)      (1) When the origin declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of this Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the origin declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.  (2) Origin of products has to be indicated.  (3) These indications may be omitted if the information is contained on the document itself.  (4) See Article 20 paragraph 5 of this Protocol. In cases where the exporter is not required to sign, the exemption of signature also implies the exemption of the name of the signatory.    Appendix V A Supplier Declaration for Products having Preferential Origin Status  I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this invoice … (1)  were produced in … (2) and satisfy the rules of origin governing preferential trade between Cameroon and the United Kingdom.  I undertake to make available to the customs authorities, if required, evidence in support of this declaration.  … (3) … (4)  … (5)      Note  The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity with the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier's declaration. The footnotes do not have to be reproduced.      (1)   - If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should be clearly indicated or marked and this  marking entered on the declaration as follows: ‘… listed on this invoice and marked … were produced …’  -  If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see Article 26 paragraph 3 of this Protocol), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead of the word ‘invoice’ (2) The UK, European Union, Cameroon or OCT. Where it has to do with Cameroon the EU or OCT a reference must also be made to the United Kingdom customs office holding any EUR.1 (s) concerned, giving the No of the certificate(s) concerned and, if possible, the relevant customs entry No involved.  (3) Place and date  (4) Name and function in company  (5) Signature    Appendix V B Supplier Declaration for Products not having Preferential Original Status  I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this invoice … (1) were produced in … (2) and incorporate the following components or materials which do not have Cameroon, UK, OCT or European Union origin for preferential trade:  … (3)   … (4)   … (5)  … (6)  I undertake to make available to the customs authorities, if required, evidence in support of this declaration.  … (7)   … (8)  … (9)    Note  The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity with the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier's declaration. The footnotes do not have to be reproduced.      (1)   - If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should be clearly indicated or marked and this  marking entered on the declaration as follows: ‘… listed on this invoice and marked … were produced …’  -  If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see Article 26 paragraph 3 of this Protocol), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead of  the word ‘invoice’  ’ (2) The UK, European Union, Cameroon, OCT.  (3) Description is to be given in all cases. The description must be adequate and should be sufficiently detailed to allow the tariff classification of the goods concerned to be determined.  (4) Customs values to be given only if required.  (5) Country of origin to be given only if required. The origin to be given must be a preferential origin, all other origins to be given as ‘third country’.  (6) ‘and have undergone the following processing in the UK, European Union, Cameroon, OCT …’, to be added with a description of the processing carried out if this information is required.  (7) Place and date  (8) Name and function in company  (9) Signature    Appendix VI Information Certificate  1.The form of information certificate given in this Appendix shall be used and be printed in one or more of the official languages in which the Agreement is drawn up. Information certificates shall be completed in one of those languages; if they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in capital letters. They shall bear a serial number, whether or not printed, by which they can be identified.  2.The information certificate shall be on A4 format (210 . 297 millimetres), a tolerance of up to plus 8mm or minus 5 mm in the length may be allowed. The paper must be white, sized for writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 60 grams per square meter.   3.The national administrators may reserve the right to print the forms themselves or may have them printed by printers approved by them. In the latter case, each form must include a reference to such approval. The forms shall bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified.  (1) Name of individual or business and full address.  (2) Optional information.  (3) Kilogram, hectolitre, cubic meter or other measure.  (4) Packaging shall be considered as forming a whole with the goods contained therein. However, this provision shall not apply to packaging which is not of the normal type of the article packed and which has a lasting utility value of its own, apart from its function as packaging.   (5) The value must be indicated in accordance with the provisions on rules of origin.        INFORMATION CERTIFICATE   UNITED KINGDOM   and    CAMEROON      2. Consignee(1)      3. Processor1)     4. State in which the working or processing has been carried out       6. Customs office of importation (1)       5. For official use        7. Import Document (2)      Form  ........................................  n° ...................... ..............................             Series.........................................................................................................                 Date               GOODS AT THE TIME OF SHIPMENT TO THE STATE OF DESTINATION    8. Marks, number, quantity    and kind of package        9. Harmonised commodity description system   10. Quantity(3)   Heading/subheading number (HS code)            11. Value(4)                                           IMPORTED GOODS USED    12. Harmonised commodity description system 13. Country of origin 14. Quantity(3) 15. Value(2)(5)   Heading/subheading number (HS code)                      16. Nature of working or processing carried out     17. Remarks       18. CUSTOMS ENDORSEMENT   19. DECLARATION BY THE SUPPLIER      Declaration certified:           I, the undersigned, declare that the information on this certificate is accurate        Document ……………………...     Form.................................n°.............      Customs office......................  ......................................             Date                       Place........................, Date                ---------------------------------------. (Signature)               Stamp    of office             .   ................ ..................... ........................................... ....................     (Signature)   (1)(2)(3)(4)(5) See notes overleaf        REFERENCE OVERLEAF        Appendix VII    Overseas Countries and Territories  Within the meaning of this Protocol ‘overseas countries and territories’ shall mean the countries and territories listed below:  (This list does not prejudge the status of these countries and territories, or future changes in their status.)  1. Country having special relations with the Kingdom of Denmark:   — Greenland.      2. Overseas territories of the French Republic:   — New Caledonia and Dependencies,     — French Polynesia,     — French Southern and Antarctic Territories,     — Wallis and Futuna Islands.      3. Territorial collectivities of the French Republic:   — Mayotte,     — Saint Pierre and Miquelon.      4 Overseas countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands:   — Aruba,    — Netherlands Antilles:  — Bonaire,  — Curaçao,  — Saba, — Sint Eustatius,    —  Sint Maarten.  5. British overseas countries and territories:   — Anguilla,     — Cayman Islands,     — Falkland Islands,     — South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands,    — Montserrat,    — Pitcairn,     — Saint Helena, Ascension Island, Tristan da Cunha,    — British Antarctic Territory,    — British Indian Ocean Territory,    — Turks and Caicos Islands,    — British Virgin Islands.           CCS0321325874 978-1-5286-2523-4 