 protocol between the government of the republic of finland and the government of the russian federation on the continued participation of russian organizations in fish-breeding activities for the conservation of the fish stocks in lake inari source: unts no. 34358, vol. 2005, 1998, p. 76-78. the government of the republic of finland and the government of the russian federation, taking into account the provisions of the agreement of 29 april 1959 between the government of the republic of finland, the government of norway and the government of the union of soviet socialist republics concerning the regulation of lake inari by means of the kaitakoski hydroelectric power station and dam, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE 1 the government of the russian federation, responding to the wishes of the government of the republic of finland, expresses agreement to the continued participation of russian organizations in fish-breeding activities for the conservation of the fish stocks in lake inari through the provision free of charge from the russian federation to the republic of finland of electricity for the fish-breeding establishments with fish hatcheries constructed by finland. the supply of electricity shall begin in 1997 at the rate of 16 million kwh a year for five years, to include supply of the shortfall of 30 million kwh in the years 1994-1996, and at the rate of 10 million kwh a year for the following four years. ARTICLE 2 in the russian federation the organization supplying electricity free of charge will be the joint-stock company kolenergo. in the republic of finland the electricity will be received by the joint-stock company inergia. these organizations shall agree between themselves on the detailed arrangements for the provision of electricity envisaged in this protocol. ARTICLE 3 this protocol shall enter into force on the date of its signature and shall expire on 31 december 2005. this protocol shall replace the protocol of 14 december 1983 between the government of the republic of finland and the government of the union of soviet socialist republics on the participation of soviet organizations in fish-breeding activities for the conservation of the fish stocks in lake inari. done at moscow on 27 november 1997 in two original copies in finnish and russian, both texts being equally authentic. for the government of the republic of finland: tarja halonen for the government of the russian federation: sergei kirienko
