Agreement Concerning Cooperation in Taking Measures Against
Pollution of the Sea by Oil

Date of adoption: 16 September 1971

Place of adoption: Copenhagen

Date of entry into force: 16 October 1971

The Governments of Norway, Denmark, Finland and Sweden,

Desiring to co-operate in dealing with any significant pollution
of the sea by oil which threatens the coasts or related
interests of one of the Contracting States, and to co-operate in
furthering supervision of compliance with the International
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil and
the national regulations based on that Convention, and

Taking into account the Agreement of June 9 1969 for
Co-operation in Dealing with Pollution of the North Sea by Oil,

Have agreed as follows;

Article 1

A Contracting State shall without delay inform the competent
authority of another Contracting State of the sighting of any
significant oil slick which it is feared will drift towards the
territory of the latter state.

Article 2

A Contracting State threatened by any significant oil pollution
which it is feared may affect another Contracting State, shall
investigate the situation including the state of the oil, its
approximate quantity or extent, position, direction of movement
and speed; the result of this investigation shall be
communicated without delay to the other State, together with
information on the measures which have been taken or which it is
intended to take.

Article 3

A Contracting State requiring assistance to deal with oil which
is threatening its coast or related interests, may request help
from the other Contracting States. Such a request shall be
addressed first to those States which can also be expected to be
affected by the oil. A Contracting State which pursuant to this
Article has been asked for assistance, shall do what is possible
to render such assistance.

Article 4

(a) The Contracting States undertake to provide themselves with
equipment for dealing with any significant oil slicks at sea.

(b) In order to achieve the greatest possible efficacy in the
use of this equipment, stocks of anti-oil material should be
built up and positioned following discussion with the other
Contracting States to the extent which is thought necessary.

(c) A Contracting State shall inform the other Contracting
States of the equipment it has for dealing with oil pollution.

(d) A Contracting State shall inform the other Contracting
States of its experience in the materials and methods of dealing
with oil pollution.

Article 5

A Contracting State shall inform the other contracting States of
any significant oil slick which has led it to take action, of
the measures taken and their result.

Article 6

A Contracting State shall inform the competent authority of
another Contracting State of any case where a vessel registered
in the latter State has been observed committing an offence
within the territorial or adjacent waters of the Contracting
States against the regulations concerning pollution by oil.

Article 7

The Contracting States shall render assistance to each other in
the investigation of offences against the regulations concerning
pollution by oil which are presumed to have been committed
within the territorial or adjacent waters of the contracting
States.

Such assistance may include inspection of the oil record book,
the ship's official log-book and the engine-room log, the taking
of oil samples and so on.

Article 8

The Contracting States shall exchange information concerning:

(a) existing facilities and facilities under construction for
the reception of oily residues from ships;

(b) national regulations and other conditions which are relevant
to the avoidance of oil pollution;

(c) the authorities in the respective Contracting States to
which information shall be given in accordance with the present
Agreement.

Article 9

The competent authorities shall co-operate directly in planning
and the other measures required of them for implementing this
Agreement.

Article 10

If one of the Contracting States desires to denounce the
Agreement, written notice to that effect shall be given to the
Danish Government, which shall forthwith inform the other
Contracting States of the denunciation and of the date of
receipt of the notice.

A denunciation shall take effect twelve months after its receipt
by the Danish Government or at such later date as may be
specified in the notice.

Article 11

The Agreement shall be deposited with the Danish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, and certified copies thereof shall be
transmitted by the said Ministry to the Government of each of
the Contracting States.

Article 12

The Agreement is open for signature from September 16, 1971 and
comes into force one month after it has been signed by Denmark,
Finland, Norway and Sweden. At the same time the Agreement of
December 8, 1967 between Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden
concerning Co-operation to Ensure Compliance with the
Regulations for Preventing Pollution of the Sea by Oil shall
cease to have effect.

In witness whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed
this Agreement.

Done at Copenhagen on September 16, 1971 in a single copy in the
Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish languages, all texts
being equally authentic.

