AGREEMENT REGARDING FISHERIES AND REED CUTTING IN THE RUDEBOL LAKE
AND THE VIDAA RIVER, AND REGARDING THE CUTTING OF HAY AND RUSHES
IN THE GOTTESKOOG.
A. FISHERIES IN THE RUDEbOL LAKE AND THE VIDAA RIVER.
Article 1.
The present lessees of fishing rights, belonging to the district of Tondern, in the Rudebol Lake
and the Vidaa River and also in the adjoining waters are entitled to continue to hold their leases until
the expiration of these leases on March 31, 1931.
Article 2.
Frontier cards containing particulars of the place or places where the frontier may be crossed will
be issued to lessees.
A list of all lessees with their addresses will be forwarded by the principal lessee to the customs
and police authorities concerned.
Article 3.
Lessees shall be entitled to sell their catch free of duty in HOjer or Tonder and may also import
into Germany, free of duty, fish caught in the above-mentioned Danish waters.
Article 4.
Fishing appliances and boats which have been brought in by German fishermen for their own
use for the fisheries mentioned in Article 1, may, whether new or already in use, be exported and imported
free of duty, subject only to the necessary customs inspection.
If a German fisherman sells any of the above-mentioned articles in Denmark they shall be subject
to the usual customs regulations. The same provision will apply when Danish fishermen who have
leased the above-mentioned fishing rights purchase fishing appliances and boats in Germany and import
them into Denmark.
German fishermen who buy fishing appliances or boats in Denmark will similarly be subject to
German customs regulations.
Any customs duty which has been paid for such articles cannot be recovered if they should be subsequently
re-exported.
Article 5.
The competent customs and police authorities are empowered to issue the necessary regulations.
B. REED CUTTING IN THE RUDEBOL LAKE AND IN THE VIDAA RIVER.
Article 6.
Until March 31, 1931, the inhabitants of Aventoft and Rosenkranz shall have the right to cut
reeds for making baskets, mats and similar wicker-work, in the Rudebol Lake and the Vidaa River
at those places where the inhabitants of the district of Tondern have the right to cut reeds. The commune
(Gemeinde) of Aventoft will, in return for this right, pay an annual tax of 20 crowns, which will be
handed over to the district of Tondern every year on January 2 for the period April 1 to March 31 of the
same year.
The existence of this right shall not, however, debar the county council of Tonder from granting
the inhabitants of the county of Tonder permission to cut reeds free of all duties and charges in the
same places, but only, however, to such an extent that the inhabitants of Aventoft and Rosenkranz
shall always be able to obtain sufficient material for their work.
For the purpose of crossing the frontier, the parties concerned will be provided with frontier cards,
containing particulars of the place or places where the frontier may be crossed.
Article 7.
The export from Denmark of quantitites of cut reeds and the import of the same into Germany
will be permitted without further formality and free from any customs or export duties.
C. CUTTING OF HAY AND RUSHES IN THE GOTTESKOOG.
Article 8.
Owners of landed estates in Rudebdl and neighbourhood who have leased out areas in the Gotteskoog
for the cutting of hay and rushes will be entitled, until March 31, 1931, to lease such areas with
the same rights as are enjoyed by German nationals.
Lands will be let on lease as hitherto to the highest bidder within a specified period, notice of which
will be given in the local neswpapers fourteen days in advance.
During the period of the lease, lessees will have free and unimpeded access to and from these areas
and shall be entitled without special export licences, but upon payment of the customary export duties,
which are also applicable to German nationals, to export the hay and rushes cut within these areas.
German customs officials, are entitled to exercise the necessary supervision to prevent larger quantities
of hay and rushes being exported than have been cut on the leased areas.
For the purpose of crossing the frontier, the parties concerned will be provided with frontier cards
giving particulars of the place or places where the frontier may be crossed.
Article 9.
On the sale of landed property the right to lease the above-mentioned areas shall be transferred
to the new owner for the remainder of the period up to March 31, 1931.
Aiticle 10.
A list of the above-mentioned lands in Rudeb6l and its neighbourhood, together with particulars
of the names of the owners, will be forwarded to the German customs and police authorities and also
to the head district officials of the district of South Tondern.


FINAL PROTOCOL.
The Contracting Parties have agreed that, as regards the export of rushes from the Gotteskoog,
the head district official of the district (Kreis) of South Tonder will, of his own accord and in due
time, prepare the export licences in so far as they are required by German regulations and will issue
them to the competent German customs authority, such licences being valid for one leasehold year
and for the quantity which may be reasonably regarded as the year's supply from the land in question.
