Free Trade Agreement between Central America and the Dominican Republic
PREAMBLE
The Governments of the Republics of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic,
DETERMINED TO
STRENGTHEN the bonds of friendship and the spirit of cooperation existing between their peoples;
ACHIEVE a better balance in your business relationships;
PROMOTE a more extensive and secure market for the goods produced and the reciprocal exchange of services in their territories;
INCREASE the competitiveness of the service sector, a requirement, sine qua non for the facilitation of merchandise trade and the flow of capital and technologies, contributing decisively to consolidating the systemic competitiveness of the countries in the free trade area;
REDUCE distortions in their reciprocal trade;
ESTABLISH a legal system with clear, transparent and mutually beneficial rules for the promotion and protection of investments, as well as the commercial exchange of their goods and services;
RESPECT their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), as well as from other bilateral and multilateral integration and cooperation instruments;
STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their companies in world markets;
PROTECT intellectual property rights;
CREATE employment opportunities and improve living standards in their respective territories;
PROMOTE economic development consistent with the protection and conservation of the environment, as well as sustainable development;
PRESERVE its ability to safeguard the public welfare;
PROMOTE the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening their economic relations; Y
IMPROVE the negotiation capacity of the Parties in the commercial forums in which they jointly participate;
Celebrate the present Central America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement 
PART ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter I: Initial Provisions
Article 1.01 : Establishment of the Free Trade Zone
	1.	
	2.	The Parties establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 (GATT 1994) and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) of the Agreement on the WTO. 
	3.	Unless otherwise provided, this Agreement shall apply between the Dominican Republic and each of the Central American countries considered individually.
Article 1.02 : Objectives
	1.	
	2.	This Treaty has the following main objectives:
	a.	
	b.	stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade in goods and services between the Parties; 
	c.	promote conditions of free competition within the Free Trade Area; 
	d.	reciprocally eliminate barriers to trade in goods and services originating from the Parties; 
	e.	remove barriers to the movement of capital and business persons between the territories of the Parties; 
	f.	increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties; 
	g.	promote and protect investments aimed at intensively taking advantage of the advantages offered by the markets of the Parties and strengthening the competitive capacity of the signatory countries in world trade flows; Y 
	h.	create effective procedures for the application and compliance of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of disputes.
	3.	 
	4.	The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of International Law.

Chapter II: General Definitions
Article 2.01 : Definitions of general application
	•	For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified, it shall be understood as:
	◦	WTO Agreement: Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization; Good : national products or merchandise as understood in the GATT 1994, whether originating or not; Originating good : a good that complies with the rules of origin established in Chapter IV (Rules of Origin); Customs Valuation Code : the Agreement relating to the application of Article VII of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes; Council : the Joint Council of Administration established in accordance with article 18.01; Days : calendar or calendar days; Tariff Fraction – The breakdown of a Harmonized System tariff classification code to more than six digits; GATT 1994 : General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994, as defined in Annex 1A of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization; Measure : any law, regulation, procedure, provision or administrative practice, among others; National : a natural person who has the nationality of a Party under its law; NAD : Dominican Tariff Nomenclature, based on the Harmonized System for the designation and coding of merchandise with tariff openings, used and carried out by the Dominican Republic; Party : Any State which has consented to be bound by this Treaty and with respect to which the Treaty is in force. Exporting Party : the Party from whose territory a good or service is exported; Importing Party : the Party into whose territory a good or service is imported; Person : a natural or legal person; Legal person: any legal entity duly constituted and organized in accordance with the legislation that is applicable to it, with or without profit, whether of public, private or mixed law; SAC : the Central American Tariff System used by the member countries of the General Treaty of Central American Economic Integration, based on the Harmonized System of Designation and Coding of Goods; Secretariat : the Secretariat established in accordance with article 18.02; Harmonized System : the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (HS), including the general classification rules and their legal notes and explanatory notes; Territory : for each Party, as defined in the annex to this article. 
Annex to Article 2.01 : Country Specific Definitions
	•	Unless otherwise provided, for the purposes of this Agreement, it shall be understood as: Territory :
	a.	
	b.	Regarding Costa Rica :The national territory including the maritime and air space, where the State exercises complete and exclusive sovereignty or special jurisdiction in accordance with articles 5 and 6 of its Political Constitution;  
	c.	Regarding El Salvador :The terrestrial, maritime and air space under its jurisdiction, in accordance with its internal Law and International Law;  
	d.	regarding Guatemala :The terrestrial, maritime and air space under the sovereignty of the State, the maritime and submarine zones, in which it exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction, in accordance with its legislation and International Law;  
	e.	regarding Honduras :Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic, Decree No. 131 of January 11, 1982: Honduras belongs to the territories located on the mainland within its territorial limits, internal waters and the islands, islets and cays, in the Gulf of Fonseca that historically, geographically and legally correspond to it, as well as the islands of the Bay, the islands of the Cisne (Swan Island) also called Santanilla or Santillana, Vicious, Mysterious; and the keys Zapotillos, Cochinos, Vivorillos, Seal or Foca (or Calf), Caratasca, Cajones or Hobbies, Greater than Cabo Falso, Cocorocuma, Palo de Campeche, Los Bajos Pichones, Media Luna, Gorda and the Salmedina, Providencia, De Coral, Cabo Falso, Rosalinda and Serranilla, and the others located in the Atlantic that historically, geographically and legally correspond to it. The Gulf of Fonseca may be subject to a special regime. They also belong to the State of Honduras :
	1.	
	2.	The territorial sea whose width is twelve nautical miles measured from the line of lowest tide along the coast; 
	3.	The zone contiguous to its territorial sea, which extends up to twenty-four nautical miles, counted from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured; 
	4.	The exclusive economic zone, which extends up to a distance of two hundred nautical miles measured from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured; 
	5.	The continental shelf, which includes the bed and sub-soil of submarine areas, which extends beyond its territorial sea and all along the natural prolongation of its territory to the outer edge of the continental margin, or to a distance two hundred nautical miles from the baseline, from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured in cases where the outer edge of the continental margin does not reach that distance; Y 
	6.	As for the Pacific Ocean, the previous measures will be counted from the closing line of the mouth of the Gulf of Fonseca, towards the high seas.
	f.	The State exercises sovereignty and jurisdiction in the air space and in the sub-soil of its continental and insular territory, territorial sea, contiguous zone, exclusive economic zone and continental platform. This declaration of sovereignty does not disregard similar legitimate rights of other States on the basis of reciprocity nor does it affect the rights of free navigation of all nations in accordance with International Law or compliance with treaties or conventions ratified by the Republic. In the cases referred to in the previous articles, the domain of the State is inalienable and imprescriptible. Foreign States may only acquire in the territory of the Republic, on the basis of reciprocity, the necessary real estate for the headquarters of their diplomatic representations, without prejudice to what is established in international treaties.  
	g.	regarding Nicaragua :The terrestrial, maritime and air space under its sovereignty, the marine and submarine zones in which the Republic of Nicaragua exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction, in accordance with its legislation and International Law;  
	h.	Regarding the Dominican Republic :It includes the terrestrial, maritime and air space under the sovereignty of the Dominican State, including the underwater soil and subsoil, as well as the airspace above them, all in accordance with its legislation and International Law. 
 PART TWO: PROVISIONS RELATING TO TRADE AND INVESTMENT
Chapter III: National Treatment and Market Access for Goods
Article 3.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as : Customs Tariff: Any import tax, duty or tribute and any charge of any kind levied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except:
	a.	
	b.	any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III.2 of the GATT 1994 or any equivalent provision of a successor agreement to which the Parties are party; 
	c.	any fee or right originating from the imposition of measures against unfair trade practices or application of safeguard measures; 
	d.	any duties or other charges related to importation proportional to the cost of the services rendered; 
	e.	any exchange difference adopted by either Party.
Article 3.02 : Coverage
	1.	
	2.	This Chapter shall apply to trade in goods between the Parties. 
	3.	For purposes of the application of this chapter, in case there is a contradiction between its provisions and any other provision of this Agreement, those of this chapter shall prevail.
Article 3.03 : National Treatment
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall grant national treatment to the goods of another Party, in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, and any equivalent provision of a successor agreement to which all Parties are contracting parties, which are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part of it. of the same. 
	3.	The provisions of paragraph 1 mean, with respect to a Party, including its departments, municipalities or provinces, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that Party, including its departments, municipalities or provinces, grants to any like goods, direct competitors or substitutes of national origin.
Article 3.04 : Liberalization of trade in goods
	1.	
	2.	As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties undertake to guarantee access to their respective markets through the total elimination of the customs duty on trade on originating goods, except those contained in the annex to this article. 
	3.	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, Nicaragua may apply the component of the customs tariff that appears in the ATP column of its tariff, and will eliminate it as of January 1, 1999, except for the products specified in the annex to this article. . 
	4.	The Parties agree that at the request of any of them, they will hold consultations to examine the possibility of eliminating the customs duty on the goods contained in the annex to this article.
Article 3.05 : Restrictions on the refund of import customs duties on exported goods and on customs duty deferral programs
	1.	The Parties shall apply their domestic legislation governing the refund of import customs duties on exported goods and customs duty deferral programs in accordance with their rights and obligations before the World Trade Organization. 
Article 3.06 : Customs valuation
	1.	
	2.	The customs valuation of an imported good will be determined in accordance with the internal legislation of the importing country, while the GATT 1994 Customs Valuation Code is adopted. 
	3.	Notwithstanding the foregoing, as of the entry into force of this Agreement, no Party will apply reference prices or minimum prices for customs valuation purposes of originating goods.
Article 3.07 : Import and export restrictions
	1.	
	2.	With the exception of the rights of the Parties in accordance with Article XX of the GATT 1994, and those regulated in Chapter VI (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and Chapter XIII (Technical Barriers to Trade) of this Agreement, the Parties undertake to guarantee access to their respective markets through the total and immediate elimination of non-tariff barriers. 
	3.	Except as otherwise provided in other chapters of this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the import of any good of another Party or on the export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of another Party. Party, except as provided in Article XI of the GATT 1994. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 or any other equivalent provision of a successor agreement to which the Parties belong, are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part of the Agreement. same. 
	4.	In the event that one of the Parties maintains or adopts prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods originating from another Party, it must demonstrate to the other Party that such measures are compatible with the WTO Agreement.
Article 3.08 : Customs processing fees and consular fees
	1.	
	2.	None of the Parties will increase or establish customs processing fees for the service provided by customs and will eliminate such fees on originating goods from the entry into force of this Agreement, except those permitted by the WTO Agreement. 
	3.	None of the Parties will charge consular fees or charges, nor will they require consular formalities on original goods from the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 3.09 : Country of origin marking
	•	The annex to this article shall apply to measures related to country of origin marking. 
Article 3.10 : Support, internal aid and export subsidies
	•	The Parties ratify their rights and obligations derived from the WTO Agreement in terms of support, domestic support and export subsidies. 
Article 3.11 : Publication and notification
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall publish and notify the other Party, within a period not exceeding forty days from the entry into force of this Agreement, the measures corresponding to laws, regulations, judicial decisions, procedures and administrative provisions of general application that it has put in place. in force and are linked to the provisions of this chapter. 
	3.	To the extent possible, each Party shall publish and notify the other Party of any measure indicated in paragraph 1 that it proposes to adopt, and shall provide the Party concerned a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures. 
	4.	The provisions of this article shall not oblige any Party to disclose information of a confidential nature, the disclosure of which may constitute an obstacle to compliance with the law, is contrary to the public interest, or harm the legitimate business interests of public or private companies. 
	5.	Each Party, at the request of another Party, will provide information and give a timely response to any question regarding current or planned measures, without prejudice to whether or not that interested Party has been previously notified of the measure.
Article 3.12 : Committee on Trade in Goods
	•	The Council will establish a Committee on Trade in Goods made up of representatives of each of the parties. The Committee will meet at least once a year. 
Annex to Article 3.04
Section A - List of excluded products
This list will be established in a protocol to this Treaty.
Section B - List of products to which Nicaragua will continue to apply the Temporary Protection Tariff (ATP) in accordance with the tax relief calendar governed by its tax law
The ATP applicable to the originating goods listed below will be eliminated according to the following tax relief schedule:
Annex to Article 3.09 : Marking of country of origin
	1.	
	2.	For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Final buyer : the last person who, in the territory of the importing Party, acquires it in the form in which it is imported. This buyer is not necessarily the final user of the good; Container – including but not limited to a container, packaging, packaging, or wrapper; Common container : the container in which the good will usually arrive at the final buyer; Legible : capable of being read easily; Sufficient permanence : that the mark will remain on the good until it reaches the final purchaser, unless it is intentionally removed; Customs value : the value of a good for the purpose of imposing import taxes on an imported good; Y Visible : that can be seen with the ordinary handling of the merchandise or container. 
	3.	 
	4.	Each Party shall apply the provisions relating to country of origin marking in accordance with Article IX of the GATT 1994. 
	5.	Each one of the Parties may require that a good from another Party imported into its territory bear a mark of the country of origin that indicates the name of the latter to the final buyer of the good. 
	6.	Each Party may require, among its general consumer information measures, that an imported good bear the country of origin mark in the manner prescribed for goods of the importing Party. 
	7.	By adopting, maintaining and applying any country of origin marking measure, each Party shall minimize the difficulties, costs and inconvenience that such measure may cause to the trade and industry of another Party. 
	8.	Each of the Parties :
	a.	
	b.	accept any reasonable method of marking a good of another Party, such as the use of adhesive or pressure labels, tags or paint, which ensures that the mark is visible, legible and of sufficient permanence; 
	c.	exempt from the requirement of marking of origin of a good from another party that:
	i.	
	ii.	is not capable of being marked; 
	iii.	cannot be marked prior to export to the territory of another Party without damaging it; 
	iv.	cannot be marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, so as to discourage its export to the territory of another Party; 
	v.	cannot be marked without material impairment of its operation or substantial deterioration of its appearance; 
	vi.	it is in a container marked in such a way as to reasonably indicate the origin of the good to the final purchaser; 
	vii.	be raw material; 
	viii.	is to be produced in the territory of the importing Party, by or on behalf of the importer, in such a way that the good becomes the good of the importing Party; 
	ix.	due to the nature or circumstances of its importation, the final buyer can reasonably know its country of origin, even if it is not marked; 
	x.	has been produced more than twenty years before its importation; 
	xi.	has been imported without the required marking and cannot be further marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, provided that the omission of marking was not for the purpose of circumventing the country of origin marking requirements; 
	xii.	is in transit, in guarantee or at the disposal of the customs authority, for purposes of temporary importation without payment of customs duties; either 
	xiii.	be an original work of art.9;
	9.	 
	10.	With the exception of the goods described in subsection 6 b), numerals vi), vii), viii), ix), xi) and xii), a Party may provide that when a good is exempt from country of origin marking requirements , in accordance with subsection 6 b), the common outer container is marked in such a way as to indicate the country of origin of the merchandise it contains. 
	11.	Each of the Parties will provide that :
	a.	
	b.	a common container that is imported empty, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but the container in which it is imported may be required to be marked with the country of origin of its content; Y 
	c.	a common container filled, disposable or not :
	i.	
	ii.	will not require the marking of your country of origin, but, 
	iii.	may be required to be marked with the name of the country of origin of its contents, unless its contents are already marked and the container can be easily opened for inspection, or the marking of the contents is clearly visible through the container.
	12.	 
	13.	Whenever administratively and legally feasible, each Party shall allow the importer to mark a good of another Party after importing it, but before releasing it from the control or custody of customs authorities, unless the importer has committed repeated violations of the Party's country of origin marking requirements and has been previously notified in writing that the good must be marked prior to importation. 
	14.	Each Party shall provide that, except for importers who have been notified in accordance with paragraph 8, no special assessment or penalty shall be imposed for failure to comply with that Party's country of origin marking requirements, unless the goods are withdrawn from the control or custody of the customs authorities without having been adequately marked, or misleading marks have been affixed to them. 
	15.	The Parties shall cooperate and consult with each other on matters related to this Annex, including additional exemptions from the country of origin marking requirement.
Chapter IV: Rules of Origin
Article 4.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Chapter : refers to the first breakdowns of the Sections that are identified by having two digits in the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System (SA) or the Central American Tariff System (SAC) or the Dominican Tariff Nomenclature (NAD); CIF : international abbreviations that mean in Spanish Cost, Insurance and Freight; Customs Valuation Code : the Agreement relating to the application of Article VII of the GATT 1994, including its Explanatory Notes; FOB : international acronym that stands for free on board (LAB) in Spanish. It applies to any means of transport; Import : entry of merchandise into the territory of one of the Parties for its use or consumption prior compliance with customs formalities; Materials, product materials : merchandise used in the production of another merchandise. Includes the parts; Merchandise : any material, material, product or part capable of being marketed; Fungible goods: interchangeable goods for commercial purposes whose properties are essentially identical and which it is impractical to distinguish one from the other, by simple visual examination; Identical goods: those goods that are the same in all aspects, including their physical characteristics, quality, brand and commercial prestige, where small differences in aspects do not prevent their consideration as identical; Indirect goods : all material, material or product, that is not physically incorporated into a good, used in the production, verification and inspection of the good, operation of equipment related to it or for the maintenance of buildings. Includes:
	a.	
	b.	fuel, energy; catalysts and solvents; 
	c.	equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods; 
	d.	gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, safety equipment and accessories; 
	e.	tools, dies and molds; 
	f.	spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings; 
	g.	lubricants, greases, compound products, and other products used in production, equipment operation, or building maintenance; 
	h.	any other matter or product that is not incorporated into the merchandise, but that can be adequately demonstrated to be part of said production;
	◦	Similar goods: those goods that, without being the same in all their aspects, have similar characteristics and compositions, especially with regard to quality and commercial prestige, which allows them to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable; Originating merchandise, material, product or material : a merchandise, material, product or material that qualifies as originating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; Heading : refers to the breakdowns of the chapters that are identified by containing four digits in the SA, SAC or NAD; Generally Accepted Accounting Principles : the principles used in the territories of the Parties, which confer substantial authorized support regarding the recording of income, costs, expenses, assets and liabilities involved in the information and preparation of financial statements. These indicators can become broad guides of general application, as well as those practical rules and own procedures usually used in accounting; Production : the cultivation, extraction, harvest, birth and rearing, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or assembly of a commodity; Producer : person - natural or legal - who cultivates, extracts, harvests, breeds the animals born in his country and obtains the products derived from them; fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing or assembling a good; Transaction value of a commodity : the price actually paid or payable for a commodity. For the determination of the Transaction Value, the legislation in force in the Parties will be applied. 
Article 4.02 : Criteria of origin
	•	It is understood that a good is considered as originating from the Parties to this Agreement if it has been entirely obtained in any of their territories. When non-originating goods are incorporated, there must be a degree of transformation. 
Article 4.03 : Determination, certification and verification of origin
	•	The determination of the origin of the goods and the corresponding certification and verification procedures will be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Article 4.04 : Scope of application
	•	The scope of application of the Rules of Origin and its modifications is limited to the exchange of merchandise governed by the provisions of this Treaty. 
Article 4.05 : Basic principle for the determination of origin, when non-originating materials or products are incorporated
	•	The Rules of Origin of this chapter are based on the general principle of change of tariff classification that will be complemented, when necessary, with other requirements as specified in this chapter and its annex. 
Article 4.06 : Instruments of application
	•	For the purposes of the previous article, the merchandise classification base is the Harmonized System and for those merchandise coded with more than six digits, the SAC or the NAD. When the determination of the Transaction Value of a merchandise is used, the legislation in force in each of the Parties will be applied. 
Article 4.07 : Originating Goods
	•	Goods originating from the territory of a Party are considered:
	a.	
	b.	products and by-products wholly obtained in a Party:
	i.	
	ii.	live animals born and raised in that Party. Animals are understood to be all living animals, including mammals, birds, fish, crustaceans, molluscs, reptiles, bacteria and viruses; 
	iii.	animals obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering or capture in that Party. Covers animals obtained from the wild of the Parties; 
	iv.	products obtained from live animals in that Party. It includes, among others, products obtained from live animals without further processing, including milk, eggs, natural honey; 
	v.	plants and plant products harvested or gathered in that Party. Includes inter alia all vegetation, including fruits, cuttings, flowers, seeds, vegetables, trees, seaweeds, fungi and live plants grown in the Parties; 
	vi.	minerals and other naturally occurring substances, not included in the above definitions, extracted or taken in that Party; includes among others: sea salt, crude mineral sulfur that arises in a free state, natural sands, clays, stones, metal ores, crude oil, natural gas, bituminous minerals, natural earths, ordinary natural waters, natural mineral water; 
	vii.	waste and scrap derived from manufacturing or transformation operations or consumption of that Party and suitable only for disposal or for the recovery of raw materials. It covers all waste and waste, including those resulting from manufacturing, transformation operations or consumption in the same Party, defective machinery, discarded packaging, household waste and all products that can no longer fulfill the purpose for which they had been produced and fit only for disposal or for the recovery of raw materials. Said manufacturing operations are understood to include those of an industrial or chemical nature, mining, agriculture, construction, refining, incineration and wastewater treatment; 
	viii.	articles collected in that Part that can no longer perform their original function or be restored or repaired and suitable only for disposal or for the recovery of parts or raw materials; 
	ix.	parts or raw materials recovered or obtained in that Party from articles that do not constitute dangerous substances according to national and international norms and standards:
	1.	
	2.	that they can no longer perform their initial function without being restored or repaired; either 
	3.	collected in that Part unfit for its original purpose or for restoration or repair and fit only for disposal or recovery of parts or raw materials;
	x.	 
	xi.	Goods obtained or produced in that Party only with products from the above definitions, provided that they do not constitute dangerous substances according to national and international norms and standards:
	1.	
	2.	the product must have been obtained or produced with products of that Party mentioned in the definitions above; 
	3.	the products of the previous definitions as long as they have not been transformed in another country; Y 
	4.	the product shall not contain materials not considered to be wholly obtained in that Party;
	c.	 
	d.	the products of the sea, soil or marine subsoil, extracted outside their territorial waters, by ships with a national flag registered or leased by companies legally established in their territories. The products of fishing and other products of the sea obtained outside the territorial sea and the maritime zones where the Parties exercise jurisdiction, are considered to be totally obtained in the States of registry of the vessel that performs those operations. The term registration includes the registration granted by a country to ships or factory ships chartered or registered on the condition that it is in conformity with the legal provisions of that Party; 
	e.	goods produced on board factory ships from fish, crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic invertebrates, obtained from the sea by ships registered or registered by a Party and flying its flag; 
	f.	goods made exclusively in the territories of the Parties from originating products; YGoods produced in the territories of the Parties that incorporate non-originating materials or products that result from a transformation process that gives them a new identity. These new goods must comply with a change in tariff classification in accordance with this chapter or other requirements, as specified in its annex. 
Article 4.08 : Minimum operations or processes
	1.	
	2.	The minimal operations or processes that by themselves, or in combination of them, do not confer the origin of a good, when they are used for:
	a.	
	b.	ensure the good state of conservation of the goods during transport and/or storage; 
	c.	that facilitate shipping or transportation; 
	d.	packaging or presentation of goods for sale. These minimum operations and processes are as follows:
	i.	
	ii.	aeration, ventilation, drying, refrigeration, freezing; 
	iii.	cleaning, washing, screening or sieving; selection, classification or graduation; 
	iv.	peeled, shelled or shucked, pitted, squeezed or squeezed; 
	v.	removal of dust or broken or damaged parts, application of oil, anti-rust paint or protective coatings; 
	vi.	tests or calibration; bulk shipping division; bundling; adhesion of distinctive marks, labels or signs on the products and their packaging; 
	vii.	packaging, unpackaging or repackaging; 
	viii.	dilution with water or any other aqueous solution; ionization and salting; 
	ix.	the simple assembly or assembly of parts of products to constitute a complete merchandise; Y 
	x.	the killing of animals.
	3.	 
	4.	The minimum operations or processes defined above will not be taken into account when determining whether a good has been totally obtained in one or more of the Parties. 
	5.	A minimal process operation or a combination of them shall not preclude the conferral of origin to a good if sufficient transformation has occurred as a result of other operations and processes.
Article 4.09 : Indirect Goods
	•	Indirect goods will be considered as originating in the region regardless of their place of manufacture or production. Its registered book value may be used in the calculation of value. 
Article 4.10 : Accumulation
	•	For compliance with the origin requirements, materials or products originating in the territory of either Party, incorporated into a specific good in the territory of the other Party, will be considered as originating in the territory of the latter. 
Article 4.11 : Regional Value Content
	1.	
	2.	The Regional Value Content of the goods will be calculated based on the Transaction Value method, for which the following formula will be applied:It is obtained by subtracting the Transaction Value of the merchandise, the value of the non-originating merchandise of the region used in its preparation or production, and it will be divided between the Transaction Value of the same; all of which is multiplied by one hundred.  VCR = [ (VT - VMN) / VT ] * 100
	◦	where: RVC = Regional Value Content, expressed as a percentage. VT = Transaction Value of the merchandise, adjusted on the FOB basis VNM = Value of the non-originating goods of the Parties used in the production of the good. 
	3.	 
	4.	When the producer of a good does not export it directly, the Transaction Value will be adjusted up to the point in which the buyer receives the good within the territory where the producer is located. 
	5.	When the origin is determined by the Regional Value Content, the required percentage will be specified in the corresponding annex to the specific Rules of Origin. 
	6.	All costs considered in the calculation of Regional Value Content will be recorded and maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, applicable in the territory of the Party where the merchandise is produced.
Article 4.12 : De Minimis
	1.	
	2.	A good that does not comply with the change in tariff classification in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this chapter, will be considered originating, if the value of all non-originating materials or products used in its production does not exceed the following percentages:
	a.	10% until the year 2000; 7% from the year 2001 onwards. 
	3.	 
	4.	In the case of goods that are classified in chapters 50 to 63 of the SAC or the NAD, the percentages will refer to the weight of the fibers and yarns with respect to the weight of the material produced.
Article 4.13 : Fungible (interchangeable) goods
	1.	
	2.	When fungible or interchangeable, originating and non-originating goods of the Parties are used in the preparation or production of a good, even when they are mixed or combined and exported, the origin of these goods may be determined by applying any of the following three inventory management methods, at the producer's choice. 
	3.	Once one of the inventory management methods is selected, it will be used throughout the fiscal period.
	a.	
	b.	First-in, first-out method (FIFO) : method by which the origin of the first fungible goods received in inventory is considered as the origin, in the same number of units, of the fungible goods that are first withdrawn of inventory. 
	c.	Last-in, first-out method (LIFO) : method by which the origin of the last fungible goods received in inventory is considered as the origin, in the same number of units, of the fungible goods that are withdrawn first of inventory. 
	d.	Average Method – A method by which the origin of fungible goods withdrawn from inventory is based on the percentage of originating and non-originating goods in inventory. The average of non-originating goods will be determined by applying the following formula: PMNO = [ VTMFNO / VTMFOYNO ] * 100
	▪	where: PMNO = Average Non-Originating Goods. VTMFNO = Total Value of non-originating fungible or interchangeable Goods that are part of the inventory prior to departure. VTMFOYNO = Total Value of the Originating and Non-Originating Fungible or Interchangeable Goods that are part of the inventory prior to departure. 
Article 4.14 : Games or assortments
	1.	
	2.	It is applied to the goods that are classified in accordance with General Rule 3 for the interpretation of the SAC or the NAD and may qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in the set or assortments comply with the Rules of Origin. established in this chapter and its annex. 
	3.	The De Minimis rule may be applied to games or assortments.
Article 4.15 : Assembly
	•	Originating goods, as established in this chapter, will be the goods that, in accordance with the SAC or the NAD, incorporate non-originating parts and pieces into their production or manufacturing process because:
	a.	
	b.	in accordance with General Rule 2 for the interpretation of the SAC or the NAD, unassembled merchandise is classified as assembled merchandise, in the same heading or subheading; 
	c.	the goods and their parts are classified in the same heading or subheading; either 
	d.	the assembly also confers origin when it incorporates unitary components that are classified in a heading other than that of the final merchandise.
Article 4.16 : Accessories, spare parts and tools
	1.	
	2.	The accessories, spare parts and tools delivered with the merchandise as a usual part thereof, will not be taken into account to determine if all the non-originating materials or products used in the production of a merchandise comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in this chapter and its annex, provided that:
	a.	
	b.	the accessories, spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the merchandise, regardless of whether each one is broken down or detailed in the invoice itself; Y 
	c.	the quantity and value of these accessories, spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the classifying merchandise.
	3.	 
	4.	The accessories, spare parts and tools that do not meet the above conditions will be applied the corresponding rule of origin to each one of them separately.
Article 4.17 : Containers and packaging products for retail sale
	•	The containers and packaging products presented together with the merchandise for retail sale and classified by the merchandise they contain, will not be taken into account to establish the origin of the merchandise object of trade. 
Article 4.18 : Containers, materials and packaging products for shipment
	•	The containers, materials and packaging products for the shipment of a merchandise will not be taken into account to establish the origin of the merchandise object of trade, as long as they are those used habitually. 
Article 4.19 : Transhipment and direct dispatch or international transit
	1.	
	2.	An originating good shall not lose such condition when it is exported from one Party to another Party and during its transportation passes through the territory of other Parties or of a non-Party country, provided that the following requirements are met:
	a.	
	b.	the transit is justified for geographical reasons or for considerations related to international transport requirements; 
	c.	is not intended for trade, use or employment in the transit country or countries, whether or not they are Parties; Y 
	d.	during its transport and deposit it is not transformed or subjected to operations other than packaging, packaging, repackaging, loading, unloading or handling to ensure conservation.
	3.	 
	4.	Otherwise, said merchandise will lose its original condition.
Article 4.20 : Certification and declaration of origin forms
	1.	
	2.	The Parties must use the Certificate of Origin form, which will be prepared by the Technical Committee on Rules of Origin and will enter into force within thirty days after the beginning of the validity of this Agreement. 
	3.	The Certificate of Origin will contain the certification and declaration of origin.
Article 4.21 : Certification and declaration of origin
	1.	
	2.	To documentally verify that a good qualifies as originating from one of the Parties, the exporter will issue the certification of origin. Said certification must contain the name, signature and seal of the certifier and may be endorsed by the competent authority designated by each Party. 
	3.	When the exporter is not the producer of the goods, the former may request a declaration of origin in order to issue the corresponding certification. In the event that the exporter is the producer of said merchandise, the declaration of origin will not be necessary. 
	4.	An exporter who has issued an incorrect certification of origin may correct it and notify it in writing, prior to importation, to the persons to whom such certification was delivered, as well as to the competent authority of the importing Party, in which case he may not be sanctioned. . 
	5.	Corrections to the Certificate of Origin will be requested in writing from the competent authority and will be made, where appropriate, by the issuer of said document.
Article 4.22 : Exports covered by the Certificate of Origin
	1.	
	2.	The Certificate of Origin may cover:
	a.	
	b.	a single export of one or more goods, or 
	c.	several exports of identical or similar merchandise, for a period not exceeding one year, to the same importer.
	3.	 
	4.	In both cases, during the validity of the certificate, for exports after the first, it will suffice to present a copy or photocopy of the original.
Article 4.23 : Accounting records and other documents
	•	The exporter that certifies the origin of the goods must keep for a minimum period of five (5) years, after their certification, all the accounting records and documents that strictly support the origin of the goods. 
Article 4.24 : Direct dispatch
	•	When an originating good is exported from one Party to another Party and during its transportation passes through the territory of other Parties, without being transformed, the certification of origin will be issued by the exporter. 
Article 4.25 : Re-export
	•	When a merchandise originating from a Party has been imported into the territory of another Party and is exported from the latter to another Party, the certification of origin will be endorsed by the competent official entity of the importing country, indicating that the merchandise has not been transformed. and attaching a photocopy of the Certificate of the country of origin. 
Article 4.26 : Non-requirement of the Certificate of Origin
	1.	
	2.	The Certificate of Origin will not be required in the following cases:
	a.	
	b.	imports for commercial purposes of merchandise whose customs value does not exceed an amount equivalent in national currency to one thousand dollars of the United States of America (US$ 1,000.00). In this case, the commercial invoice will indicate that the merchandise qualifies as originating; 
	c.	imports for non-commercial purposes of merchandise whose customs value does not exceed an amount equivalent in national currency to one thousand United States dollars (US$ 1,000.00).
	3.	 
	4.	The above exceptions will not apply when it is verified that an import has been divided into two or more shipments.
Article 4.27 : Omission or anomalies in the Certificate of Origin
	•	When the exporter does not present the certificate or incorrectly certifies the origin of a certain good, the importing Party shall not deny the import. However, the competent authority will require a guarantee for an amount equivalent to the amount of the taxes, which may be returned within the term established by the legislation of each Party, upon presentation of the corresponding Certificate of Origin. 
Article 4.28 : False or unfounded statements
	1.	
	2.	When the exporter has falsely or unfoundedly certified that the merchandise qualifies as originating, the competent authority of the importing Party shall declare said merchandise as non-originating until the exporter proves that it complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
	3.	Each of the Parties undertakes to impose the corresponding criminal, civil or administrative sanctions in accordance with their national legislation.
Article 4.29 : Collaboration between competent authorities
	•	The competent authority of the importing Party may request all the necessary technical collaboration from its counterpart in the exporting country, and the latter will provide it promptly. 
Article 4.30 : Confidentiality
	•	The competent authority of each of the Parties will maintain the confidentiality of the information collected in the origin verification process. 
Article 4.31 : Means of verification
	•	For the verification of the origin of a merchandise, the following elements must be taken into account, among other things:
	a.	
	b.	the official statistical information provided by each Party; 
	c.	questionnaires, forms and information request notes addressed to importers, exporters, producers or others; Y 
	d.	visits to the facilities of the exporter and producer, with the purpose of examining the accounting records and documents referred to in article 4.23, in addition to inspecting the facilities and materials or products used in the production of the goods.
Article 4.32 : Forms of notification
	•	If the application is accepted or rejected, the competent authority of the importing Party, within a period of no more than five (5) days after the issuance of the respective resolution, shall notify the interested parties when appropriate and the competent authority of the Party exporter. 
Article 4.33 : Payment guarantee
	1.	
	2.	When there is doubt about the origin of a merchandise, at the time of its importation, the customs authority will not prevent entry to it but will request the competent authority to start the investigation process, in accordance with article 4.34. 
	3.	When the competent authority of the importing Party notifies the customs authority that there is a process of verification of origin on a merchandise, it may not prevent the successive entry of identical merchandise sent by the exporter subject to investigation, but the constitution of a guarantee that supports the payment of taxes.
Article 4.34 : Request for verification
	•	When there is doubt about the origin of a merchandise from the territory of one of the Parties, any natural or legal person who demonstrates a legal interest in this regard, may submit the corresponding verification request to the competent authority of their country, providing the documents, expert reports and other evidence that support the request. This verification may also be initiated ex officio, when the necessary evidence is available. 
Article 4.35 : Admission or rejection of the application
	1.	
	2.	The competent authority will issue the resolution of admission or rejection of the application within a period of ten (10) days. Said resolution must contain the evidence that motivated it. 
	3.	If the verification request is rejected or the competent authority does not resolve within the indicated period, the merchandise will be considered as originating in the exporting country.
Article 4.36 : Notification
	1.	
	2.	To make the notifications referred to in this instrument, the competent authorities of the Parties may use any communication system provided that the acknowledgment of receipt is guaranteed. 
	3.	Once the admission resolution has been notified to the competent authority of the exporting Party, the latter must notify the exporter and the producer within the following ten (10) days, the start of the procedure to verify the origin of the goods. 
	4.	With the notification of the admission resolution, the questionnaires, forms and information request notes will be sent.
Article 4.37 : Trial period
	1.	
	2.	Once the interested parties have been notified, they will have up to twenty (20) days to present their arguments and means of proof before their competent authority. Once these documents are received, the competent authority of the exporting Party shall forward them to the competent authority of the importing Party within a period of no more than five (5) days. 
	3.	Within or outside the trial period, the competent authority of the importing Party may use any of the means of verification stipulated in Article 4.31.
Article 4.38 : Failure to present arguments and evidence
	•	When the exporter or producer does not make a statement within the twenty-day period referred to in article 4.37, the competent authority of the importing Party will resolve within five (5) days that the merchandise covered by the Certificate is not originating, and in this case, within the following five (5) days, notify the interested parties and the corresponding institution so that the cancellation of the taxes becomes effective. 
Article 4.39 : Notification of the visit
	1.	
	2.	Before carrying out a verification visit, the competent authority of the importing Party must notify the competent authority of the exporting Party of its intention to carry it out, who must notify it within five (5) days of receiving the notification. to the exporter and producer, as the case may be. 
	3.	From the moment the verification visit is notified and until the verification visit is signed, the test period referred to in article 4.37 will be interrupted, and must be resumed once said procedure has been completed. 
	4.	The exporter or producer who receives a notification to carry out a visit, must make a statement in this regard within a period not exceeding ten (10) days from the date on which the notification is received.
Article 4.40 : Visit notification requirements
	•	The notification referred to in article 4.39 will contain at least the following information:
	a.	
	b.	the identification of the competent authority issuing the notification; 
	c.	the name of the exporter or producer to be visited; 
	d.	the date and place where the visit will take place; 
	e.	the object and scope of the verification visit, including the express reference of the merchandise subject to verification and the specific rule of origin referred to in the Certificate of Origin; 
	f.	the names and positions of the officials who will carry out the visit; and legal basis for the verification visit.
Article 4.41 : Modification to the content of the notification
	•	Any modification of the information referred to in article 4.40 must be notified in writing to the competent authority of the exporting Party, who in turn will notify the producer or exporter, at least ten (10) days in advance of the visit. 
Article 4.42 : Scope of verification
	•	The competent authority of the importing Party may request the producer or exporter to make the accounting records and other documents that prove compliance with the rules of origin available during the verification visit. You may also request the inspection of the materials, products, processes and facilities used in the preparation of the merchandise. 
Article 4.43 : Request for extension
	•	During the period established in paragraph 3 of Article 4.39, the exporter or producer may request in writing, to the competent authority of the importing Party, an extension that, if granted, shall not exceed ten (10) days. 
Article 4.44 : Lack of consent for the visit
	1.	
	2.	If the exporter or producer does not make a statement or does not give their consent expressly and in writing, to carry out the verification visit within the period established in Article 4.43, the competent authority of the importing Party will deny, by means of a resolution, the origin of the goods covered by the respective Certificate, and in this case, within five (5) days after, notify the importer and the competent authority of the exporting Party, who will notify the exporter and producer if applicable. 
	3.	Likewise, within the same term, you must officially communicate the resolution to the corresponding institution so that the cancellation of the taxes becomes effective.
Article 4.45 : Designation of witnesses
	•	The competent authority of the exporting Party will request the exporter or producer to designate three witnesses who are present during the visit, provided that they intervene only in that capacity. If there is no appointment of witnesses, this omission will not result in the postponement of the visit, nor the nullity of the proceeding. 
Article 4.46 : Minutes of the visit
	1.	
	2.	From the verification visit, the competent authority of the importing Party will draw up a record containing the relevant facts verified by those present, who will sign it at the end of the visit. 
	3.	The record will constitute a means of proof that must be incorporated into the respective file and be evaluated in due course within the procedure.
Article 4.47 : Final resolution
	1.	
	2.	Once all origin verification procedures have been exhausted, within a period not exceeding twenty (20) days, the competent authority of the importing Party must issue the final resolution, determining whether or not the merchandise subject to investigation qualify as originating. The resolution must include the conclusions of fact and law on which the determination is based. 
	3.	If within the term established in Article 4.37, for the provision of evidence, the competent authority of the importing Party has sufficient evidence to rule on the case under investigation, it may issue the final resolution, subject to the acceptance of the person under investigation to that the term be reduced. 
	4.	The period established for issuing a resolution will be interrupted when the competent authority of the importing Party considers that the evidence presented or some of the facts are insufficient to be able to issue the resolution, and said period must be resumed at the end of the pertinent administrative proceedings. 
	5.	The notification to the interested parties of the final resolution must be made within five (5) days after its issuance.  
	6.	If the origin of the goods is denied, the competent authority that issues the final resolution must send the official communication to the corresponding institution within five (5) days, so that the cancellation of the taxes becomes effective. Otherwise the guarantee will be returned.
Article 4.48 : Appeals for review and challenge
	•	Against the resolutions issued by the competent national authorities, the resources granted by the domestic law of each Party may be filed. 
Article 4.49 : Rules of Origin Technical Committee
	1.	
	2.	The Rules of Origin Technical Committee is established, which will depend on the Council and will be made up of a representative of each Party, and the advisors it deems appropriate. 
	3.	The Committee must be constituted within two (2) months after the effective date of this Treaty and will meet ordinarily at least twice a year and extraordinarily at the express request of one of the Parties. 
	4.	The Technical Committee will have the following functions, among others:
	a.	
	b.	propose to the Council the modifications required by this chapter; 
	c.	ensure the effective compliance, application and administration of the content of this chapter; Y 
	d.	Other tasks assigned by the Council.

ANNEX TO CHAPTER IV: SPECIFIC RULES OF ORIGIN
SECTION I (CHAPTER 1 TO 5): LIVE ANIMALS AND PRODUCTS OF THE ANIMAL KINGDOM
CHAPTER 1 : LIVING ANIMALS
SECTION VI (CHAPTER 28 TO 38): PRODUCTS OF THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES OR RELATED INDUSTRIES
Section Note:
VI-1 Chemical Reaction:
A "Chemical Reaction" is a process (including biochemical processes) that results in a molecule with a new structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and forming new ones, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecule. .
The following operations are considered not to constitute chemical reactions for the purposes of this definition:
Dissolution in water or other solvents;
Elimination of solvents, including dissolving water;
The addition or removal of water of crystallization.
VI-2 Purification:
The purification that produces the elimination of 80% of the content of existing impurities or the reduction or elimination that produces a chemical substance with a minimum degree of purity, in order to make the product suitable for uses such as:
1) Pharmaceutical substances or food products that comply with national standards or international pharmacopoeia.
2) Reactive chemical products for chemical analysis or for use in laboratories;
3) Elements and components for use in microelectronics;
4) Different applications of optics;
Human or veterinary use.
 
CHAPTER 28: INORGANIC CHEMICALS; INORGANIC OR ORGANIC COMPOUNDS OF PRECIOUS METALS, RADIOACTIVE ELEMENTS, RARE-EARTH METALS OR ISOTOPES.
Chapter Notes:
28-1 Valued Solutions:
The standardized solutions constitute preparations suitable for analytical, verification or reference use, with degrees of purity or proportions guaranteed by the manufacturer. The preparation of valued solutions confers origin.
28-2 Separation of Isomers:
The isolation or separation of isomers from a mixture of isomers confers origin. SECTION VII (FROM CHAPTER 39 TO 40): PLASTICS AND ARTICLES THEREOF; RUBBER AND ARTICLES THEREOF
Section Notes:
VII-1 Chemical Reaction:
A "Chemical Reaction" is a process (including biochemical processes) that gives rise to a molecule with a new structure by breaking intramolecular bonds and forming new ones, or by altering the spatial arrangement of atoms. of a molecule.
The following operations are considered not to constitute chemical reactions for the purposes of this definition:
1. Dissolution in water or other solvents.
2. The removal of solvents, including dissolving water;
3. The addition or removal of water of crystallization.
VII-2 Purification:
The purification that produces the elimination of 80% of the content of existing impurities or the reduction or elimination of impurities produced by a chemical substance with a minimum degree of purity, in order to make the product suitable for uses such as:
1. Pharmaceutical substances or food products that comply with national standards or international pharmacopoeia;
2. Reactive chemical products for chemical analysis or for use in laboratories;
3. Elements and components for use in microelectronics;
4. Different optical applications;
5. Human or veterinary use.
VII-3 Separation of isomers:
The isolation or separation of isomers from a mixture of isomers confers origin.
 
CHAPTER 39: PLASTICS AND ARTICLES THEREOF
Chapter V: Customs Procedures
Article 5.01 : Customs procedures
	1.	
	2.	The provisions of this chapter constitute the general framework of principles applicable to the customs administration of the Parties. 
	3.	The specific procedures referring to the different regimes and customs operations shall be governed by the provisions of the national legislation of the Parties. 
	4.	The Parties will establish minimum requirements for the clearance of the goods of the other Party that enter their territory. For these purposes, to the extent possible, selective and random automated controls will be used, without prejudice to the exercise of the type of physical and documentary control to which each Party is authorized, in accordance with its customs legislation.
Article 5.02 : Customs cooperation and mutual assistance
	1.	
	2.	The Parties, through their customs authorities, undertake to:
	a.	
	b.	strengthen their bonds of cooperation and mutual assistance in resolving the differences that arise in the administration of this chapter; 
	c.	stimulate, to the extent possible, coordination practices among themselves, defining the fields of action, procedures, terms and scope of assistance, as well as intensify relations between them in order to exchange experiences that allow perfecting and harmonizing applicable customs systems and procedures based on the principle of reciprocity; Y 
	d.	Strengthen trade between them through mechanisms that expedite merchandise transit and customs clearance, without prejudice to the application of controls to prevent illegal trade, unfair international trade practices, and other practices that cause trade distortions.
	3.	 
	4.	In particular, the Parties will facilitate the customs clearance of originating goods and will maintain the degree of conformity of the customs facilitation measures agreed by them, related to this chapter after the entry into force of this Agreement. 
	5.	In relation to subparagraph a) of paragraph 1 of this article, the Parties will give priority to the areas of harmonization of customs procedures, information technology and training. 
	6.	The Parties shall endeavor to jointly organize training programs on customs matters that include:
	a.	
	b.	training for officials directly involved in customs procedures; Y 
	c.	training for users.
Article 5.03 : International transit of goods
	•	The Parties will simplify, to the extent of their possibilities, and make the users aware of the procedures for international transit of merchandise, the required documentation, the conditions required for the transport units, the hours of operation of the customs, the information on the authorized ports and airports and the access and infrastructure of the customs of the Parties. 
Article 5.04 : Dispatch of goods
	1.	
	2.	Each Party, through its customs authority, must carry out the immediate clearance of merchandise from the other Party that enters its territory. For these purposes, to the extent possible, automated controls of residence time and selective or random criteria for review, weighing, physical verification of the merchandise and direct dispatch in companies will be used. 
	3.	The Parties will seek to simplify the documents for internal transit and will allow importers to request the change of customs regime in accordance with the legislation of the importing Party. 
	4.	Each Party shall inform the other Party of the procedures that facilitate and expedite the dispatch of merchandise, including the requirements for their entry into the territory of the Party, for the reception, unloading, and storage in accordance with the merchandise import and export regimes, of accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 5.05 : Samples or samples
	•	Each Party will grant facilities for the entry into its territory of samples or samples and will prepare an instruction for the same in which it will include the procedure and the commercial, banking or customs documentation necessary to identify the samples or samples subject to importation. 
Article 5.06 : Use of electronic information systems
	1.	
	2.	Each Party, taking into account its possibilities, will implement systems for the electronic transmission of information for customs management. 
	3.	Each Party shall establish rules for the operation of electronic information transmission systems that include:
	a.	
	b.	use of user codes and access codes; 
	c.	probative value of data and records; 
	d.	confidentiality of information; 
	e.	responsibility of the officials who operate the system and of the users; Y 
	f.	the information storage system.
Article 5.07 : Exchange of information
	1.	
	2.	The Parties shall exchange, to the extent of their possibilities and through their customs authorities, information and experience on:
	a.	
	b.	customs classification and valuation; 
	c.	rules of origin; 
	d.	documents and requirements for the import and export of goods; 
	e.	import and export statistics, whether general or specific; in terms of the legislation of each Party; 
	f.	goods subject to non-tariff measures; 
	g.	customs regimes and procedures; 
	h.	new techniques to combat customs fraud, when their efficiency has been proven; Y 
	i.	new trends related to customs offences, means and methods used to commit them.
	3.	 
	4.	The mechanisms for the exchange of information will be defined by the Customs Procedures Committee, established in article 5.09.
Article 5.08 : Procedure to facilitate trade
	•	Notwithstanding the provisions of other chapters, as of the entry into force of this Treaty, the Parties agree that any new customs regulation that is intended to be established in trade between the Parties must be previously communicated within thirty (30) days before the expected effective date. These regulations shall be published in accordance with national legislation and within ten days of such publication, the authority of the importing Party shall notify the authority of the exporting Party of such regulations. 
Article 5.09 : Customs Procedures Committee
	1.	
	2.	The Parties establish a Customs Procedures Committee made up of representatives of each of them that will meet at least once a year, as well as at the request of any of them. 
	3.	The Committee will be responsible for, in addition to the powers assigned to it by the Council:
	a.	
	b.	propose customs policies that facilitate trade between the Parties; 
	c.	try to reach agreements on:
	i.	
	ii.	the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter; 
	iii.	tariff classification and customs valuation matters; 
	iv.	any other matter referred to it by a Party;
	d.	 
	e.	propose uniform guidelines for the improvement of customs procedures; 
	f.	report to the Council on any customs procedure that is incompatible with the provisions of this chapter; 
	g.	report annually to the Council on its activities; Y 
	h.	examine the proposals for administrative or operational modification related to this chapter in customs matters, which may affect the flow of trade between the Parties.

Chapter VI: Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Article 6.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Food additive : any substance that by itself is not normally consumed as food, nor is it used as a basic ingredient in food, whether or not it has nutritional value, and whose addition to food in its production, manufacturing, processing, preparation, treatment phase , packaging, packaging, transport or storage, results (or can reasonably be expected to result) directly or indirectly by itself or its by-products, a component of the food or affects its characteristics. This definition does not include "contaminants" or substances added to food to maintain or improve nutritional qualities; Food : any processed, semi-finished or raw substance intended for human or animal consumption, including beverages, chewing gum and any other substances used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of food, but does not include cosmetics or tobacco or substances used solely as medicines; Animal : any vertebrate or invertebrate species, including aquatic and wild fauna; Good : food, animals, vegetables, their products and by-products; Harmonization : establishment, recognition and application of common sanitary and phytosanitary measures by the Parties; Contaminant : any substance or living organism not intentionally added to food, which is present in said food as a result of production (including operations carried out in agriculture, animal husbandry and veterinary medicine), manufacturing, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transportation or storage of such food or as a result of environmental contamination. This term includes physical contaminants; Risk assessment :
	a.	
	b.	the probability of entry, establishment and spread of a disease or pest and the possible biological, agronomic and economic consequences; Y 
	c.	the probability of detrimental effects to human, animal, or plant life or health from the presence of additives, contaminants, toxins, or disease-causing organisms in a good;
	◦	Food safety : quality that ensures that food does not present any risk to human and animal health; Scientific Information – Data or information derived from the use of scientific principles and methods; Sanitary or phytosanitary measure: measure that a Party establishes, adopts, maintains or applies to:
	a.	
	b.	protect life, human and animal health, as well as plant health in its territory from the risks arising from the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease; 
	c.	protect human, animal and plant life and health in its territory from risks resulting from the presence of an additive, contaminant, toxin or a pathogenic organism in a good; 
	d.	protect human life and health in its territory from risks from an organism that causes a pest or disease carried by an animal or plant or a derivative thereof; 
	e.	prevent or limit other damage in its territory from the introduction, establishment and spread of a pest or disease; Y 
	f.	sanitary and phytosanitary measures comprise all relevant laws, regulations, requirements and procedures, including a criterion relating to the final product; a process or production method directly related to the good; a test, inspection, certification, or approval procedure; a relevant statistical method; a sampling procedure; a risk assessment method; a packaging and labeling requirement directly related to food safety; and a quarantine regime, such as a relevant requirement associated with the transport of animals or plants, or with material necessary for their survival during transport;
	◦	Appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection : level of protection to life, human and animal health, as well as plant health, that a Party considers adequate; International standards, guidelines or recommendations : any of these, established:
	a.	
	b.	in relation to food safety, that of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, including that related to product spoilage, prepared by the Codex Alimentarius Committee on Fish and Fishery Products, food additives, contaminants, hygienic practices and methods analysis and sampling; 
	c.	in relation to animal health and zoonoses, the one elaborated under the auspices of the International Office of Epizootics (OIE); 
	d.	in relation to plant health, the one prepared under the auspices of the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention; Y  
	e.	those established by other international organizations agreed by the parties;
	◦	Disease : designates the infection, clinical or not caused by one or several etiological agents of the diseases listed in the OIE International Animal Health Code; I think : balanced food for animal use; Plague : any species, race or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent harmful or potentially harmful to plants, animals or their products; Approval procedure: any registration, certification, notification or any other mandatory administrative procedure to approve the use of an additive or establish a tolerance of a contaminant for defined purposes or under agreed conditions in a food, drink or feed, prior to allowing its use or commercialization when any of these contains the additive or contaminant; Control or inspection procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine compliance with a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, including sampling, testing, inspection, verification, monitoring, auditing, conformity assessment, accreditation, or other procedures involving the physical examination of a good, of the packaging of the good, or of the equipment or facilities directly related to the production, commercialization or use of a good, but does not mean an approval procedure; Transport : the means of mobilization, the form of packaging and the modality of transportation, established in a sanitary or phytosanitary measure; pesticide: any substance intended to prevent, destroy, attract, repel or control any pest, including unwanted species of plants or animals, during the production, storage, transport, distribution and processing of food, agricultural products or animal feed, or that may administered to animals to combat ectoparasites. The term includes substances intended for use as plant growth regulators, defoliants, desiccants, agents to reduce fruit density or sprout inhibitors, and substances applied to crops before or after harvest to protect the produce. against deterioration during storage and transport. The term does not normally include fertilizers, nutrients of vegetable or animal origin, Pesticide Residue : Any specified substance present in food, agricultural produce, or animal feed as a consequence of the use of a pesticide. The term includes any derivative of a pesticide, such as conversion products, metabolites and reaction products, and impurities considered to be of toxicological importance; Plant : living plants and parts thereof, including seeds and germplasm; Area of low pest or disease prevalence : an area designated by the competent authorities, which may include the whole of a country, part of a country, or all or parts of several countries, in which a given pest or disease occurs only to a low degree and that it is subject to effective surveillance, control, or eradication measures against the pest or disease; Pest- or disease-free zone: zone designated by the competent authorities, which may include the whole of a country, part of a country, or all or parts of several countries, in which a particular pest or disease does not exist. A pest- or disease-free area may surround, be surrounded by, or be adjacent to an area - either within part of a country or in a geographical region that may include all or parts of several countries - in which it is known that a particular pest or disease exists but is subject to regional control measures such as the establishment of protection, surveillance and buffer zones that isolate or eradicate the pest or disease in question. 
Article 6.02 : Rights and obligations
	1.	
	2.	Each Party may, in accordance with the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (AMSF) of the WTO Agreement, establish, adopt, maintain, or apply any sanitary and phytosanitary measure necessary for the protection of life and health. human (food safety) and animal or to preserve plants in its territory, even those that are stricter than an international measure, standard, guideline or recommendation. 
	3.	Each Party shall ensure that any sanitary or phytosanitary measure it adopts, maintains or applies:
	a.	
	b.	is based on scientific principles, taking into account, where appropriate, both relevant factors and different regional conditions; 
	c.	be maintained only when there is a scientific basis to support it; 
	d.	is based on a risk assessment appropriate to the circumstances; 
	e.	do not restrict trade more than is necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; 
	f.	does not have the purpose or consequence of creating a hidden restriction between the Parties; Y 
	g.	is based on international measures, standards, guidelines or recommendations or their relevant elements or imminent adoption, except when these measures do not constitute an effective or adequate means to protect human or animal life or health, or to preserve plants in their territory .
	4.	 
	5.	Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each Party, in order to protect human or animal life or health, or to preserve plants in its territory, may set its appropriate levels of protection, taking into account the risk associated from the point of view of view of the consequences of the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease. For this purpose, the analysis and risk assessment methodology of international reference organizations (CODEX ALIMENTARIUS, International Phytosanitary Convention and the International Office of Epizootics) will be taken into account, as well as specialized regional organizations from which the Parties are members, for the areas of food safety, plant health and animal health. 
	6.	The risk analysis and assessment carried out by the importing Party may not exceed a maximum period of three months to establish the respective sanitary or phytosanitary measure from the date said analysis is requested from the competent authority. 
	7.	The Parties will define, before the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, the competent authority for notification and will use the Information Centers as a channel to notify the other Party. 
	8.	The Parties shall notify draft sanitary or phytosanitary measures through the pertinent channels. In the case of emergency measures, the Parties shall notify the Information Center in writing of the measure at least three days before its entry into force, or failing that, three days later, whenever it has an effect on the trade of the other part. 
	9.	The Parties will make their respective sanitary and phytosanitary measures equivalent through bilateral protocols for the mutual recognition of the sanitary and phytosanitary systems of each Party. 
	10.	The Parties shall observe the control, inspection and approval procedures for the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures set forth in the annex to this article.
Article 6.03 : Administration
	1.	
	2.	The Parties establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which will be made up of those responsible for the areas of food safety, plant health, animal health and trade of each Party. 
	3.	The Committee will meet at least once a year, or as many times as required, and may convene ad-hoc technical groups to deal with specific issues, which will report the recommendations to the Committee for decision-making. 
	4.	The Parties agree on the organizational structure, functions and general procedures of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures based on the provisions of the annex to this article. 
	5.	The Committee will annually establish a work program that intensifies and promotes the application of the AMSF of the WTO Agreement, especially the process of harmonization and equivalence of sanitary or phytosanitary measures, and will promote technical cooperation between the Parties.  
	6.	The Committee shall annually report to the Council a report on the application of this chapter.
Article 6.04 : Settlement of disputes
	1.	
	2.	The Parties renounce the retaliatory application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the framework of their reciprocal trade. The application of measures on the basis of reciprocity will be presumed retaliatory.The Parties, through their competent authorities, may request in writing the holding of consultations to clarify or resolve any difference regarding the provisions of this chapter and the requested Party must respond within fifteen (15) days to any request in this sense.  
	3.	If the difference is not resolved through the technical consultations referred to in paragraph 2, any Party may request a dispute settlement procedure in accordance with Chapter XVI (Dispute Settlement), in which case, the arbitral tribunal must have the Advice from recognized specialists in the subject matter of the controversy, whenever a technical and scientific matter related to the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures is discussed. 
	4.	To this end, the Committee will create a registry of qualified specialists in the areas of food safety, plant health, and animal health outside government management.
Annex to Article 6.02 : Control, inspection and approval procedures in the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures
	•	In order to expeditiously apply sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the territory of the Parties and thus facilitate trade flows, the procedures for control, inspection and approval of sanitary and phytosanitary measures will be framed within the provisions of this annex. . Transparency : In order to ensure adequate transparency in the adoption and application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the competent authorities in charge of notification and the Information Centers will use the same or similar formats to those designed and used by the Sanitary Measures Committee. and Phytosanitary of the World Trade Organization. Harmonization : The Parties will make use of international organizations and regional forums specialized in the matter in order to harmonize their sanitary and phytosanitary measures. For this purpose, an agenda of priorities to be developed by the Committee will be established. Sanitary and phytosanitary status: The sanitary and phytosanitary status recorded in the databases of FAO (Food Safety and Plant Health), OIE (Animal Health), and specialized regional organizations is recognized as valid between the Parties. If reasoned doubt arises from one of the Parties, by mutual agreement, reasonable access will be allowed for inspections, tests and other pertinent procedures in order to verify said status. Equivalences : In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in the process of recognition of equivalences for their sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the Parties will address, through bilateral consultations, aspects related to the effectiveness of the measure, impact on trade, minimization of the cost of application and adequacy of the technological levels, which will be specified in the bilateral instruments of mutual recognition. Risk assessment and determination of the appropriate level of protection : In the risk assessment process, the Parties will apply, in the first instance and whenever they are available, the risk assessment methodologies harmonized by international reference organizations or, failing that, it will resort to the harmonized methodology at the regional level within the framework of the specialized regional organizations. Criteria for Inspection (including inspection at origin) : The official instances will be the only channels between the Parties and will have the power and obligation to determine the inspection time periods, the period to inform the other Party, as well as to the signing of protocols or specific bilateral instruments that respond to the requirements between the Parties. From the request of one of the Parties, within a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, the official channels will have the obligation to resolve the request, as well as to inspect and report the results and measures applied for the recognition of the other part. Inspections carried out in a specific export center of another country will be valid for at least one year, except for reasonable exceptions. Inspection costs will be borne by the exporting country. Free areas and areas of low prevalence of pests and diseases : In the process of recognition of free areas and areas of low prevalence of pests and diseases, the Parties will apply, in the first instance, the methodologies used by international reference organizations or, in failing that, those harmonized at the regional level within the framework of specialized regional organizations. Likewise, they will establish specific bilateral protocols. Accreditation : The Parties will seek to standardize their accreditation processes for competent professionals and institutions in order to grant mutual recognition of their ability to provide services. 
Annex to Article 6.03 : General Procedures of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
	•	The Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, hereinafter the Committee, will be made up of the representatives of the competent entities of human health (food safety), animal health, plant health and trade. The Parties will report to the Council the names of the members of the Committee prior to its installation. The primary function of the Committee will be compliance and correct application of the provisions of this chapter, as well as facilitating its interpretation, application and administration. The Committee will meet once a year, or as many times as it deems necessary. For this purpose, agendas will be exchanged in advance and at least thirty (30) days before the meeting. The Parties will alternate venues for Committee meetings. In Central America, venues will alternate within the region. The Committee will report annually to the Council and will submit its recommendations for consideration by this instance. The Committee will establish a work program to promote harmonization, equivalence and work related to the recognition of free zones and zones of low prevalence of pests and diseases, as well as any aspect that requires a special dynamic. The Committee will be chaired by a President, appointed annually and in correspondence with the venue of the meeting, as well as a Technical Secretary of the other Party, who will have the task of monitoring the agreements reached by the Committee. The Committee will appoint ad-hoc technical committees in the three areas (food safety, plant health, animal health) to deepen the application of this chapter and to resolve aspects of the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the commercial relationship between the Parties. The resolutions of the Committee will be made by consensus between the Parties. The Committee may invite, in a consultative capacity, academics, researchers and officials from specialized international or regional organizations, to deal with specific issues on the Committee's agenda. The Committee shall seek and facilitate cooperation and technical assistance between the Parties. The Committee will promote the active participation of the Parties in international and regional organizations of reference.  
Chapter VII: Unfair trade practices
Article 7.01 : General principle
	•	The Parties reject any unfair international trade practice that causes or threatens to cause trade distortions. Rights acquired within the framework of the World Trade Organization are not considered unfair practices. 
Article 7.02 : Scope of application
	1.	
	2.	The Parties confirm their rights and obligations in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures of the World Trade Organization and the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VI of the GATT 1994. 
	3.	The investigation procedure and the application of countervailing or antidumping duties shall be carried out in accordance with the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures of the World Trade Organization and the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VI of the GATT 1994, as well as with the other laws governing their application in each Party.
Article 7.03 : Clarifications
	1.	
	2.	Once a provisional or definitive countervailing or antidumping duty has been established, the interested parties may request the competent authority to clarify whether or not a certain good is subject to it. 
	3.	The presentation of the request referred to in the previous paragraph will not interrupt the course of the investigation nor will it suspend the application of the countervailing or antidumping duties adopted.
Article 7.04 : Settlement of disputes
	•	When a Party considers itself affected by a measure emanating from a final resolution in the sense of Article 16.03, it may submit the dispute to the Dispute Settlement procedure established in Chapter XVI (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement. 

Chapter VIII: Safeguard Measures
Article 8.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Threat of Serious Harm – The clear imminence of serious harm. The determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury will be based on facts and not simply on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility; Serious injury : a general and significant impairment of a domestic industry; Domestic industry : the group of producers of similar or directly competitive products that operate within the territory of one of the Parties or those whose joint production of similar or directly competitive products constitutes a significant proportion of the total national production of those products . This significant proportion may not be less than 25%. 
Article 8.02 : General provisions
	1.	
	2.	The Parties retain their rights and obligations to apply safeguard measures in accordance with Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the Agreement on Safeguards of the World Trade Organization. 
	3.	The Parties may apply safeguard measures to imports of products originating in the territory of one of the Parties, the application of which shall be based on clear, strict criteria and with a defined period of time. The Parties may adopt safeguard measures of a bilateral or global nature. 
	4.	For the application of bilateral safeguard measures, the competent authorities shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and, additionally, with the provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994, the Agreement on Safeguards of the World Trade Organization and the legislation respective national. 
	5.	The Parties reiterate their commitment to respect the right of defense of importers, exporters and other interested parties so that they can present evidence and present their arguments during the course of the procedure.
Article 8.03 : Bilateral safeguard measures
	1.	
	2.	The provisions on bilateral safeguard measures shall be applied in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 1.01. 
	3.	The Parties may adopt and apply bilateral measures if the volume of imports of one or several products increases at a rate and under such conditions that it causes or threatens to cause serious damage to the domestic industry of similar or directly competitive products. 
	4.	Measures may only be adopted when strictly necessary to counteract the threat or serious injury caused by imports from the territory of the other Party. 
	5.	The measures will be of a tariff type. The tariff applied will be that of the Most Favored Nation effectively applied. 
	6.	The measures may be applied for a period of one year, extendable for an equal and consecutive period. The extension will be made in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 14 of Article 8.04.  
	7.	The Parties may initiate investigations for the application of a safeguard measure even up to twenty-four months after compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 3.04. This provision will be applicable to the products included in the annex to article 3.04 from the date they are incorporated into free trade. 
	8.	Upon concluding the application of the bilateral measure, it will be subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 3.04. 
	9.	The Parties to this Agreement shall apply bilateral safeguard measures to the same product only once.
Article 8.04 : Procedure for bilateral safeguard measures
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall establish clear and strict procedures for the adoption and application of safeguard measures, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
	3.	To determine the origin of the application of a safeguard measure, the competent investigating authority of the importing Party will carry out the pertinent investigation. 
	4.	The Party that decides to initiate a procedure that could result in the adoption of bilateral safeguard measures, will publish the initiation thereof through its corresponding official dissemination bodies and will notify the exporting Party in writing within the third business day following the publication. 
	5.	The exporting Party will be deemed notified seven days after the date on which the notification document and its attached documents have been delivered to the diplomatic representation of the exporting Party, without prejudice to the sending of a copy by specialized courier, fax or mail. electronic. 
	6.	In order to determine whether the increase in imports has caused or threatens to cause serious injury, the competent investigating authority shall evaluate all factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that are related to the affected domestic industry, in particular the rate and amount of the increase in imports. imports of the product in question, in absolute and relative terms, the part of the internal market absorbed by the increase in imports, changes in the level of sales, internal prices, production, productivity, use of installed capacity, participation in the market, profits, losses and employment. 
	7.	To determine whether the safeguard measures are applicable, a direct causal relationship between the increase in imports of the product in question and the injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry will also be demonstrated. If there were factors other than the increase in imports from the other Party, which simultaneously injure or threaten to injure a domestic industry, the injury or threat caused by those factors cannot be attributed to the aforementioned imports. 
	8.	If, as a result of the investigation, the competent authority determines, based on objective evidence, that the assumptions set forth in this chapter are met, the importing Party may initiate consultations with the other Party. 
	9.	The request for consultations will contain sufficient information to support the application of the measures, including:
	a.	
	b.	the names and available addresses of domestic producers of like or directly competitive products that are representative of the domestic industry, their participation in the domestic industry of that product, and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of that sector; 
	c.	a clear and complete description of the product subject to the procedure, the tariff classification, as well as the description of the similar or directly competitive product; 
	d.	import data for each of the three most recent years that provide the basis for that product being imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute terms or relative to domestic production; 
	e.	data on total domestic production of the like or directly competitive product for the last three years; 
	f.	the data that demonstrate the serious damage or the threat thereof caused by the imports to the sector in question in accordance with the data referred to in subparagraphs c) and d); 
	g.	a list and description of the presumed causes of serious injury or the threat thereof, based on the information required under subparagraphs a) to d) and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in imports of that similar product or directly competitive in relative or absolute terms of the domestic industry is the cause thereof; Y 
	h.	information on the safeguard measures that are intended to be adopted and their duration.
	10.	The request for consultations will be considered notified in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of this article.  
	11.	The consultation period shall begin on the business day following receipt by the exporting Party of the notification requesting prior consultations. This period will be thirty (30) days, unless the Parties agree to a shorter term. 
	12.	During the consultation period, the exporting Party will make all the observations it deems pertinent, in particular regarding the proceeding of the proposed measure and its compensation. 
	13.	The Party affected by a safeguard measure may impose a mutually agreed tariff compensation measure, in the consultation period, with trade effects equivalent to the impact of the safeguard measure. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation, the Party proposing to take the bilateral measure shall be empowered to do so and the affected Party may unilaterally impose compensation. 
	14.	Las medidas bilaterales previstas en este capítulo sólo podrán adoptarse una vez concluido el período de consultas. La resolución final por medio de la que se impone una medida de salvaguardia, y en su caso la de compensación, se publicará a través de los órganos de difusión oficiales correspondientes de la Parte que la adopte, según corresponda y será notificada a la otra Parte dentro del tercer día hábil siguiente de su publicación. 
	15.	The consultations will not oblige the Parties to reveal the information that has been provided confidentially, the disclosure of which may impede compliance with the laws of the Party that regulate the matter or harm commercial interests. Notwithstanding this, the importing Party that intends to apply the safeguard measure shall provide the other Party with a non-confidential summary of the information that is confidential or indicate why such a summary cannot be provided. 
	16.	If the importing Party determines that the reasons that gave rise to the application of the safeguard measure subsist, it shall notify the competent authorities of the other Party of its intention to extend it, at least ninety days prior to the expiration of its validity, and it will provide the evidence that the causes that led to the adoption of the measure persist in order to initiate the respective consultations, which will be carried out in accordance with the provisions of this article. Notification of the extension and compensation will be made in the terms provided in this article prior to the expiration of the measures adopted.

Chapter IX: Investment
Article 9.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	ICSID : International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes, created by the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, opened for signature in Washington on March 18, 1965; Company of a Party : any legal person or any other entity constituted or organized under the current legislation of any of the Parties, having its domicile in the territory of that Party, whether or not it is for profit and is privately or governmental owned , including companies, and their branches that carry out economic activities in the territory of a Party, trusts, shareholdings, sole proprietorships or joint ventures; Investment : all kinds of assets or rights of any nature defined in accordance with the legal system of the receiving country, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit or for other business purposes, acquired with resources transferred to the territory of a Party, or reinvested in it, by investors of another Party, provided that the investment has been made in accordance with the laws of the Party in whose territory it was made and shall include, in particular, although not exclusively:
	a.	
	b.	shares and corporate quotas and any other form of economic participation, in any proportion, in companies constituted or organized in accordance with the legislation of the other Party; 
	c.	credit rights or any other benefit that has an economic value directly linked to an investment; 
	d.	movable and immovable property, as well as all other property rights such as mortgages, pledges, easements and usufructs; 
	e.	rights in the field of intellectual property in accordance with the internal legislation of the respective Parties; 
	f.	rights derived from concessions or similar rights granted by law or by virtue of a contract or other act in accordance with the internal legislation of each country, to carry out economic or commercial activities.
	◦	The definition of investment does not include:
	1.	
	2.	a payment obligation or the granting of a credit to the State or to a State company; 
	3.	pecuniary claims derived exclusively from:
	a.	
	b.	commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by an investor of a Party in the territory of that Party to an investor in the territory of another Party; either 
	c.	the granting of credit in relation to a commercial transaction, whose expiration date is less than one year, such as trade financing;
	◦	Investor of a Party : a Party, or a company owned by it, a national according to the legislation of each of the Parties, or a company incorporated in one of the Parties, which carries out the legal acts tending to materialize a investment and is in the process of committing capital, or if applicable, makes or has made an investment in the territory of another Party; Transfers , remittances and international payments as specified in article 9.10. 
Article 9.02 : Scope of application and extent of obligations
	1.	
	2.	This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
	a.	
	b.	investors of another Party in everything directly related to their investment; Y 
	c.	investments of investors of a Party made in the territory of another Party after the entry into force of this Agreement. However, it will also apply to investments made prior to its validity and that have the quality of foreign investment, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2, subparagraph c) of this article;
	3.	 
	4.	This chapter shall not apply to:
	a.	
	b.	the economic activities reserved by each Party in accordance with its internal legislation in force on the date of signing this Treaty; 
	c.	the measures adopted by a Party to restrict the participation of investments by investors of another Party in its territory, for reasons of national security or public order, protection of cultural and environmental heritage, and conservation of the environment; Y 
	d.	disputes or claims arising prior to its entry into force, or related to events that occurred prior to its entry into force, even if its effects remain even after it.
Article 9.03 : Minimum level of treatment
	1.	
	2.	Each Party must guarantee treatment in accordance with International Law, including fair and equitable treatment, and the enjoyment of full protection and security within its territory to the investments of investors of the other Party. 
	3.	Each Party will comply with the commitments it has entered into with respect to investments and in no way impair, through the adoption of arbitrary and discriminatory measures, the management, exploitation, maintenance, use, usufruct, acquisition, expansion or disposal of investments.
Article 9.04 : National Treatment
	•	Each Party shall grant to the investors of another Party, in direct relation to its investment and to the investments of the investors of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to its own investors and to the investments of said investors. 
Article 9.05 : Most Favored Nation Treatment
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall grant to investors of another Party, in direct relation to their investment and to the investments of investors of another Party, a treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to investors and investments of investors of another Party or of a country that is not Party, except as provided in paragraph 2 of this article. 
	3.	If a Party has granted special treatment to investors or their investments, coming from a country that is not a Party, by virtue of agreements that establish provisions to avoid double taxation, free trade zones, customs unions, common markets, economic or monetary unions, said Party shall not be obliged to grant the treatment in question to investors or investments of the other Party.
Article 9.06 : Treatment in case of losses
	•	Each Party shall grant investors of another Party, with respect to their investments that suffer losses in the territory of the Party where they are established, due to wars, armed conflicts or civil strife, a state of national emergency or other similar events, a non-discriminatory treatment with respect to that granted to its national investors or investors from any third State, in relation to any measure that it adopts or maintains in connection with those losses. 
Article 9.07 : Performance requirements
	•	The Parties may not impose, in connection with permitting the establishment or acquisition of an investment, or enforce, in connection with the subsequent regulation of that investment, any of the performance requirements stipulated in the Agreement on Investment Measures. Related to the Trade of the Agreement on the OMC. 
Article 9.08 : Immigration status of investors
	1.	
	2.	Subject to its domestic legislation relating to the entry and stay of foreigners, each Party will allow the entry and stay in its territory of investors of the other Party and persons hired by them, by virtue of occupying senior management positions or by virtue of of their specialized knowledge, with the purpose of establishing, developing, managing or advising the operation of the investment, in which said investors have committed capital or other resources. 
	3.	In order to comply with this article, the Parties will apply the provisions of Chapter XI (Temporary Entry of Business Persons) of this Agreement.
Article 9.09 : Senior business management and boards of directors
	•	Neither Party may require that a company of a Party appoint individuals of any particular nationality to occupy senior management positions, except as provided in the legislation of each Party. 
Article 9.10 : Transfers
	1.	
	2.	Each Party will allow all transfers related to the investment of an investor of one Party in the territory of another of the Parties, to be made freely and without delay, in accordance with its domestic legislation.Such transfers include:
	a.	
	b.	earnings, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments and other amounts derived from the investment; 
	c.	administration expenses; 
	d.	amounts derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment; 
	e.	additional capital contributions made for the maintenance or development of an investment; 
	f.	payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor is a party in connection with its investment, including payments made pursuant to a loan agreement; 
	g.	payments derived from compensation for expropriation concept; Y 
	h.	payments that come from the application of the provisions related to the dispute resolution mechanism in this Agreement.
	3.	 
	4.	Each of the Parties will allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currencies at the current market exchange rate on the date of the transfer, in accordance with the domestic legislation of each Party. 
	5.	Likewise, each Party may, through the equitable and non-discriminatory application of its legislation, request information and establish requirements regarding reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments. 
	6.	Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the Parties may establish temporary controls on exchange operations, as long as the balance of payments of the Party in question presents a serious imbalance and implements a program in accordance with internationally accepted standards. Limitations adopted or maintained by a Party pursuant to this paragraph, as well as their removal, shall be promptly notified to the other Party.
Article 9.11 : Expropriation and compensation
	1.	
	2.	The investments of investors from a country of a Party in the territory of another Party shall not be subject to nationalization, expropriation or any other measure that has equivalent effects (hereinafter "expropriation"), unless the following conditions of according to your national legislation:
	a.	
	b.	the measures are adopted for reasons of public utility in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article; 
	c.	the measures are not discriminatory; Y 
	d.	the measures are accompanied by prompt, adequate and effective compensation.
	3.	 
	4.	The compensation will be equivalent to the fair price that the expropriated investment had immediately before the expropriation measure was adopted or before the imminence of the measure became public knowledge, whichever occurs first. The compensation will include the payment of interest calculated from the day of dispossession of the expropriated property until the day of payment. These interests will be calculated on the basis of an average passive rate of the national banking system of the Party where the expropriation takes place. The compensation will be paid without delay in convertible currency and will be effectively realizable and freely transferable. The amount of compensation will be determined as follows:
	a.	
	b.	an expert opinion according to the internal legislation of each one of the Parties, which must include all the necessary data to identify the asset that is valued; 
	c.	in the case of real estate, the opinion will contain the valuation regardless of the land, crops, constructions, tenancies, leases, commercial rights, deposits and any other assets or rights subject to compensation; 
	d.	in the case of movable property, each one will be valued separately and the characteristics that influence its valuation will be indicated; 
	e.	the appraisals will take into account only the actual permanent damages. Future events or legal expectations that affect the property will not be included or taken into account. Nor may capital gains derived from the project that originates the expropriation be recognized; 
	f.	all expert opinion must indicate, in a broad and detailed manner, the elements of judgment on which the value assigned to the property and the methodology used are based.
	5.	 
	6.	The affected investor shall have the right, in accordance with the domestic legislation of the Party carrying out the expropriation, to prompt review, by the judicial authority or other competent and independent authority of said Party, of its case to determine whether the expropriation and the valuation of your investment have been adopted in accordance with the principles established in this article. 
	7.	Nothing in this article shall affect the power of the Government of a Party to decide to negotiate or not with the other Party, or with third States, quantitative restrictions on its exports, nor its power to define the allocation of quotas eventually negotiated through of the mechanisms and criteria it deems pertinent, in accordance with the multilateral disciplines.
Article 9.12 : Special formalities and information requirements
	1.	
	2.	Nothing in Article 9.03 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that determines special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of another Party, such as that the investments be constituted in accordance with the legislation of the Party, provided that such formalities do not substantially impair the protection afforded by a Party under this chapter. 
	3.	Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 9.03 and 9.04, the Parties may request that an investor of another Party in relation to the investment made in their territory provide routine information, referring to that investment exclusively for information or statistical purposes. The Party will protect the information that is confidential, from any disclosure that could adversely affect the competitive situation of the investment or of the investor. 
	4.	Each Party shall publish all types of laws, decrees and administrative regulations relating to investments.
Article 9.13 : Relationship with other chapters
	•	For purposes of the application of this chapter, in case of incompatibility between one of its provisions and those of another chapter, the latter shall prevail, to the extent of the incompatibility. 
Article 9.14 : Denial of benefits
	•	A Party, upon notice and consultation with the other Party, may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of another Party that is an enterprise of that Party and to investments of such investor, if investors from a non-Party country own the enterprise. company and it does not have substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is constituted or organized. 
Article 9.15 : Measures relating to the environment
	•	Each Party may adopt, maintain, or implement any measure consistent with this chapter that it deems appropriate to ensure that investments in its territory comply with the environmental legislation of that Party. 
Article 9.16 : Promotion of investments and exchange of information
	1.	
	2.	Each Party, subject to its general policy in the field of foreign investment, will encourage and create favorable conditions in its territory for investments by investors from the other Party and will admit them in accordance with its legislation. 
	3.	In order to increase investment flows between the Parties, they will prepare documents on investment opportunities and design mechanisms for their dissemination. In particular, each Party shall endeavor, at the request of any Party, to inform the latter about:
	a.	
	b.	investment opportunities in its territory that can be developed by investors of the other Party; 
	c.	opportunities for strategic alliances between investors of the Parties; Y 
	d.	opportunities based on their respective processes of privatization or capitalization of public sector companies that interest an investor from another Party.
	4.	 
	5.	Each Party shall notify the competent national entity or authority for the purposes of paragraph 2 of this Article.
Article 9.17 : Subrogation
	1.	
	2.	When a Party or an authorized body has granted an insurance contract or some other financial guarantee against non-commercial risks, with respect to any investment of one of the investors in the territory of the other Party, the latter shall recognize the rights of the former. Part of subrogating the rights of the investor, when he has made a payment under said contract or guarantee. 
	3.	When a Party has paid its investor and by virtue of this has assumed its rights and benefits, said investor may not claim such rights and benefits from the other Party, unless expressly authorized by the first Party.
Article 9.18 : Double taxation
	•	The Parties, with the aim of promoting investments within their respective territories by eliminating obstacles of a tax nature and monitoring compliance with tax obligations through the exchange of tax information, agree to start negotiations aimed at holding of agreements to avoid double taxation, according to the one established between the competent authorities of the Parties. 
Article 9.19 : Specific commitment
	•	Investments that have been the subject of a particular commitment by one of the Parties to investors of the other Party shall be managed, without prejudice to the provisions of this Agreement, by the terms of that commitment if it includes more favorable provisions than those provided for in the Agreement. present Treaty. 
Article 9.20 : Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party
	1.	
	2.	Controversies that arise within the scope of this Agreement, between one of the Parties and an investor of the other Party that has made investments in the territory of the former, will be, to the extent possible, resolved through friendly consultations. 
	3.	If, through said consultations, a solution is not reached within five (5) months from the date of the settlement request, the investor may refer the dispute:
	a.	
	b.	to the competent courts of the Party in whose territory the investment was made; either 
	c.	to the national arbitration of the Party in whose territory the investment has been made; either 
	d.	to international arbitration:
	i.	
	ii.	ICSID, when both Parties are members thereof; either 
	iii.	to the Complementary Mechanism Rules for the administration of conciliation, arbitration and fact-checking procedures by the ICSID Secretariat, when one of the Parties is not a member of ICSID; either 
	iv.	to arbitration in accordance with the Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), in the event that neither Party is a member of ICSID.
	4.	To this end, each Party gives its advance and irrevocable consent so that any dispute may be submitted to this arbitration.  
	5.	Once the investor has referred the dispute to the competent national court of the Party in whose territory the investment was made or to an arbitral tribunal, the choice of one or the other procedure will be final. 
	6.	The arbitral tribunal will decide on the basis of:
	a.	
	b.	the provisions of this Agreement and other related Agreements concluded between the Parties; 
	c.	the national law of the Party in whose territory the investment has been made, including the terms of any particular agreements concluded in relation to the investment; Y 
	d.	the universally recognized rules and principles of International Law.
	7.	 
	8.	Arbitration awards will be final and binding for the Parties in dispute and will be enforced in accordance with the domestic law of the Party in whose territory the investment was made. 
	9.	The Parties will refrain from discussing, through diplomatic channels, issues related to disputes submitted to judicial process or arbitration, in accordance with the provisions of this article, until the corresponding processes are concluded, except in the case in which the other Party in the dispute, has not complied with the court ruling or the decision of the arbitral tribunal, in the terms established in the respective judgment or decision and in accordance with domestic law.
Annex to Article 9.11
	•	For the purposes of subparagraph a) of article 9.11, the following shall be understood to be included in the term of public utility:
	◦	Costa Rica : legally proven public interest; El Salvador : public utility and social interest; Guatemala : collective utility, social benefit or public interest; Honduras : public need or interest; Nicaragua : public utility and social interest; Y Dominican Republic : public utility and social interest. 

Chapter X: Trade in Services
Article 10.01 : Purpose
	•	The purpose of this chapter is to establish a framework for the liberalization of trade in services between the Parties in consistency with the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) of the WTO Agreement. Said framework shall promote the interests of the Parties, based on reciprocal benefits and the achievement of a global balance of rights and obligations between the Parties. 
Article 10.02 : Definitions
	1.	
	2.	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Trade in services: the supply of a service in any sector, through the following modes of provision:
	a.	
	b.	from the territory of a Party to the territory of another Party; 
	c.	in the territory of a Party to a consumer of another Party; 
	d.	by a service provider of a Party through commercial presence in the territory of the other Party; Y 
	e.	by a service provider through the presence of natural persons of one Party in the territory of another Party;
	◦	Services: any service in any sector, except services provided in the exercise of governmental authority; Service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority: any service supplied by a public institution, which is not supplied on commercial terms or in competition with one or more service providers; Provision of a service: the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a service; Commercial presence: all types of commercial or professional establishment through, among others, the constitution, acquisition or permanence of a legal entity, as well as branches or representative offices located in the territory of a Party, in order to provide a service; Service of another Party: the service provided:
	a.	
	b.	from or in the territory of that other Party; either 
	c.	by a service provider of that other Party through commercial presence or through the presence of natural persons;
	◦	Service provider: any person who provides a service; Service consumer: any person who receives or uses a service; Natural person of another Party: national of another Party; Legal person of another Party: any legal person constituted or organized under the laws of that other Party and carrying on or planning to carry on substantive business operations in the territory of that Party or of any other Party; Specialized air services: aerial mapping services, aerial surveying, aerial photography, forest fire control, firefighting, aerial advertising, glider towing, skydiving services, aerial construction services, air transportation of logs, flights panoramic, training flights, aerial inspection and surveillance and aerial spraying. 
	3.	 
	4.	Any other definition that is not contained in paragraph 1 of this article shall be taken from the definitions contained in the GATS of the WTO Agreement.
Article 10.03 : Scope of application
	1.	
	2.	This Chapter shall apply to measures that a Party adopts or maintains on the trade in services of another Party, including those relating to:
	a.	
	b.	the production, distribution, marketing, sale and supply of a service; 
	c.	the purchase, use or payment of a service; 
	d.	access to services offered to the general public by prescription of the Parties, and the use thereof, for the purpose of supplying a service; 
	e.	the presence of persons of a Party in the territory of another Party for the supply of a service; Y 
	f.	the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.
	3.	 
	4.	This chapter shall not apply to:
	a.	
	b.	promotion and development measures granted by a Party or a State enterprise, including loans, guarantees, insurance, donations and tax incentives granted by the governments of the Parties; 
	c.	air services, including national and international air transport, with and without a fixed itinerary, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:
	i.	
	ii.	aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period when an aircraft is withdrawn from service; 
	iii.	specialized air services; Y 
	iv.	computerized reservation systems;
	d.	 
	e.	government services or functions such as, but not limited to, law enforcement, rehabilitation services, income security or insurance, social security or insurance, social welfare, public education, public training, health and care for children.
	5.	 
	6.	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
	a.	
	b.	impose any obligation on a Party with respect to a national of another Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor to confer any right on that national, with respect to that income or employment; either 
	c.	impose any obligation or grant any right to a Party, with respect to government purchases made by the other Party, except as provided in paragraph 3 of Article 12.02.
	7.	 
	8.	For purposes of this chapter, "measures adopted by the Parties" shall mean any provision, whether in the form of a law, decree, regulation, rule, procedure, decision, administrative resolution or in any other form with effect on trade in services, adopted by:
	a.	
	b.	central, regional, provincial, departmental, municipal or local governments and authorities; either 
	c.	non-governmental institutions exercising powers delegated to them by the authorities mentioned in subparagraph a) above.
	9.	 
	10.	Regarding the non-governmental organizations mentioned in subparagraph b) of paragraph 4 of this article, which exercise regulatory, administrative or other powers of a governmental nature that have been delegated to them in accordance with the legislation of each Party, the central government shall take the measures reasonable within their power to bring such agencies into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
	11.	The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the measures related to the services contemplated in the annex on Professional Services, only to the extent and terms stipulated in that annex.
Article 10.04 : Most Favored Nation Treatment
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall immediately and unconditionally accord to the services and service providers of another Party treatment no less favorable than it accords to like services and like service providers of any other country. 
	3.	The provisions of this chapter shall not be interpreted in the sense of preventing a Party from conferring advantages to adjacent countries, in order to facilitate exchanges limited to contiguous border areas, of services that are produced or consumed locally.
Article 10.05 : Transparency
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall promptly publish and notify the Committee on Trade in Services and each of the Parties, no later than the date of its entry into force, of all measures that refer to this Chapter or affect its operation. International agreements that refer to or affect trade in services and to which any of the Parties is a signatory will also be published and notified. 
	3.	When the publication of the information referred to in the preceding paragraph is not feasible or practical, the Parties will make all efforts required to make them available to the public in another way. 
	4.	Each Party shall promptly inform the other Parties of the entry into force of new laws, regulations or administrative guidelines, or of the modifications it introduces to existing ones, that significantly affect trade in services. 
	5.	Each Party shall respond promptly to all specific requests for information from the other Parties about the measures specified in paragraph 1 of this Article. 
	6.	For the purposes of compliance with this Article, the Parties shall use the inquiry points established at the national level under the provisions of GATS Article III:4 of the WTO Agreement.
Article 10.06 : Disclosure of confidential information
	•	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing an obligation on the Parties to provide confidential information the disclosure of which may constitute an obstacle to compliance with the law or be otherwise contrary to the public interest, or may harm the legitimate business interests of state or private companies. 
Article 10.07 : National regulation
	•	In order to ensure that any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the requirements and procedures for the granting of permits, authorizations and licenses to nationals of another Party does not constitute an unnecessary barrier to trade, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that those measures:
	a.	are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as capacity, aptitude and competence to provide a service;
	b.	are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of a service; Y
	c.	do not constitute a disguised restriction on the supply of a service.
Article 10.08 : General exceptions
	1.	
	2.	Notwithstanding the provisions of this and other chapters of this Agreement, the Parties may adopt or apply measures to:
	a.	
	b.	protect morality or preserve public order; 
	c.	protect the life and health of people, animals, plants and preserve the environment; 
	d.	protect national security; 
	e.	ensure compliance with laws and regulations relating to:
	i.	
	ii.	the prevention of practices that lead to error and fraudulent practices or that lead to the breach of contracts signed for the purpose of providing services to natural or legal persons of the Parties; 
	iii.	the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of the confidential nature of individual records and accounts; either 
	iv.	public safety;
	f.	 
	g.	protect national, artistic, historical or archaeological treasures.
	3.	 
	4.	The measures listed in this article shall not be applied in such a way that they constitute a tax or restriction on subregional trade in services, nor a means of discrimination between countries that are Parties or not to the Treaty to which this chapter forms part, in which conditions prevail. Similar.
Article 10.09 : Restrictions to protect the balance of payments
	1.	
	2.	In the event of the existence or threat of serious external financial or balance of payments difficulties, a Party may adopt or maintain restrictions on trade in services with respect to the measures covered by Articles 10.04, 10.10 and 10.12 and paragraph 1 of Article 10.13, with inclusion of payments or transfers for transactions relating to the sectors affected by such measures. It is recognized that certain balance of payments pressures may make it necessary to use restrictions to achieve, among other things, the maintenance of a sufficient level of financial reserves for the application of its economic development or economic transition program. 
	3.	The restrictions referred to in paragraph 1 above:
	a.	
	b.	they will not discriminate between the Parties; 
	c.	they will be compatible with the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF); 
	d.	they will avoid unnecessarily injuring the commercial, economic and financial interests of the Parties; 
	e.	they will not go beyond what is necessary to deal with the circumstances mentioned in paragraph 1 above; Y 
	f.	they will be temporary or phased out as the situation indicated in paragraph 1 above improves.
	4.	 
	5.	In determining the incidence of such restrictions, the Parties may give priority to the supply of services that are most necessary for their economic or development programs, but such restrictions shall not be adopted or maintained in order to protect a particular service sector. 
	6.	Restrictions adopted or maintained under paragraph 1 above, or any changes thereto, shall be promptly notified to the Parties. 
	7.	 
	a.	Parties applying the provisions of this Article shall promptly consult on restrictions adopted under these provisions. 
	b.	The Council shall establish procedures for holding periodic consultations in order to be in a position to make the recommendations it deems appropriate to the interested Party. 
	c.	In these consultations, the situation of the balance of payments of the Party concerned and the restrictions adopted or maintained under this article shall be evaluated, taking into account, among others, factors such as:
	i.	
	ii.	the nature and extent of external financial and balance of payments difficulties; 
	iii.	the external, economic and commercial environment of the Party object of the consultations; 
	iv.	other possible corrective measures that can be used.
	d.	 
	e.	In the consultations, the conformity of the restrictions that are applicable in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article will be examined, in particular with regard to the progressive elimination of the same in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph e) of said paragraph. . 
	f.	In such consultations, any statistical or other factual findings submitted by the IMF on foreign exchange, reserve money, and balance of payments issues will be accepted and the conclusions will be based on the IMF's assessment of the external financial situation and balance of payments of the Party subject to consultations.
Article 10.10 : Local presence
	•	No Party shall require a service provider of another Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of business, or to reside in its territory, as a condition of supplying a service. 
Article 10.11 : Non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions
	1.	
	2.	No later than six (6) months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall draw up a list of existing measures that constitute non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions.  
	3.	Periodically, at least once every two (2) years, the Parties shall endeavor to negotiate to liberalize or eliminate:
	a.	
	b.	existing quantitative restrictions maintained by a Party, according to the list referred to in paragraph 1 above; either 
	c.	quantitative restrictions that a Party has adopted after the entry into force of this Agreement.
	4.	 
	5.	Each Party shall notify the other Party of any measure that constitutes a non-discriminatory quantitative restriction, which is adopted after the entry into force of this Agreement, and shall indicate the restriction in the list referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
Article 10.12 : National Treatment
	•	Each Party shall grant the other Party's services and service providers treatment no less favorable than that it grants to its own similar services or similar service providers. 
Article 10.13 : Consolidation of measures
	1.	
	2.	As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of its existing measures with respect to Articles 10.04, 10.10 and 10.12. Any amendment to any of these measures will not decrease the degree of compliance of the measure as it was in effect immediately prior to the amendment. 
	3.	No later than six (6) months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall exchange a list of non-conforming measures with Articles 10.04, 10.10 and 10.12.
Article 10.14 : Denial of benefits
	•	A Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of another Party, prior notification and consultation, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out substantive commercial operations in the territory of the other. Party and that, in accordance with the current legislation of each country, is owned or controlled by persons of a country that is not a Party. 
Article 10.15 : Future liberalization
	•	Through future negotiations to be convened by the Council, the Parties will deepen the liberalization achieved in the different service sectors, with a view to achieving the elimination of the remaining restrictions listed in accordance with Article 10.11 and paragraph 2 of Article 10.13. 
Article 10.16 : Committee on Trade in Services
	1.	
	2.	The Committee on Trade in Services is created, made up of representatives of the corresponding authorities of each Party. Likewise, representatives of other institutions may participate when the responsible authorities deem it appropriate. 
	3.	The Committee will have, among others, the following attributions:
	a.	
	b.	oversee the execution and administration of this chapter; 
	c.	consider the aspects related to trade in services that are presented to it by any of the Parties; 
	d.	discuss matters on trade in services of interest to the Parties; 
	e.	analyze issues related to these matters that are discussed in other international forums; 
	f.	facilitate the exchange of information between the Parties and cooperate in terms of advice on trade in services; Y 
	g.	create working groups or convene panels of experts on issues of mutual interest to the Parties.
	4.	 
	5.	The Committee shall meet at least once a year, or at any time at the request of either Party.
Article 10.17 : Settlement of disputes
	•	Any difference that arises by virtue of the application of this chapter will be resolved in accordance with the provisions of chapter XVI (Dispute Resolution). 
Article 10.18 : Relationship with multilateral agreements on services
	1.	
	2.	The Parties undertake to apply to each other the provisions contained in the multilateral agreements on services of which the Parties are members. 
	3.	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 above, in the event of any inconsistency between those agreements and this chapter, this chapter shall prevail over the former.
Article 10.19 : Anti - competitive business practices
	•	In relation to anti-competitive business practices, which adversely affect competition and/or trade in services between and/or within the Parties, the provisions on the defense of competition of each Party shall apply, as well as the same as on the competition rules are established through international conventions. 
Article 10.20 : Future work
	1.	
	2.	The Committee on Trade in Services will determine, among other things, the procedures for establishing the necessary disciplines related to:
	a.	
	b.	urgent safeguard measures; Y 
	c.	subsidies that distort trade in services.
	3.	 
	4.	The Committee on Trade in Services may delegate, on a specific and temporary basis, to working groups, the examination of issues related to the harmonization of regulations in specific service sectors. 
	5.	For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, the work of the relevant international organizations will be taken into account.
Article 10.21 : Review
	1.	
	2.	In order to achieve the objectives of this chapter, the Parties will evaluate it annually, taking into account the evolution and regulation of trade in services in each of the Parties, as well as the progress made on the matter in the World Trade Organization and other forums. 
	3.	In case of deciding on the need to review this chapter, the Parties will work within the framework of the Committee on Trade in Services, submitting a report to the Council, for the decision of the Parties.
Annex to Article 10.03 : Professional services
Article 1: Definitions
	•	Professional : the natural person who has received a university degree as a consequence of having received higher education and who accredits it to practice a specific profession; Professional services: services that require higher education to be provided and whose exercise is authorized and regulated in each case by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons who practice a trade, or to crew members of merchant ships and aircraft; Professional practice : the habitual performance of any professional act or the provision of any service specific to each profession that requires authorization in accordance with the legislation of each Party; Higher education : all academic training that has culminated in obtaining an academic degree awarded by a higher level education center and whose curriculum contains an equivalent level of training; Recognition of qualifications : the acceptance by the government and/or competent non-governmental institution of a Party, of the qualification obtained by a professional of another Party; Licenses for professional practice : the authorization granted to a professional, by competent governmental and/or non-governmental institutions of a Party, to practice the profession of the recognized title within its territory. 
Article 2: Object
	•	The purpose of this annex is to establish the rules that the Parties will observe to harmonize the measures that will regulate the recognition of titles and the provision of professional services between them through:
	a.	
	b.	the mutual recognition of titles for professional practice and academic degrees with the corresponding certificates; either 
	c.	the granting of licenses for professional practice.
Article 3 : Recognition of titles
	•	When a Party recognizes unilaterally or by agreement with another State, titles obtained in the territory of another Party or of any State that is not a Party:
	a.	
	b.	Nothing in the provisions of Article 10.04 of Chapter X (Trade in Services) shall be interpreted in the sense of requiring that Party to recognize the titles obtained in the territory of the other Party; Y
	c.	
	d.	the Party will provide the other Party with the opportunity to demonstrate that the titles obtained in the territory of that other Party may also be recognized, or to negotiate or celebrate an arrangement or agreement that has equivalent effects.
Article 4 : Bases for the recognition of titles and licenses for professional practice
	1.	
	2.	The Parties agree that the processes of mutual recognition of titles and the granting of licenses for professional practice will be based on improving the quality of professional services through the establishment of standards and criteria for these processes, while protecting to consumers and safeguarding the public interest. 
	3.	The Parties shall encourage relevant bodies, inter alia, competent government authorities and professional associations and colleges to:
	a.	
	b.	develop such criteria and standards; Y 
	c.	formulate and present recommendations on the mutual recognition of professional titles and the granting of licenses for professional practice.
	4.	 
	5.	The elaboration of norms and criteria referred to in the previous paragraph, may consider the legislation of each country and as an indication, the following elements: education; exams; experience; conduct and ethics; professional development and recertification; scope of action; local knowledge; supervision and consumer protection. 
	6.	The Parties will provide the detailed and necessary information for the recognition of titles and the granting of licenses for professional practice, including what corresponds to academic courses, guides and study materials, payment of rights, exam dates, hours, locations, affiliation to societies and/or professional associations. This information will include legislation, administrative guidelines and measures of general application of a central nature and those developed by governmental and non-governmental institutions.
Article 5: Adoption of recommendations
	•	Based on the recommendations received by the Parties and to the extent that they are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement, Article VII of the GATS of the WTO Agreement, as well as the results of the negotiations on professional services that take place in the World Trade Organization, the Parties shall seek the adoption of those recommendations by the competent authority. 
Article 6: Review
	•	The Parties shall review, at least annually, the application of the provisions of this annex. 
Chapter XI: Temporary entry of business persons
Article 11.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Labor certification : the procedure carried out by the competent administrative authority tending to determine if a foreign individual coming from a Party who intends to temporarily enter the territory of another Party displaces national labor in the same labor branch or significantly harms the labor conditions of the same ; Temporary entry: the entry of a business person of a Party into the territory of another Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence; Immigration measure : any measure in immigration matters; Business person : the national of a Party who participates in the trade of goods or provision of services, or in investment activities; Recurring practice: a practice carried out by the migration authorities of a Party on a repetitive basis during a representative period prior to and immediately after its execution; Business activity: those legitimate activities of a commercial nature created and operated for the purpose of making a profit in the market. It does not include the possibility of obtaining employment, nor salary or remuneration from a source of the Parties; Valid : the binding quality of the legislative precepts of the Parties at the time of entry into force of this Agreement; Employment authorization : for the purposes of paragraph 1 of Section A, the written permission granted by the competent administrative authority of a Party to an individual national of another Party in which he is authorized to obtain employment in salaried activities in the territory of the Authorizing Party; Business-essential specialist knowledge – For the purposes of Section C, paragraph 1, if an individual has specialist knowledge of the good or service that the business provides, or has a high degree of knowledge of the business's processes and procedures; Being in the process of committing a significant amount of capital : for the purposes of paragraph 1 of Section B, when the funds are irrevocably directed towards the investment in such a way that it is irreversible; Supervisory Roles – For purposes of Section B, paragraph 1, those roles where the individual has supervisory responsibilities for a significant portion of a business's operations and does not involve supervision of low-level employees; Executive functions : for the purposes of paragraphs 1 of Sections B and C, those functions assigned within an organization, under which the individual has fundamentally the following responsibilities:
	a.	
	b.	direct the administration of the organization or a relevant component or function thereof;
	c.	
	d.	establish the policies and objectives of the organization, component or function; either
	e.	
	f.	receive general supervision or direction only from the highest level executives, the Board of Directors or the Council of Administration of the organization or the shareholders of the same;
	◦	Management functions : for the purposes of paragraph 1 of Section C, those functions assigned within an organization, under which the individual has fundamentally the following responsibilities:
	a.	
	b.	manage the organization or an essential function within it;
	c.	
	d.	supervising and controlling the work of other professional employees, supervisors or administrators;
	e.	
	f.	have the authority to hire and fire, or recommend these actions, as well as others regarding the management of personnel that is directly supervised by the individual and perform functions at a higher level within the organizational hierarchy or with respect to the function under their charge; either
	g.	
	h.	perform actions at their discretion with respect to the daily operation of the function over which the individual has authority;
	◦	Functions that involve essential skills : for the purposes of paragraph 1 of Section B, when you are an individual with specialized knowledge or own skills that are essential for the effective operation of the company. The individual must be employed in a position of high responsibility that requires independent judgment, creativity, training, or supervision of other employees and must not be employed to perform routine work that can be performed by skilled labor. He must have a high degree of preparation and experience in the operation of the company. 
Article 11.02 : General principles
	•	The provisions of this chapter reflect the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose. Likewise, they reflect the need to guarantee the security of the borders and to protect the work of their nationals and permanent employment in their respective territories. 
Article 11.03 : General obligations
	1.	
	2.	Each Party will apply the measures related to this Chapter in accordance with Article 11.02, in particular, it will apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delays or damages in trade in goods and services, or in investment activities included in this Agreement.
	3.	
	4.	The Parties shall endeavor to develop and adopt common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the application of this Chapter. 
	5.	Each Party may modify its migratory measures, as long as these modifications do not alter the commitments made in this chapter.
Article 11.04 : Temporary entry authorization
	1.	
	2.	In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including those contained in the annex to this article, each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of business persons who comply with the other applicable measures, relating to public health and safety, as well as those relating to National security. 
	3.	Each Party may deny the issuance of a migration document that authorizes employment to a business person, when their temporary entry adversely affects:
	a.	
	b.	the solution of any labor conflict that exists in the place where it is employed or will be employed; either
	c.	
	d.	the employment of any person involved in that conflict.
	4.	
	5.	When a Party denies the issuance of an immigration document authorizing employment, in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party:
	a.	
	b.	inform the affected business person in writing of the reasons for the refusal; Y
	c.	
	d.	promptly notify the Party whose national is refused entry in writing of the reasons for the refusal.
	6.	
	7.	Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees caused by the processing of temporary entry applications to the approximate cost of the processing services provided. 
	8.	The temporary entry of a business person does not authorize professional practice.
Article 11.05 : Availability of Information
	1.	
	2.	Each part:
	a.	
	b.	provide another Party with the information that allows it to know the measures related to this Chapter; Y
	c.	
	d.	no later than twelve (12) months after the date of entry into force of the Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its territory and in that of another Party, a consolidated document that explains the requirements for the temporary entry pursuant to this chapter, so that business persons of another Party may become acquainted with them.
	3.	
	4.	Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to the other Party, in accordance with its legislation, the information related to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this chapter, to persons of the other Party to whom documentation has been issued. migratory.
Article 11.06 : Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons
	1.	
	2.	The Parties establish a Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons, made up of their representatives, including immigration officials.
	3.	
	4.	The Committee shall meet, initially, no later than six (6) months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement and at least once a year, to review:
	a.	
	b.	the application and administration of this chapter; 
	c.	the elaboration of measures that further facilitate the temporary entry of business persons; Y
	d.	
	e.	proposals for modifications or additions to this chapter.
Article 11.07 : Settlement of Disputes
	1.	
	2.	The Parties may not initiate the procedures provided for in article 16.07 on Intervention of the Council, good offices, conciliation and mediation, with respect to a refusal to authorize temporary entry in accordance with this chapter, nor with respect to any particular case included in article 11.03, unless:
	a.	
	b.	the matter refers to a recurring practice; Y
	c.	
	d.	the affected person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to them with respect to that particular matter.
	3.	
	4.	The remedies mentioned in subparagraph b) of paragraph 1 will be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution in twelve (12) months from the start of the administrative procedure and the resolution has not been delayed for reasons attributable to the affected business person.
Article 11.08 : Relationship with other chapters
	•	Except as provided in this chapter and in the chapters of this Agreement on initial provisions, general definitions, publication, notice and guarantees of hearing and legality, dispute settlement and final provisions, nothing in this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to its immigration measures. 
Annex to Article 11.04 : Temporary Entry of Business Persons
Section A - Business Visitors
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of the business person who, at the prior request of a company or a business association, intends to carry out an activity expressly mentioned in the Appendix to this Section, without requiring employment authorization, provided that, in addition To comply with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry, show:
	a.	
	b.	proof of nationality of a Party;
	c.	
	d.	documentation proving the prior request of a company established in the territory of a Party;
	e.	
	f.	documentation proving that you will undertake those activities and stating the purpose of your entry; Y
	g.	
	h.	proof of the international character of the proposed business activity and that the person does not intend to enter the local labor market.
	3.	
	4.	Each Party will stipulate that a business person can meet the requirements indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 1, when he demonstrates:
	a.	
	b.	that the main source of remuneration for that activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; Y
	c.	
	d.	that the principal place of business and where most of the profits are obtained are outside this territory.
	5.	
	6.	For the purposes of paragraph 2, each Party will normally accept a declaration as to the principal place of business and the place of profit. When a Party requires additional verification, a letter from the employer registered in the Bilateral Register of companies stating these circumstances may be considered sufficient proof.
	7.	
	8.	Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of the business person who intends to carry out any business activity other than those indicated in the Appendix to this Section, in terms no less favorable than those provided for in the current legislation on migration, aliens and related matters, as long as that business person also complies with current immigration measures, applicable to temporary entry.
	9.	
	10.	Neither Party may:
	a.	
	b.	require as a condition to authorize temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1, prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests, or other procedures of similar effect; Y
	c.	
	d.	impose or maintain any numerical restriction on temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1 or 4.
	11.	
	12.	Notwithstanding paragraph 5, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain a visa or equivalent document prior to entry. The Parties shall consult with each other in order to avoid and/or eliminate visa or equivalent document requirements.
Section B - Investors
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and provide the corresponding documentation to the business person who intends to establish, develop, manage or provide key technical advice or services, in supervisory, executive functions or involving essential skills, to carry out or manage a business. investment in which the person or their company has committed, or is in the process of committing, a significant amount of capital, provided that the person also complies with the immigration measures applicable to temporary entry.
	3.	
	4.	No Party may require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry under paragraph 1.
	5.	
	6.	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, a Party may examine, at a peremptory time, the investment proposal of a business person to assess whether the investment complies with the applicable legal provisions.
	7.	
	8.	Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document.
Section C - Personnel transfers within a company
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to a business person employed by a company established in its territory, who intends to perform managerial, executive, or specialized knowledge functions, in that company or in one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, provided that that person and that company comply with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. Each Party may require that the person have been employed by the company continuously for one year within the three years immediately preceding the filing date of the application.
	3.	
	4.	No Party may require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry under paragraph 1.
	5.	
	6.	Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document. The Parties shall consult with each other in order to avoid and/or eliminate visa or equivalent document requirements.
Appendix to Section A of the Annex to Article 11.04 : Activities of business visitors
	•	research and design
	◦	Technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out research independently or for a company established in the territory of the other Party. 
	•	Cultivation, manufacturing and production
	◦	Purchasing and production personnel, at a managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company established in the territory of the other Party. 
	•	Commercialization
	◦	Researchers who carry out research or analysis, including market analysis, independently or for a company established in the territory of the other Party. Trade fair and promotional staff who attend trade conventions. 
	•	Sales
	◦	Sales representatives and agents who place orders or negotiate contracts for goods and services for an enterprise established in the territory of another Party, but who do not deliver the goods or provide the services; Buyers who make acquisitions for a company established in the territory of the other Party. 
	•	Distribution
	◦	Customs brokers who provide advisory services regarding facilitating the import or export of goods. 
	•	After sales services
	◦	Installation, repair, maintenance and supervisory personnel who have the specialized technical knowledge essential to fulfill the seller's contractual obligation and who provide services, or train workers to provide such services, pursuant to a warranty or other service contract related to the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company established outside the territory of the Party to which temporary entry is requested, during the term of the warranty or service contract. 
	•	General services
	◦	Managerial and supervisory personnel involved in commercial operations for a company established in the territory of the other Party. Public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions. Tourism staff (tour and travel agents, tour guides or tour operators) attending or participating in conventions. Translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company established in the territory of the other Party. 

Chapter XII: Public Sector Procurement
Article 12.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Assets of another Party : all assets included in the scope of application established in article 12.04; Construction services contract: a contract for the realization by any means of civil works, infrastructures and buildings; Technical specification : a specification that establishes the characteristics of the goods or related processes and production methods, or the characteristics of services or their related methods of operation, including the applicable administrative provisions. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a good, process or method of production or operation; Supplier – a person who has provided or may provide goods or services in response to an entity's invitation to bid; Locally established supplier : which includes a natural person residing in the territory of a Party, a company organized or established under the laws of that Party, and a branch or representative office located in the territory of that Party; Bases : document that contains the uniform information necessary to make it easier for all bidders to prepare their offers under equal conditions. It must contain the general conditions and the required technical specifications, the requirements to qualify and the criteria to compare the offers. 
Article 12.02 : Scope of application
	1.	
	2.	The provisions contained in this chapter establish the general principles that the entities of each Party must observe in their purchasing procedures. 
	3.	This Chapter shall apply to measures that a Party adopts or maintains with respect to purchases of all:
	a.	
	b.	entities of a central government; 
	c.	government companies; 
	d.	decentralized, decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous institutions; Y 
	e.	municipalities.The foregoing enumeration refers to all government entities, institutions or companies of each of the Parties, except those that, due to provisions of the domestic legislation of each of the Parties, cannot be included in the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the annex I 
	4.	 
	5.	Likewise, this chapter applies to the measures that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the purchases of all originating goods of the other Party, except those established in Annex II, of all services, without prejudice to the rights and obligations established in Chapter X (Services). 
	6.	Paragraphs 1 and 2 are subject to the provisions of Annex III. 
	7.	Purchases include acquisitions by methods such as purchase, lease, or rental, with or without a purchase option. Purchases do not include:
	a.	
	b.	Non-contractual agreements, nor any form of government assistance, including cooperation agreements, transfers, loans, capital transfers, guarantees, fiscal incentives and government supplies of goods and services granted to individuals or to central governments or municipalities; 
	c.	the acquisition of agency services or fiscal deposits, the liquidation and administration services for regulated financial institutions, nor the sale and distribution services of public debt.
	8.	 
	9.	The Parties shall ensure that the measures applied by their entities are in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 12.03 : National Treatment and non-discrimination
	1.	
	2.	With respect to measures related to purchases covered by this Chapter, each Party shall immediately and unconditionally grant to the goods, services and suppliers of the other Party that offer goods or services originating in that Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted to national goods, services and suppliers. 
	3.	With respect to measures relating to purchases covered by this Chapter, neither Party may:
	a.	
	b.	give a supplier established in its territory less favorable treatment than that accorded to another supplier established in said territory, by reason of the degree of affiliation or foreign ownership; either 
	c.	discriminate against a supplier established in its territory, because the goods or services offered by that supplier for a particular purchase are goods or services of the other Party.
	4.	 
	5.	Goods originating from the Parties, included in the scope of application of this chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 of article 3.04. 
	6.	For purposes of comparison, customs duties and other import charges shall not be added to the price of goods originating from another Party, when the purchasing entity is exempt from paying them. 
	7.	The Parties may establish local representation and presence requirements, as long as said requirements do not have the effect of discriminating in favor of national suppliers.
Article 12.04 : Rules of origin
	•	For the purposes of public sector purchases covered by this Chapter, neither Party shall apply rules of origin to goods imported from another Party that are different from or incompatible with the rules of origin contained in Chapter IV (Rules of Origin). 
Article 12.05 : Denial of benefits
	•	A Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of another Party, after prior notification and consultation, when the Party verifies that the service is being provided by a company that is owned or controlled by persons of a country that is not a Party and such company does not carry on significant business activities in the territory of either Party. 
Article 12.06 : Prohibition of special compensatory conditions
	•	Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not take into account, request or impose special compensatory conditions in the qualification and selection of suppliers, goods or services, in the evaluation of offers or in the award of contracts. For the purposes of this article, special compensatory conditions are understood to be those that an entity imposes or takes into account before or during the purchase procedure to promote local development or improve balance of payments accounts, through content requirements. local, licensing of technology, investment, countertrade or similar requirements. 
Article 12.07 : Technical specifications
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not develop, adopt, or apply technical specifications that have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.
	3.	
	4.	Each Party shall ensure that any technical specifications stipulated by its entities:
	a.	
	b.	is defined in terms of performance criteria rather than design or descriptive features; 
	c.	where appropriate, is based on international standards, national technical regulations, recognized national standards or building codes; Y
	d.	
	e.	is compatible with the provisions contained in Chapter XIII (Technical Barriers to Trade).
	5.	 
	6.	Each Party shall ensure that the technical specifications stipulated by its entities do not require or refer to a specific brand or trade name, patent, design or type, specific origin, producer or supplier, unless there is no other sufficiently precise or understandable way of describing the purchase requirements and provided that, in those cases, words such as "or equivalent" are included in the bases. 
	7.	Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not solicit or accept, in a manner that has the effect of preventing competition, advice that could be used in preparing or adopting any technical specification in respect of a particular purchase from a person who may have a commercial interest. on that purchase.
Article 12.08 : Purchasing procedures
	1.	
	2.	Each of the Parties will apply its national legislation regarding purchasing procedures, including the formalities related to the qualification of suppliers, call, bases, deadlines, presentation, reception and opening of offers, award of contracts and the amounts established in each country. , to determine the purchase modality to be used, provided that the chosen procedure guarantees the maximum possible competition. 
	3.	Notwithstanding the foregoing, each of the Parties shall ensure that the purchasing procedures carried out by their entities are applied respecting the principles of transparency, publicity and non-discrimination, in accordance with what is established in this chapter.
Article 12.09 : Principle of transparency
	1.	
	2.	In order to comply with the principle of transparency, the Parties shall ensure that their laws and regulations on public procurement procedures stipulate:
	a.	
	b.	recruitment prerequisites; 
	c.	public procurement procedures and the cases in which they will proceed; 
	d.	the public procurement procedures that will require bases; 
	e.	the obligation that the bases contain the general conditions and the required technical specifications, and the requirements to qualify and compare the offers; 
	f.	the publication in the Official Gazette or in the newspapers of national circulation of the notice of public bidding, through which it is invited to participate in a State purchase; 
	g.	the possibility, for any potential offeror, of objecting to the bases when it considers that any of the principles established in the internal legislation of the Party in which it is participating, or of this chapter, is violated; the motivation that grounds the act of adjudication; 
	h.	the rendering of guarantees of participation and compliance, when appropriate; 
	i.	the possibility of correcting defects in form, omissions or obvious errors in the offer, provided that these defects do not affect the content of the offer in terms of the characteristics of the goods offered, the price, delivery times or guarantees or any any other substantial aspect established by the domestic legislation of each Party or that are classified as such in the bidding conditions or any other aspect whose correction violates the principle of equality between bidders; 
	j.	the possibility of appealing the adjudication act, in the terms established by the national legislation of each one of the Parties; Y 
	k.	the others that by means of a protocol to this Agreement are established by the Parties.
	3.	 
	4.	Each Party shall ensure that its entities:
	a.	
	b.	provide all suppliers equal access to information regarding a purchase; Y 
	c.	do not provide any supplier with information about a specific purchase in such a way that it has the effect of preventing competition or granting an advantage to a supplier that has an interest in said purchase.
Article 12.10 : Principle of publicity
	•	In order to comply with the principle of publicity, the parties must, in addition to what is stated in the previous article:
	a.	
	b.	publish all laws, regulations, and when applicable, jurisprudence, administrative resolutions of general application, model contractual clauses and any other measure related to public sector procurement, and notify them to its National Secretariat Section and to the other Party; 
	c.	notify its National Section of the Secretariat and the other Party, no later than the entry into force of this Agreement, the list of central government entities, government companies, decentralized, decentralized, autonomous or semi-autonomous institutions and existing municipalities.
Article 12.11 : Challenge procedures
	•	Each of the Parties shall apply its national legislation in the challenge procedures for purchases covered by this chapter, in accordance with the following conditions:
	a.	
	b.	they must be non-discriminatory, timely, transparent and effective, allowing participating suppliers to challenge alleged violations of this chapter and their respective domestic legislation, which occur in the context of a contract in which they have or have had an interest; 
	c.	that within the challenge system of each Party, appeals are contemplated before:
	i.	
	ii.	The contracting entity itself or, to the extent possible, before an impartial and independent court or administrative body that has no interest in the outcome of the contract and whose members are protected from external influences throughout the entire period of their mandate; Y 
	iii.	the competent courts;
	d.	 
	e.	that within the challenge system, once the administrative means have been exhausted, it is possible to go to the courts; Y 
	f.	in any instance of challenge, the procedures must ensure the right to a hearing for the participating providers; that participating providers can be represented and assisted; that participating providers have access to all performances; that the proceedings may be public; that the opinions or decisions be formulated in writing, with a statement of grounds; witnesses and documentary evidence can be brought forward.
Article 12.12 : Settlement of disputes
	•	Any dispute that arises between the Parties in relation to the provisions of this chapter will be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVI (Dispute Resolution). 
Article 12.13 : Public Sector Procurement Committee
	•	A Public Sector Procurement Committee will be established upon the entry into force of this Agreement, which will be made up of representatives of each of the Parties. The Committee shall meet when necessary, but at least once a year, to give the Parties the opportunity to consult on issues relating to the operation of this Chapter or the achievement of its objectives, to seek cooperation mechanisms that allow for greater understanding of their public sector procurement systems, greater access to them; promote opportunities for their micro, small and medium enterprises; and to perform the functions established in this chapter and the others entrusted to it by the Parties. 
Article 12.14 : Exceptions
	1.	
	2.	Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any action or refraining from disclosing information that it considers necessary to protect its essential security interests in connection with the purchase of arms, ammunition or war materiel, or any other essential contracting for national security or for national defense purposes. 
	3.	As long as these measures are not applied in such a way that they constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where the same conditions exist or that they imply a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted as meaning to prevent a Party from establishing or maintaining measures:
	a.	
	b.	necessary to protect morality, public order or safety; 
	c.	necessary to protect human, animal or plant life and health; 
	d.	necessary to protect intellectual property; either 
	e.	related to goods or services provided by disabled people, charitable institutions or prison labor.
Article 12.15 : Provision of information
	1.	
	2.	Each part:
	a.	
	b.	explain to the other Party, upon request, its public sector procurement procedures; 
	c.	ensure that its entities, upon request from a supplier, promptly explain their public sector procurement practices and procedures; Y 
	d.	shall designate, no later than the entry into force of this Agreement, one or more Information Centers for:
	i.	
	ii.	facilitate communication between the Parties; Y 
	iii.	answer, upon request, all reasonable questions from the other Party in order to provide relevant information on aspects covered by this chapter.
	3.	 
	4.	A Party may request additional information on the award of the contract that may be necessary to determine whether a purchase was made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter with respect to offers that have not been selected. For this purpose, the Party of the purchasing entity will provide information on the relative characteristics and advantages of the winning offer and the price of the contract. When the disclosure of this information could harm competition in future purchases, the requesting Party may not disclose the information except after consulting with and obtaining the consent of the Party that provided the information. 
	5.	Each Party shall provide to the other Party, upon request, information available to that Party on covered purchases and on individual contracts awarded by its entities. 
	6.	No Party may disclose confidential information the disclosure of which would harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person or would be detrimental to fair competition between suppliers, without the formal authorization of the person who provided such information to the Party. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a Party to provide confidential information the disclosure of which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest. 
	7.	With a view to ensuring effective supervision of purchases covered by this chapter, each Party shall collect statistics and provide the other Party with an annual report containing, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, statistics on the estimated value of contracts awarded. , broken down by contracting procedures, by entities, by categories of goods and services and by country of origin of the goods and services. The Public Sector Procurement Committee, upon the entry into force of this Agreement, will agree on the format and under which the Parties must comply with this commitment.
Article 12.16 : Alienation of entities
	1.	
	2.	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from disposing of or privatizing an entity covered by it. 
	3.	If a public entity covered by this chapter is privatized or the State loses its control or participation, the Party may withdraw the entity from the coverage of this chapter, prior notification to its National Section of the Secretariat and to the other Party.
Article 12.17 : Reorganization
	1.	
	2.	A party may reorganize its public sector entities, or establish programs to decentralize the purchases of said entities or that the corresponding public functions cease to be carried out by the public sector, without thereby failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter, provided and when the reorganizations or programs are not intended to evade compliance with the established obligations. 
	3.	If a public entity covered by this chapter ceases to exist due to reorganization, the Party may withdraw the entity from the coverage of this chapter, prior notification to the other Party and its National Section of the Secretariat.
Article 12.18 : Performance of the contract
	•	The Parties will ensure that the entities covered by the scope of application of this chapter comply with the commitments acquired in the contractual clauses, such as the payment term. 
Article 12.19 : Future negotiations
	•	With a view to determining the feasibility and convenience of achieving the harmonization of public sector procurement procedures between the Parties and of including within the coverage of this chapter the construction of public works, the concession of public works in general, the Committee of Public Sector Procurement will prepare a report, which will be submitted to the Council. The Council will formulate the pertinent recommendations to the Parties. 
Annex I to Article 12-02: Excluded Entities
Section A : Costa Rica - Dominican Republic
Costa Rica
	•	The following entities are excluded from the coverage of this chapter in relation to Costa Rica:
	A.	
	B.	non-state public entities whose financing comes, in more than fifty percent (50%), from their own resources, the contributions or the contributions of their members; 
	C.	public companies whose capital stock belongs, for the most part, to individuals and not to the public sector; 
	D.	the Central Bank of Costa Rica, the Bank of Costa Rica, the National Bank of Costa Rica, the Banco Popular y Desarrollo Comunal, the Banco Crédito Agrícola de Cartago and the Banco Hipotecario de la Vivienda; Y 
	E.	the entities indicated in paragraph 2 of article 12.02 that are excluded by domestic legislation from the application of the administrative contracting procedures contained in the Administrative Contracting Law No. 7494 of May 2, 1995.
Dominican Republic
	•	The following entities are excluded from the coverage of this chapter in relation to the Dominican Republic:
	A.	
	B.	public companies whose capital stock belongs, for the most part, to individuals and not to the public sector; Y 
	C.	the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic, Banco Agrícola, the Industrial Development Corporation and the National Housing Bank.
Section B : El Salvador - Dominican Republic
	•	Subject to future negotiations. 
Section C : Guatemala - Dominican Republic
Guatemala
	•	The following entities are excluded from the coverage of this chapter in relation to Guatemala:
	A.	
	B.	Ministry of National Defense; 
	C.	Supreme Electoral Tribunal; Y 
	D.	the Bank of Guatemala.
Dominican Republic
	•	The following entities are excluded from the coverage of this chapter in relation to the Dominican Republic:
	a.	
	b.	Secretary of State for the Armed Forces; 
	c.	Central Electoral Board; Y 
	d.	Central Bank of the Dominican Republic.
Section D : Honduras - Dominican Republic
	•	Subject to future negotiations. 
Section E : Nicaragua - Dominican Republic
Nicaragua
	•	The following entities are excluded from the coverage of this chapter in relation to Nicaragua:
	a.	
	b.	Ministry of Defense (Armed Forces), and 
	c.	Financial Public Sector.
Dominican Republic
	•	The following entities are excluded from the coverage of this chapter in relation to the Dominican Republic:
	A.	
	B.	Secretary of State for the Armed Forces, in relation to the matter exclusively dedicated to safeguarding national security, and 
	C.	the following financial institutions of the Public Sector: Banco de Reservas, Banco Agrícola, Corporación de Fomento Industrial and Banco Nacional de la Vivienda.
Annex II to Article 12-02 : Exclusion of Assets
Section A : Costa Rica - Dominican Republic
	•	This chapter does not apply, with respect to both parties, to the purchase of arms, ammunition, war material or any other contract essential for national security, public safety or for purposes of national defense. 
Section B : El Salvador - Dominican Republic
	•	Subject to future negotiations. 
Section C : Guatemala - Dominican Republic
	•	This chapter does not apply, with respect to both parties, to the purchase of arms, ammunition, war material or any other contract essential for national security, public safety or for purposes of national defense. 
Section D : Honduras - Dominican Republic
	•	Subject to future negotiations. 
Section E : Nicaragua - Dominican Republic
	•	This chapter does not apply, with respect to both parties, to the purchase of arms, ammunition, war material or any other contract essential for national security, public safety or for purposes of national defense. 
Annex III to Article 12-02
Section A : Costa Rica - Dominican Republic
Costa Rica
	1.	
	2.	This chapter does not apply in relation to Costa Rica to:
	a.	
	b.	The activities that are excluded from the procedures of public tenders established in that law expressly indicated in article 2 of the Administrative Contracting Law No. 7494 of May 2, 1995; 
	c.	employment relationships; 
	d.	public loans; 
	e.	the contracting of public works, the concession of public facilities, the concession of public works and the concession of works with public service, the alienation in general of real estate or any other type of contract that is not the purchase of goods or services; 
	f.	other activities and public purchases subjected by domestic legislation to a special contracting regime different from that established in the Administrative Contracting Law No. 7494 of May 2, 1995 and its regulations, without prejudice to the provisions of the second paragraph of this section .
	3.	 
	4.	The purchases made by the Social Security Fund under the procedures established in Law 6914 of November 15, 1983 will be covered by the scope of application and other provisions of this chapter with the sole exception that the provided in subparagraphs d) f) and j) of article 12-09 and the provisions of article 12.11. 
	5.	Paragraph 4 of Article 12.03 shall not apply to goods originating from the other Party included in the exceptions annex contained in Article 3.04.
Dominican Republic
	•	This chapter does not apply:
	a.	
	b.	to the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies, works and essential services to solve situations derived from the states of exception declared in accordance with the Law; 
	c.	to the sales of services of a special nature carried out by the institutions of the Public Sector; 
	d.	to negotiations and agreements entered into with other States or with subjects of international public law, nor to contractual activities carried out between public law entities; 
	e.	to the contracting activity, which due to its nature, the concurrent circumstances or its small amount, cannot or is not convenient to submit to a public tender, either because there is only one supplier, for special reasons of security, pressing urgency or other equally qualified ones, according to internal legislation; 
	f.	to purchases financed with resources from loans and donations made in favor of any of the Parties, their agencies, institutions and municipalities made by persons, entities, international organizations or other States or foreign governments, which will be governed solely by the provisions of said loans and donations; 
	g.	to the acquisition of goods, services and supplies between the dependencies of the State organisms, and between these and the decentralized, autonomous entities and municipalities; 
	h.	to purchases of goods, contracting of services carried out by legations, embassies and consulates abroad; 
	i.	to employment relationships; 
	j.	to the contracting of public works, concession of public works, concession of public works with public service, the alienation of real estate and any other type of public contracting that is not the purchase of goods or services.
Section B : El Salvador - Dominican Republic
	•	Subject to future negotiations. 
Section C : Guatemala - Dominican Republic
Guatemala
	•	This chapter does not apply:
	a.	
	b.	to the purchase of goods, contracting of works, services and supplies of a strategic nature acquired by public institutions to safeguard the borders, bridges, natural resources subject to international regime or the territorial integrity of the country; 
	c.	to the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies, works and essential services to solve situations derived from states of exception declared in accordance with the law; 
	d.	to the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies, works and services that are necessary and urgent to resolve situations of national interest or social benefit; 
	e.	to purchases financed by funds from loans and donations, that in favor of any of the Parties, their entities, institutions or municipalities, are made by persons, entities, associations, international organizations, or other States or foreign governments, which will be governed solely for what was agreed upon in said loans and donations; 
	f.	to the acquisition of goods, services and supplies, between the dependencies of the State organisms and between these and the decentralized, autonomous entities and municipalities; 
	g.	to goods, contracting of works, services and supplies, considered as specific cases of exception acquired by public institutions and which include:
	i.	
	ii.	the purchase of goods, the contracting of services, or construction services carried out by agencies of the State of Guatemala abroad, such as embassies, legations, consulates or missions; 
	iii.	the contracting of professional, individual services in general; 
	iv.	the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies and services with unique suppliers.
Dominican Republic
	•	This chapter does not apply:
	a.	
	b.	to the purchase of goods, contracting of works, services and supplies of a strategic nature acquired by public institutions to safeguard the borders, bridges, natural resources subject to international regime or to the territorial integrity of the country; 
	c.	to the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies, works and essential services to resolve situations derived from the states of exception declared in the current legislation of the Dominican Republic; 
	d.	to the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies, works and services that are necessary and urgent to solve situations of national interest in accordance with the legislation itself; 
	e.	to purchases financed with resources from loans and donations that in favor of the Parties, their entities, institutions and municipalities are made by persons, entities or international organizations or other States or foreign governments, which will be governed solely by what is agreed in said loans and donations; 
	f.	to the acquisition of goods, services and supplies between the dependencies of the State organisms and between these and the decentralized, autonomous entities and municipalities; Likewise, it will not apply to goods, contracting of works, services and supplies, considered as specific cases of exception acquired by public institutions and which include:
	i.	
	ii.	purchases of goods, contracting of services or construction services carried out by legations, embassies and consulates abroad; 
	iii.	the contracting of professional, individual services in general.
Section D : Honduras - Dominican Republic
	•	Subject to future negotiations. 
Section E : Nicaragua - Dominican Republic
Nicaragua
	1.	
	2.	This chapter will be subject to the exceptions contained in article 14, chapter IV of Decree No. 809 of the National Reconstruction Governing Board of the Republic of Nicaragua (State Administrative Contracting Law, decentralized or autonomous entities and municipalities).
	3.	
	4.	This chapter does not apply to purchases financed by funds from loans and donations, which in favor of any of the Parties, their entities, institutions or municipalities, are made by persons, entities, associations, international organizations, or other States or foreign governments, which will be governed solely by what is agreed in said loans and donations.
Dominican Republic
	•	Regarding the Dominican Republic with Nicaragua, this chapter does not apply:
	a.	
	b.	to the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies, works and essential services to resolve situations derived from the states of exception declared in the current legislation of the Dominican Republic;
	c.	
	d.	to the purchase and contracting of goods, supplies, works and services that are necessary and urgent to solve situations of national interest in accordance with the legislation itself;
	e.	
	f.	to purchases financed with resources from loans and donations that in favor of the Parties, their entities, institutions and municipalities are made by persons, entities or international organizations or other States or foreign governments, which will be governed solely by what is agreed in said loans and donations;
	g.	
	h.	to the acquisition of goods, services and supplies between the dependencies of the State organisms and between these and the decentralized, autonomous entities and municipalities; Likewise, it will not apply to goods, contracting of works, services and supplies, considered as specific cases of exception acquired by public institutions and which include:
	i.	
	ii.	purchases of goods, contracting of services or construction services carried out by legations, embassies and consulates abroad; 
	iii.	the contracting of professional, individual services in general.
	i.	 
	j.	to purchases or contracts made for the purpose of repairing vehicles, engines, machines and other similar devices.
	•	Annex IV: Procurement system for goods and services in the public sector of the Dominican Republic Title I : Hiring Modalities
	◦	Article 1. Contracts for the supply of goods and services will be carried out by Public Tender, Invitation Tender and Restricted Tender, as appropriate, according to the amounts of the contracts. Article 2. In all the modalities established in this Regulation, the contracting body will carry out each purchase or contract taking into consideration the prices provided by the Price Information System, the technical specifications and the quality standards established by the General Directorate of Procurement. . Article 3. Public Tender: The Tender is Public when all interested parties can submit an offer, as long as they observe the requirements established in Law 295 and in these regulations, and it will be the procedure to follow when the amount of the contract exceeds THREE. MILLIONS OF DOMINICAN PESOS (RD$3,000,000.00). Paragraph : The Public Tender may be applied at the discretion of the contracting body even when the amount to be contracted is less than the level established in this article. Article 4. Tender by invitation: The Tender is by Invitation when only those suppliers that have been specially invited have the right to submit a bid. This modality will be applied for contracts whose amount exceeds ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (RD$100,000.00) and up to the minimum amount of the Public Tender. For this purpose, at least ten (10) bidders who meet the conditions established in this Regulation and who are included in the list referred to in article 17 must be formally invited to participate. Paragraph : When, due to the nature of the good or service to be contracted, the number of participating suppliers is less than ten (10), the contracting agency will leave an express record in the file on the reasons why the provisions of this article were not complied with. ; which will be in the public domain and easily accessible to any interested party. Article 5. Restricted Tender: The Tender will be restricted when the bidder selects the bidders he considers to be in the best condition to respond to his requirements. This contracting modality will be used for acquisitions that do not exceed ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOMINICAN PESOS (RD$100,000.00) and will be carried out with a formal invitation to quote at least five (5) suppliers of the good or service object of the contracting. Paragraph : When, due to the nature of the good or service to be contracted, the number of suppliers is less than five (5), an express record of this situation will be left in the corresponding file, which will be in the public domain and easily accessible to any interested party. . Article 6. Minor purchases: It will be the mechanism to be implemented for direct purchases and contracts whose amounts will be established by the Comptroller General of the Republic through Resolution. Article 7 . The amounts established in articles 3 to 5 may be readjusted each year by the Procurement Commission, which will issue a resolution in the second half of January that incorporates the corresponding amounts and specifies the current parameters for each of the modalities included in this Regulation. Article 8 . A contract may not be divided in order to reduce the amount of the same and thus avoid the requirements of advertising, the procedure and the form of adjudication of the same. Paragraph : When the object admits fractioning, duly justifying it in the file, in the award phase, the independent realization of each of its Parties may be foreseen, provided that they are susceptible to division or so required by the nature of the contract. Article 9. The cost incurred in the Public Tender and Prequalification process referred to in articles 3 and 13 of these Regulations will be covered in equal parts by the participating bidders and it is the responsibility of the contracting institution to distribute the same. 
	•	Title II : Special Hiring Modalities
	◦	Article 10. Auction or auction: It will be applied in the negotiations with adjudication to the bidder that offers the lowest price, which must be expressly stated in the corresponding file. Article 11. Urgent Procedure: In cases of purchases and contracts whose adjudication must be accelerated to avoid damage to the public interest, serious damage to people or irreparable damage to things, one or all of the formalities of the established procedures may be dispensed with. in this Regulation. Paragraph I. In such cases, the file must contain the declaration of urgency made by the contracting agency, which will previously request authorization to use this procedure from the Comptroller General of the Republic. The request must be resolved within five business days following the receipt of the request and the silence of the controlling body may be interpreted as its approval, without this implying the disclaimer of the responsibility of the contracting body or its officials. Paragraph II . The files classified as urgent will have preference for their dispatch by the different administrative bodies that participate in their processing and will have a period of five (5) days to issue their respective reports. Article 12. Emergency Procedure. In the cases provided for in article 13 of Law No. 295, the competent contracting body, without the obligation to process an administrative file, may order the execution of what is necessary to remedy the event that occurred, satisfy the supervening need or freely contract its object, in all or in part, without being subject to the formal requirements established in this Regulation. The Comptroller General of the Republic will be notified immediately of the corresponding contracts. Article 13. Of the prequalification. When it considers it favorable for a better choice of supplier, the contracting authority may promote a prequalification stage, as part of the Public Tender or the Tender by Invitation, in order to previously select the participants, according to their particular conditions. Paragraph I. The specifications will expressly indicate the factors that will be used for the election and the value assigned to each factor. The start of the procedure will be notified through a publication in national and/or foreign newspapers, as appropriate. Paragraph II. Once the Prequalification act is completed, the procedure will continue and only the prequalified firms will be invited. The administrative selection decision, regarding the eligibility of prequalified natural or legal persons, may not be changed in the next stage of the contest. Paragraph III. The contracting body may carry out a single prequalification for several tenders, when it anticipates that it will have to carry out several tenders to acquire goods and services of the same nature. Natural or legal persons, thus prequalified, may participate in one or more of the planned tenders. 
	•	Title III : Qualification of Suppliers, the right to offer and prohibitions
	◦	Article 14. On the qualification of suppliers: This article will be applied to the evaluation of suppliers carried out at any stage of the contracting process. Without prejudice to the right of suppliers to protect their intellectual property or trade secrets, the contracting body may require those who participate in the contracting process to present pertinent supporting documents and other information that it deems useful to prove that:
	a.	
	b.	They have the appropriate technical competence and sufficient financial resources, equipment and other physical facilities, business capacity, reliability, experience and reputation, as well as personnel to comply with the contract to be awarded. 
	c.	They have the necessary legal capacity to contract. 
	d.	They are not foreclosed, bankrupt or in the process of liquidation, their businesses have not been placed under receivership; and their business activities have not been suspended or legal proceedings have been initiated against them for any of the above reasons.They have complied with their tax and social security obligations. 
	◦	Article 15 . Any requirement that is established in accordance with the paragraphs of the previous article will appear in the prequalification documentation or in the specifications, as the case may be, and will be equally applicable to all suppliers. The contracting entity will not impose any criteria, requirement or procedure to evaluate the qualification of the suppliers that has not been provided for in subparagraph a) of article 14. Article 16 . The contracting body will evaluate the qualification of the suppliers according to the criteria and procedures indicated in the respective documentation for each contract, in the specifications and in this Regulation. Article 17. Of the right to offer. Any natural or legal person who meets the conditions established in article 14 of these regulations and who are not affected by the prohibition regimes established in article 18 will have the right to bid. Paragraph: Anyone interested in contracting with public administration agencies has the right to register as a provider as long as they comply with the conditions of this article. Article 18. Bidding Prohibition. In the procedures for the acquisition of goods and services promoted by the institutions included in this Regulation, natural or legal persons who are in the following circumstances are inhibited from participating as bidders, directly or indirectly:
	a.	
	b.	The President and Vice President of the Republic, the Secretaries and Undersecretaries of State, the Senators and Deputies of the National Congress, the Magistrates of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Chamber of Accounts and the Central Electoral Board, the Trustees and Aldermen, the Comptroller and the Deputy Comptrollers General of the Republic, the National Director and the Deputy Directors of the Budget, the Attorney General of the Republic and the National Treasurer. 
	c.	Executive Presidents, managers and deputy managers of both decentralized institutions and public companies and public officials with interference or decision-making power, at any stage of the administrative contracting procedure, of the entity where they perform their duties. 
	d.	The legal persons in whose social capital any of the officials mentioned in the preceding paragraphs participate. 
	e.	Relatives, by consanguinity or affinity up to the third degree inclusive, of the officials covered by the prohibition. The prohibition also applies to spouses, people related to a similar relationship of affective cohabitation, such as cohabitation, or with whom they have procreated children, and descendants of these people, provided that, with respect to said people, they hold their legal representation. 
	f.	The legal persons in which the relatives indicated in the previous paragraph are holders of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the social capital or hold a position of management or representation. 
	g.	The natural or legal persons who have intervened, as advisors, at any stage of the contracting procedure or have participated in the elaboration of the respective specifications and designs. 
	h.	Natural or legal persons who have been sentenced by final judgment or are being prosecuted or accused of crimes of misrepresentation or against property or for crimes of bribery, embezzlement of public funds, influence peddling, negotiations prohibited to officials, disclosure of secrets or use of privileged information or crimes against public finances, until a period equal to twice the sentence has elapsed. If the sentence is for a crime against the public administration, the prohibition to contract with the State will be perpetual. 
	i.	Companies whose directors are prosecuted for crimes against public administration, crimes against public faith or crimes included in the Inter-American Convention against Corruption, the Vienna Convention of 1988 or for any other serious crime defined in our penal code.
	j.	
	k.	Those who have not complied with their tax or Social Security obligations imposed by the provisions in force.
	l.	
	m.	Natural or legal persons who are suspended or disqualified under any legal system.
	◦	Article 19. Persons covered by the prohibition regime are prohibited from intervening, directly or indirectly, before the officials responsible for the stages of the contracting procedure, in favor of third parties. Article 20 . In case of doubt about the interference of a specific official in a specific business, it will correspond to the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic, through a reasoned resolution and prior request of the interested party or any citizen. Article 21. Lifting of the Incompatibility. The express prohibition in subparagraphs d) and e) of Article 15 will not operate when the persons named therein prove that they habitually dedicate themselves to developing the business activity potentially subject to administrative contracting, at least one year before the emergence of the contract. In the event of inhibition and in the case of a single provider, by means of a procedure before the Attorney General of the Republic , who will be responsible for lifting the incompatibility if all the requirements of this Regulation are satisfied. Article 22 . Effects of Default. The violation of the regime of prohibitions established in this chapter will cause the absolute nullity of the offer, the act of adjudication or the contract, relapsed in favor of the inhibited party and will lead to the offending party, the sanctions provided for in this Regulation and in our Common Law. . 
	•	Title IV : Recruitment Process
	◦	Article 23 . To start the purchase or contracting procedure, it is necessary to have the allocation of sufficient budgetary resources to meet the respective expenditure. For this purpose, the annual appropriation and legislation of budgetary funds available for the corresponding period must be available. Paragraph : In the purchases of goods or services whose development lasts for more than one budgetary period, the necessary provisions must be adopted to guarantee the payment of the obligations. Article 24 . All Public Tenders will be made in compliance with the following requirements:
	a.	
	b.	Particular specifications and technical specifications and qualification of the products to which the execution of the contract must comply; 
	c.	Definition of the bases to qualify and compare the offers; 
	d.	Publication for a minimum of three (3) days in national and foreign newspapers of the notice of tender inviting to participate, with a minimum notice of fifteen (15) working days, to the date indicated as the last for the reception of offers; 
	e.	Publication of all the steps of the procedure and the possibility of access to all the technical studies prepared by or for the contracting body, and motivation of the award act; 
	f.	The requirement of the division in lots if any;Full submission of the bidder to the Dominican legal system, to the requirements of this regulation and to the general and particular rules of bidding as the case may be;  
	g.	In the case of acquisitions charged to financing with bilateral and multilateral institutions, international bidding will be carried out in accordance with the rules agreed with them.
	◦	Article 25 . The offers of the suppliers will be secret and the means that guarantee such character will be arbitrated until the moment of the bidding. Its presentation presumes the acceptance by the provider of the particular administrative clauses and the content of the specifications. Article 26 Of the Adjudication. The award will be made by the competent authority to approve the contract, which must be notified to the successful bidders, in case the contract is divided into lots, to the remaining bidders, and published in a newspaper of national or international circulation, according to as the case may be, within three business days following the award. Article 27 . For the granting of the purchase order or the service contract by bidding, the contracting agency will be assisted by a Bidding Committee, which will be made up of a President, a secretary and at least three members and a notary public. Said Committee will previously qualify the documents presented in a timely manner and will proceed, in a public act, to open the accepted offers and make the proposal to the contracting body for the award of the contract to the supplier whose proposal best meets the criteria established in the specifications. Paragraph : The Tender Committee may request, before formulating its proposal, as many technical reports as it deems necessary and related to the purpose of the contract. Whatever their decision, it must be duly motivated and expressed in writing, extracted from the minutes that include their actions. Article 28. When the contracting body decides to declare a contracting procedure void, it must leave an express record of the reasons of public interest to adopt that decision. Article 29. If an unsuccessful Public Tender is produced, the contracting agency may use the Invitation Tender procedure in the new contest. Article 30. The sale price of the good or service to be contracted will be expressed in national currency, with the exception of supply contracts from abroad, in which it may be expressed in the currency of their country of origin. Article 31. The appeal against the adjudication act will follow the following steps:
	a.	
	b.	The appellant will initiate it before the same body that granted the act. 
	c.	To legitimize and substantiate the appeal, it will be governed by the rules of appeal. 
	d.	If the appeal is appropriate, the contracting body will notify the decision to the awarded party within a period of 48 hours. 
	e.	The adjudicated party will be obliged to answer the appeal within three (3) business days, from the notification of the resolution. 
	f.	The contracting body will be obliged to resolve the conflict within fifteen business days from the response to the appeal.
	g.	
	h.	The resolution issued by the contracting body will consider the administrative process exhausted. However, it may be challenged before the Contentious-Administrative jurisdiction, without suspensive effect and within three business days following its communication.
	◦	Article 32. The administrative contract will be valid when it is carried out in accordance with the legal system and when the final act of adjudication and the constitution of the guarantee are fulfilled. It will be perfected by the receipt of the purchase order by the supplier or by the signing of the parties to the contract to intervene. Paragraph I. Contracts and/or purchase or service orders will be formalized in simple documents, and copies thereof will be sent to the General Procurement Directorate, within a period of no more than 30 days. Paragraph II. When the institution is part of the Central Government, the service contracts must be sent for registration to the Comptroller General of the Republic. Article 33. Of the Guarantees. The successful bidders whose contracts exceed the sum of FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOMINICAN PESOS (RD$500,000.00) are required to constitute a guarantee within five (5) business days, counted from the date of notification of the award, for the amount of 4% of the amount of the contract to be intervened, at the disposal of the contracting body, regardless of the procedure and method of awarding the contract. Paragraph. In special cases and contracts for the repair and maintenance of buildings and equipment, the contracting entity may also establish, in the particular specifications, a complementary guarantee of up to 6% of the aforementioned amount. Article 34. The guarantees will respond to the following concepts:
	a.	
	b.	Of the obligations derived from the contract, of the expenses originated to the contracting body due to the contractor's delay in fulfilling its obligations and of the damages caused to it due to the execution of the contract or in the event of breach thereof. 
	c.	In the supply contract, the guarantee will respond for the existence of vices or defects in the goods and services supplied during the guarantee period established in the contract.
	◦	Article 35. The guarantees will be returned:
	a.	
	b.	After the liquidation of the contract is approved, if there are no responsibilities that have to be exercised on the guarantee and the term of the guarantee has elapsed, its return will be ordered.
	c.	
	d.	In the event of partial reception, the contractor may only request the cancellation of the proportional part of the guarantee when expressly authorized in the specific specifications.
	e.	
	f.	After a period of six (6) months from the date of termination of the contract, without the formal reception and settlement having been made and for reasons beyond the control of the contractor, the guarantee will be immediately cancelled.
	◦	Article 36 . In consultancy and assistance contracts, for services and specific and unusual works or when the contractor immediately delivers consumable or easily deteriorated goods, the guarantee may be waived when so provided by the contracting authority in the specific specifications , and the reasons for said waiver must be substantiated. 
Chapter XIII: Technical Barriers to Trade
Article 13.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, the Parties will use as reference the terms presented in current ISO/CEI Guide 2, "general terms and their definitions in relation to standardization and related activities". However, it will be understood by:
	◦	Hazardous waste : any material generated in the processes of extraction, transformation, production, consumption, use, control or treatment, whose quality does not allow it to be used again in the process that generated it and which, due to its corrosive, toxic, poisonous, reactive, radioactive, explosive, flammable, biological, infectious or irritant, they represent a danger to health or the environment; Risk assessment: the assessment of the potential damage to human, animal or plant health or safety, or the environment, could be caused by any good or service traded between the Parties; Standardization measures : standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures; Standard – A document approved by a recognized institution that provides, for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines, or characteristics for goods or related processes and production methods, or for related services or methods of operation, and compliance with which is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to, or dealing exclusively with, a good, service, process or method of production or operation; International Standard – A standard, or other guide or recommendation, adopted by an international standard-setting body and made available to the public; Legitimate objectives : among others, it includes objectives such as: the guarantee of safety or the protection of human, animal, plant or environmental life or health, or the prevention of practices that may mislead or deceive consumers , including matters related to the identification of goods or services, considering, among other aspects, when appropriate, fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological, infrastructure or scientific justification type; Conformity assessment procedure: any procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine whether the relevant requirements established by technical regulations or standards are met, including sampling, testing, inspection, evaluation, verification, assurance of conformity, accreditation, certification , registration and approval, used for those purposes; Administrative refusal : actions taken by a public administration body of the importing Party, in the exercise of its powers, to prevent a shipment from entering its territory or the provision of a service, for technical reasons; Technical regulation : a document that establishes the characteristics of the goods or their related processes and production methods, or the characteristics of the services or their related methods of operation, including the applicable administrative provisions, and the observance of which is mandatory. It may also include requirements regarding terminology, symbols, packaging or labeling applicable to goods, services, processes or methods of production or related operations, or deal exclusively with them; Service : any service within the scope of this Agreement, which is subject to standardization or metrology measures; Hazardous substances : are those that threaten human, animal, vegetable or environmental health or integrity, and that are identified as such by national and international organizations. 
Article 13.02 : Scope of application
	1.	
	2.	This chapter applies to the standardization and metrology measures of the Parties, as well as to measures related to them, which may directly or indirectly affect trade in goods or services between them. 
	3.	The Parties confirm their current rights and obligations arising from the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade of the WTO Agreement and from other International Treaties, to which the Parties are party, including the Treaties on health, environment and conservation and consumer protection . 
	4.	This chapter does not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
Article 13.03 : Use of international standards
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall use as a basis for the elaboration or application of its standardization measures, current international standards or imminent adoption, except when these international standards do not constitute an effective or adequate means to achieve their legitimate objectives, due to fundamental factors of a climatic nature. , geographical, technological, infrastructure, or for scientifically proven reasons. 
	3.	When an importing Party applies conformity assessment approval procedures that prohibit or restrict access to goods, that Party shall consider recourse to a relevant international standard as the basis for access until a final determination is made.
Article 13.04 : Risk assessment
	1.	
	2.	Each Party may carry out risk assessments in its territory provided that this does not have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between them. In doing so, it will take into account risk assessment methods developed by international organizations. 
	3.	In conducting a risk assessment, the Party conducting the risk assessment shall take into consideration all relevant scientific evidence, available technical information, intended end use and related processing technology. 
	4.	Having established the level of protection that it deems appropriate when conducting a risk assessment, each Party shall avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions between similar goods and services, if those distinctions:
	a.	
	b.	have the effect of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against goods or service providers of the other Party; 
	c.	constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties; either 
	d.	They discriminate between similar goods or services for the same use, under the same conditions, posing the same level of risk and conferring similar benefits.
Article 13.05 : Compatibility and equivalence
	1.	
	2.	Without prejudice to the rights conferred on them by this chapter and taking into account international standardization activities, the Parties will make their respective standardization measures compatible, without reducing the level of safety or protection of human, animal or human life or health. plant, the environment or consumers. 
	3.	Each Party will accept a technical regulation adopted by the other Party as equivalent to its own, when in cooperation with the other Party, the exporting Party is convinced that the importing Party's technical regulations adequately meet the legitimate objectives of is. 
	4.	At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall inform it in writing of its reasons for not having accepted a technical regulation pursuant to paragraph 2. 
	5.	The Parties recognize the need to update, review and achieve the harmonization of technical standards and regulations, as well as create mechanisms that allow the parties to carry out conformity assessment, design conformity assessment systems, certify, accredit and create marks of conformity for certification.
Article 13.06 : Conformity assessment
	1.	
	2.	If mutually beneficial, each Party will reciprocally accredit, approve, license or recognize conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party on terms no less favorable than those granted to those bodies in its territory. 
	3.	For conformity assessment procedures, those that make up this Agreement may use the capacity and technical structure of accredited bodies established in the territory of the Parties. 
	4.	Where possible, the Parties shall ensure that the procedure is carried out at the production facility of the good and that a mark of conformity is granted, where appropriate. 
	5.	Each Party shall give favorable consideration to the request of the other Party to negotiate agreements on mutual recognition of the results of that Party's conformity assessment procedures.
Article 13.07 : Metrological standards
	•	Each of the Parties will guarantee, to the extent possible, the traceability of their metrological standards in accordance with the recommendations of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) and the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML), complying with the principles stipulated in this chapter. 
Article 13.08 : Labeling, packaging and packaging
	1.	
	2.	The Parties will develop harmonized standards on labeling, packaging and packaging and formulate them through a subcommittee created in accordance with article 13.11. 
	3.	While such harmonized standards are developed, each Party will apply within its territory its relevant labeling, packaging and packaging requirements. 
	4.	In the case of food and food additives, to ensure that the standards developed do not contradict, neither in spirit nor in practice, the principle of harmonization, the standards and related documents developed by the Codex Alimentarius will preferably be used.
Article 13.09 : Notification
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall notify the other Party of the standardization and metrology measures that it intends to establish before they enter into force. 
	3.	Each Party shall notify the other Party when a standardization-related measure is no longer in force. 
	4.	When proposing the adoption or modification of any metrological standardization or management measure, each Party:
	a.	
	b.	expeditiously publish a notice and notify the other Party in writing, using the same notification format to the World Trade Organization, of its intention to adopt or modify that measure, in order to allow interested persons to familiarize themselves with the proposal, at least sixty (60) days prior to its adoption or modification; 
	c.	provide a copy of the proposed measure to the other Party or any interested person who requests it and, where possible, identify provisions that deviate substantially from relevant international standards; 
	d.	without discrimination, it will allow the other Party and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, will discuss and take them into account, as well as the results of the discussions; Y
	e.	
	f.	once the measure is adopted, the Party will deliver a copy to the other Party through the Information Centers.
	5.	 
	6.	When a Party considers it necessary to address an urgent problem related to a legitimate objective, it may omit the sixty (60) day period required in subparagraph a) of paragraph 3. 
	7.	Each Party shall annually notify the other Party in writing of its standardization plans and programs. 
	8.	When a Party administratively rejects a shipment or provision of services due to non-compliance with a standardization or metrology measure, it shall notify, without delay and in writing, the person holding the shipment or the service provider, the technical justification for the rejection. 
	9.	Once the information referred to in paragraph 6 has been generated, the Party will send it immediately to the Information Center of each of the Parties that make up this Agreement.
Article 13.10 : Information centers
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one Information Center in its territory capable of responding to all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing relevant updated documentation in relation to any standardization measures. , metrological standards or conformity assessment procedures adopted or proposed in their territory, by governmental or non-governmental bodies. 
	3.	The Parties designate as Information Centers, the institutions contained in the annex to this article. 
	4.	When a Party designates more than one Information Center:
	a.	
	b.	inform the other Party about the scope of responsibilities of each one of those centers; Y 
	c.	will ensure that any request sent to the wrong Information Center is forwarded, expeditiously, to the correct Information Center.
	5.	 
	6.	When an Information Center requests copies of the documents referred to in paragraph 1, they will be provided free of charge. Interested persons will be provided at the same price as their nationals, plus the actual cost of shipping.
Article 13.11 : Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
	1.	
	2.	The Parties establish the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade, hereinafter called the Committee, made up of an equal number of specialized representatives from each Country that is part of this agreement, which will begin its functions when it enters into force and will make its decisions by consensus. 
	3.	The functions of the Committee are defined in the annex to this article.
Article 13.12 : Settlement of disputes
	1.	
	2.	When differences arise between the Parties in relation to the provisions of this chapter, they will resort to the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade. 
	3.	In the event that the technical recommendation issued by said Committee does not allow the settlement of the difference, the Parties may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism established in this Agreement.
Article 13.13 : Management of hazardous substances and wastes
	1.	
	2.	For the control and management of hazardous substances and waste, the Parties will apply the provisions, guides or recommendations of the United Nations Charter, the Basel Convention and the international agreements that the Parties are party to and their current legislation of the Parties. 
	3.	Each Party shall regulate, in accordance with its legislation, the introduction, acceptance, deposit, transportation, and transit through its territory of hazardous, radioactive, and other wastes of internal or external origin that, due to their characteristics, constitute a hazard to health and safety. of the population or for the environment.
Article 13.14 : Protection of the environment
	•	For the care and protection of its environment, each Party will apply the provisions, guides or recommendations of the United Nations Organization and the pertinent international Agreements, to which the Parties are party, in addition to their legislation. 
Article 13.15 : Registration procedures
	•	The goods subject to registration in the territory of any of the Parties will be registered, recognized or evaluated by the competent authority of that Party, based on a national system of obligatory observance. Said registrations must be carried out as expeditiously as possible. 
Article 13.16 : Technical cooperation
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall foster the technical cooperation of its standardization and metrology bodies by providing information or technical assistance, to the extent of its possibilities and on mutually agreed terms, in order to help comply with this chapter and strengthen the activities, processes, systems and standardization and metrology measures of the Parties. 
	3.	The Parties may make joint efforts with the aim of managing technical cooperation from third countries.
Annex to Article 13.10 : Information Centers

	•	The Parties designate as Information Centers:
	a.	
	b.	Costa Rica : Ministry of Economy and Commerce, through the National Office of Standards and Measurement Units (ONNUM); 
	c.	El Salvador : Ministry of Economy, through the Directorate of Trade Policy; 
	d.	Guatemala : Ministry of Economy, through the Guatemalan Standards Commission (COGUANOR); 
	e.	Honduras : Ministry of Industry and Commerce, through the General Directorate of Productive Sectors; 
	f.	Nicaragua : Ministry of Economy and Development, through the General Directorate of Science and Technology; 9;
	•	Dominican Republic : General Directorate of Standards and Quality Systems (DIGENOR); or their successors. 
Annex to Article 13.11 : Functions of the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade
	a.	
	b.	Follow up on the application, compliance and administration of this chapter, including the progress of the established work subcommittees; 
	c.	contribute to the solution of problems derived from unnecessary technical barriers to trade; 
	d.	facilitate the process through which the Parties will make their standardization and metrology measures compatible; 
	e.	Serve as a forum for the Parties to consult on issues related to their standardization and metrology measures; 
	f.	promote technical cooperation activities between the Parties; 
	g.	assist in risk assessments carried out by Parties; 
	h.	help develop and strengthen the standardization and metrology measures of the Parties; 
	i.	report annually and make recommendations to the Council on the application of this chapter on matters within its competence; 
	j.	establish its regulations, which must be approved by the Council; 
	k.	establish the sub-committees on labelling, packaging and packaging and the approval procedures sub-committee within thirty days following the date of entry into force of this Agreement; Y 
	l.	others that are assigned by the Council.

Chapter XIV: Intellectual Property
Article 14.01 : Application
	•	The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), established as Annex 1C of the WTO Agreement. 
Article 14.02 : Intellectual Property Committee
	•	The Intellectual Property Committee is established, which will depend on the Council and will be made up of the representatives of each Party. The main function of the Committee will be to find the most appropriate means to apply the provisions of paragraph 1, as well as any other task assigned to it by the Council. 

Chapter XV: Competition Policy
Article 15.01 : Application
	1.	
	2.	The Parties shall endeavor to ensure that the benefits of this Agreement are not undermined by anti-competitive business practices. In the same way, they will try to move towards the adoption of common provisions to avoid said practices. 
	3.	Likewise, the Parties shall endeavor to establish mechanisms that facilitate and promote the development of competition policy and guarantee the application of rules on free competition between and within the Parties, in order to avoid negative effects of anti-competitive commercial practices in the area. of free trade.
Article 15.02 : Trade and Free Competition Committee
	•	The Committee on Trade and Free Competition is created, made up of two members from each of the parties. The main function of the Committee will be to find the most appropriate means to apply the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, as well as any other task assigned to it by the Council. 

Chapter XVI: Settlement of Disputes
Article 16.01 : Definitions
	•	For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
	◦	Disputing Parties : the complaining Party and the defending Party; Complaining Party : the Party or Parties that make the claim, taking into consideration that:
	a.	
	b.	In no case, the Dominican Republic may file the claim jointly with any other Party; 
	c.	The Parties, individually or jointly, may only use this dispute settlement procedure contained in this chapter to file claims against the Dominican Republic;
	◦	Respondent Party : the Party or Parties against whom the claim is made, in terms of the definition of the complaining Party; Consulting Party : any Party that consults pursuant to Article 16.06; Mission Act : mandate with which the arbitral tribunal must comply in accordance with paragraph 3 of article 16.12; Understanding : Understanding Relative to the Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes in the World Trade Organization. 
Article 16.02 : Cooperation
	•	The Parties shall endeavor to reach agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement through cooperation and consultation, and shall endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that might affect its operation. 
Article 16.03 : Scope of application
	•	Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the procedure of this chapter shall apply:
	a.	
	b.	to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement; either 
	c.	when a Party considers that a current or proposed measure of another Party is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or that, even if it does not contravene the Agreement, considers that the benefits that it could reasonably have expected to receive from the application of this Agreement are nullified or impaired Treaty.
Article 16.04 : Settlement of disputes in accordance with the Understanding
	1.	
	2.	The controversies that arise in relation to the provisions of this Agreement and the WTO Agreement or the agreements negotiated in accordance with the latter, may be resolved in one or another forum, at the choice of the complaining Party. 
	3.	Once the constitution of a court pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or one pursuant to the Understanding has been requested, the selected forum will be exclusive of any other. 
	4.	For the purposes of this article, a dispute settlement procedure shall be considered initiated in accordance with the Understanding when a Party requests:
	a.	
	b.	the integration of a panel in accordance with article 6 of the Understanding; either 
	c.	investigation by a Committee, in accordance with agreements negotiated under the WTO Agreement.
Article 16.05 : Perishable goods
	•	In disputes relating to perishable goods, the Parties, the Council or the arbitral tribunal will speed up the deadlines established in this chapter as much as possible. 
Article 16.06 : Consultations
	1.	
	2.	Any Party may request in writing to the other Party or Parties consultations regarding any measure adopted or proposed, or regarding any other matter that it considers could affect the operation of this Agreement in the terms of article 16.03. 
	3.	The requesting Party shall deliver the request to the Council and to the other Parties. 
	4.	The consulting Parties:
	a.	
	b.	they will provide the information that allows examining the manner in which the adopted or projected measure could affect the operation of this Agreement; 
	c.	treat confidential information exchanged during consultations in the same manner as the Party that provided it; Y 
	d.	they shall endeavor to avoid any solution that adversely affects the interests of any other Party under this Agreement.
Article 16.07 : Intervention of the Council, good offices, conciliation and mediation
	1.	
	2.	Any consulting Party may request in writing through its National Section of the Secretariat that the Council meet whenever a matter is not resolved in accordance with the previous article within thirty days following delivery of the request for consultations. The Request must be notified to all Parties. 
	3.	A Party may also request in writing that the Council meet after technical consultations have been held in accordance with the provisions of Articles 6.04 and 13.12. 
	4.	The requesting Party shall mention in the request the measure or any other matter that is the subject of the complaint and shall indicate the provisions of this Agreement that it considers applicable. 
	5.	The Council will meet within ten days following the submission of the request and in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, it may:
	a.	
	b.	convene technical advisers or create the working or expert groups that it deems necessary; 
	c.	resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other dispute resolution procedures; either 
	d.	make recommendations. 9;
	6.	 
	7.	Ex officio or at the request of a Party, the Council may combine the dispute resolution procedures contained in this article, when it receives two or more requests to hear matters related to the same measure or different matters whose joint examination is convenient.
Article 16.08 : Request for integration of the arbitral tribunal
	1.	
	2.	Any consulting Party may request in writing the establishment of an arbitral tribunal when the Council has met in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 16.07 and the matter has not been resolved within:
	a.	
	b.	thirty (30) days after the meeting, or 
	c.	the thirty (30) days following the day in which the Council has met and has accumulated the most recent matter that has been submitted to it, in accordance with article 16.07.
	3.	 
	4.	The requesting Party shall deliver the request to the Council through its National Section of the Secretariat and to the other Parties. The Council, if applicable, will invite the other consulting Parties to participate in the arbitration, which will have a period of ten (10) days to respond. 
	5.	After said term, and with the Parties that have accepted the invitation, the Council will constitute a single arbitral tribunal. 
	6.	The Parties that have not agreed to participate in the arbitration in accordance with the preceding paragraph, will not lose their right to request the establishment of a different arbitral tribunal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, as long as the scope, nature or cause that originates the controversy does not be the same at the discretion of the interested Party.
	7.	
	8.	Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, the arbitral tribunal shall be constituted and perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 16.09 : List of arbitrators
	1.	
	2.	The Parties will integrate a list of thirty (30) people who have the necessary qualities and willingness to be arbitrators. 
	3.	The members of the list will be designated by common agreement by the Parties, for periods of three years, and may be reelected for equal periods. 
	4.	Said list will include three (3) national experts of each Party and twelve non-nationals of the Parties. 
	5.	The members of the list will meet the qualities stipulated in paragraph 1 of the following article. 9;
Article 16.10 : Qualifications of the referees
	1.	
	2.	All referees will have the following qualities:
	a.	
	b.	they will have specialized knowledge or experience in Law, International Trade, and other matters related to this Agreement, or in the solution of controversies derived from international trade Agreements; 
	c.	they will be elected strictly based on their objectivity, probity and reliability; 
	d.	they will be independent, will not be linked to the Parties and will not receive instructions from them; Y 
	e.	they will comply with the Code of Conduct established by the Council.
	3.	 
	4.	The persons who have intervened in a dispute, under the terms of paragraph 4 of article 16.07, may not be arbitrators for the same dispute.
Article 16.11 : Constitution of the arbitral tribunal
	1.	
	2.	For the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, the following procedures shall be applied:
	a.	
	b.	the arbitral tribunal will be made up of three (3) members; 
	c.	The disputing Parties shall endeavor to agree on the appointment of the President of the arbitral tribunal within fifteen (15) days following the submission of the request for its integration. In the event that the disputing Parties fail to reach an agreement within this period, one of them, chosen by lot, will designate it within five (5) days. For this purpose, in the cases in which two or more Parties decide to act jointly, one of them, elected by lot, will assume the representation of the others. The person designated as President of the arbitral tribunal may not be of the nationality of any of the Parties; 
	d.	within five (5) days after the election of the President, each disputing Party shall select by lot an arbitrator who is a national of the other disputing Party; 
	e.	if a disputing Party does not select its arbitrator within that period, the arbitrator shall be chosen by lot from among the list members who are nationals of the other disputing Party. 9;
	3.	 
	4.	The arbitrators will preferably be selected from the list. Within five days after the day on which the proposal is made, any disputing Party may challenge, without explanation, any person not on the list who is proposed as arbitrator by a disputing Party. 
	5.	When a disputing Party considers that an arbitrator has committed a violation of the Code of Conduct, the disputing Parties shall consult and, if agreed, remove that arbitrator and select a new one in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Article 16.12 : Rules of procedure
	1.	
	2.	The Commission shall establish Model Rules of Procedure, in accordance with the following principles:
	a.	
	b.	the procedures will guarantee the right to a hearing before the arbitral tribunal, as well as the opportunity to present arguments and replies in writing; Y 
	c.	The hearings before the arbitral tribunal, the deliberations and the preliminary resolution, as well as all the writings and communications presented therein, will be confidential. 9;
	3.	 
	4.	Unless otherwise agreed between the disputing Parties, the procedure before the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure. 
	5.	The mission of the arbitral tribunal, contained in the mission statement will be:
	◦	Examine, in light of the provisions of this Treaty, the controversy submitted to its consideration in the terms of the request for the Council meeting, and issue the preliminary resolution and the final resolution. 
	6.	 
	7.	If the complaining Party alleges that a matter has been the cause of nullification or impairment of benefits within the meaning of subparagraph b), paragraph 2 of article 16.03, the mission certificate will indicate so. 9; When a disputing Party requests that the arbitral tribunal make conclusions on the degree of adverse trade effects that a measure that is judged inconsistent with this Agreement or has caused nullification or impairment within the meaning of subparagraph b), paragraph 2, has generated for any Party , of article 16.03, the mission certificate will indicate it.
Article 16.13 : Information and technical advice
	•	At the request of a disputing Party or ex officio, the arbitral tribunal may request the information and technical advice from the persons or institutions it deems pertinent. 
Article 16.14 : Preliminary resolution
	1.	
	2.	The arbitral tribunal will issue a preliminary resolution based on the arguments and communications presented by the disputing Parties and on any information it has received in accordance with the previous article. 
	3.	Unless the disputing Parties decide another term, the arbitral tribunal will present to said Parties, within ninety (90) days following the appointment of the last arbitrator, a preliminary resolution that will contain:
	a.	
	b.	findings of fact, including any resulting from a request under paragraph 5 of Article 16.12; 
	c.	the determination of whether the measure in question is or may be inconsistent with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of subparagraph b), paragraph 2 of Article 16.03, or in any other determination requested in the mission statement; Y 
	d.	the draft decision. 9;
	4.	 
	5.	The arbitrators may reason their vote in writing on issues for which there is no unanimous decision. 
	6.	The disputing Parties may make written observations to the court on the preliminary resolution within thirty (30) days following its presentation. 
	7.	In this case, and after examining the written observations, the arbitral tribunal may, ex officio or at the request of any disputing Party:
	a.	
	b.	perform any diligence it deems appropriate; Y 
	c.	reconsider the preliminary ruling.
Article 16.15 : Final resolution
	1.	
	2.	The arbitral tribunal shall simultaneously notify the Council and the disputing Parties of its final resolution, agreed upon by majority and, where appropriate, the reasoned votes in writing on the issues for which there has been no unanimous decision, within a period of forty-five ( 45) days from the presentation of the preliminary resolution. 
	3.	Neither the preliminary resolution nor the final resolution will reveal the identity of the arbitrators who have voted with the majority or with the minority. 
	4.	The final resolution will be published within the fifteen days following its notification to the Council and to the disputing Parties.
Article 16.16 : Compliance with the final resolution
	1.	
	2.	The final resolution shall be obligatory for the disputing Parties in the terms and within the terms established by it. 
	3.	When the final resolution of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is inconsistent with this Agreement, the Party complained against shall refrain from executing the measure or shall repeal it. 
	4.	When the final resolution of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is cause for nullification or impairment in the sense of subparagraph b), paragraph 2, of article 16.03, it will determine the level of nullification or impairment and may suggest adjustments that it considers mutually satisfactory to the Parties. contenders.
Article 16.17 : Suspension of benefits
	1.	
	2.	The complaining Party may suspend the defendant Party, the application of benefits derived from this Agreement that have equivalent effect to the benefits not received, if the arbitral tribunal resolves:
	a.	
	b.	that a measure is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement and the Party complained against does not comply with the final resolution within the period that the court has set; either 
	c.	that a measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of subparagraph b), paragraph 2, of Article 16.03, and the Party complained against does not reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute with the complaining Party within the term that the arbitral tribunal has fixed. 9;
	3.	 
	4.	The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant Party complies with the final resolution or until it and the complaining Party reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the controversy, as the case may be. However, if the Party complained against is made up of two or more Parties in accordance with the definition of Party complained against, and one or any of them complies with the final resolution, or reaches a mutually satisfactory agreement with the Complaining Party, the Complaining Party must lift or lift the suspension of benefits. 
	5.	In considering the benefits to be suspended under this article:
	a.	
	b.	the complaining Party shall first seek to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the arbitral tribunal has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or that has been cause for nullification or impairment. in the sense of subparagraph b), paragraph 2, of article 16.03; Y 
	c.	if the complaining Party considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors, it may suspend benefits in other sectors.
	6.	 
	7.	At the written request of any disputing Party, notified to its National Section of the Secretariat and to the other Parties, the Council will install, within a period of twenty-five days, an arbitral tribunal to determine whether the level of benefits that the complaining Party has been manifestly excessive. suspended pursuant to this article. 
	8.	The procedure before the arbitral tribunal constituted for the purposes of the previous numeral will be processed in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure. The arbitral tribunal will present its final resolution within sixty days following the election of the last arbitrator, or in any other term that the disputing Parties agree. 9;
Article 16.18 : Judicial and administrative instances
	1.	
	2.	The Council will endeavor to agree, as soon as possible, on an appropriate non-binding interpretation or response, when:
	a.	
	b.	a Party considers that a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement, arising or to arise in a judicial or administrative proceeding of another Party, merits interpretation by the Council; either 
	c.	a Party receives a request for an opinion on a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement by a court or administrative organ of that Party. 9;
	3.	 
	4.	The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall submit to them the response of the Council, in accordance with the procedures of that forum. 
	5.	When the Council fails to agree on a response, either Party may submit its own opinion to the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.
Article 16.19 : Alternative means for the solution of controversies between individuals
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall promote and facilitate the arbitration procedure and other alternative means for the solution of international commercial disputes between individuals. 
	3.	To this end, each Party shall have adequate procedures to ensure compliance with the International Arbitration Agreements ratified by each of the Parties and the recognition and enforcement of the arbitral awards that are pronounced in those controversies. 
	4.	The Council may establish a Private Business Dispute Advisory Committee composed of individuals who have specialized knowledge or experience in the resolution of private international business disputes. The Committee will submit reports and general recommendations to the Council on the existence, use and effectiveness of arbitration and other procedures for the settlement of disputes.

Chapter XVII : Exceptions
Article 17.01 : General exceptions
	•	Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between Parties where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade between them. 
Article 17.02 : National security
	•	In addition to the provisions of Article 17.01, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to mean:
	a.	
	b.	compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; 
	c.	prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:
	i.	
	ii.	relating to trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on goods, materials, services and technology carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment; 
	iii.	taken in time of war or other emergencies in international relations; 
	iv.	regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other explosive or nuclear devices; either 
	v.	relative to disintegrable materials or those used for their manufacture;
	d.	 
	e.	prevent any Party from taking measures in accordance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.
Article 17.03 : Exceptions to the disclosure of information
	•	No provision of this Agreement shall be construed in the sense of forcing a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which may impede compliance or be contrary to its Political Constitution or its laws regarding the protection of the privacy of people, financial affairs and bank accounts of individual clients of financial institutions, among others. 

PART THREE: INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Chapter XVIII: Administration of the Treaty
Article 18.01 : Joint Board of Directors
	1.	
	2.	The Parties establish the Joint Administration Council, which will be made up of the officials referred to in Annex I to this article or by the persons designated by them. 
	3.	The Council will have the following functions:
	a.	
	b.	ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Treaty; 
	c.	evaluate the results achieved in the application of the Treaty, monitor its development and recommend to the Parties the modifications it deems appropriate; 
	d.	propose measures aimed at the correct administration and development of the Treaty and its annexes; 
	e.	negotiate and approve the liberalization of trade in goods and services contained in the Annexes to Article 3.04 and Chapter X (Trade in Services); 
	f.	contribute to the solution of controversies that arise regarding its interpretation and application; 
	g.	supervising the work of all committees, working groups and expert groups established in accordance with this Agreement and included in annex II to this article; 
	h.	recommend to the Parties the adoption of the necessary measures to implement their decisions; 
	i.	establish ad hoc or permanent committees, working groups and groups of experts, as well as assign powers to them; 
	j.	prepare the regulations required for the development of the Treaty, which must be approved by the Executive Bodies of the Parties, in accordance with their internal legal systems; 
	k.	hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, or any other that is entrusted to it by the Parties; Y 
	l.	fix the amounts of remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators, their assistants and the experts, which will be covered by equal portions by the Disputing Parties.
	4.	 
	5.	The Council may:
	a.	
	b.	request the advice of persons or institutions without governmental ties; Y 
	c.	if agreed by the Parties, adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions.
	6.	 
	7.	The Council will establish its rules and procedures and all its decisions will be made by consensus. 
	8.	The Council shall meet at least once a year in ordinary session and, at the request of any Party, in extraordinary session. The sessions will be chaired successively by each Party.
Article 18.02 : Secretariat
	1.	
	2.	The Council will establish and supervise the coordinated operation of a Secretariat made up of the National Sections of the Parties. 
	3.	Each part:
	a.	
	b.	designate its permanent official office or dependency that will act as the National Section of the Secretariat of that Party; 
	c.	designate the official responsible for its National Section, who will be responsible for its administration; 
	d.	shall notify the Council of the address of its National Section, to which communications should be addressed.
	4.	 
	5.	It will correspond to the National Sections:
	a.	
	b.	provide assistance to the Council; 
	c.	provide administrative support to arbitral tribunals: 
	d.	on instructions from the Council, support the work of the other committees and groups established under this Agreement; Y 
	e.	carry out the other functions entrusted to it by the Council.
Annex I to Article 18.01 : Officers of the Council
	•	The officials referred to in article 18.01 are:
	a.	
	b.	in the case of Costa Rica, the Minister of Foreign Trade or his successor; 
	c.	in the case of El Salvador, the Minister of Economy or his successor; 
	d.	in the case of Guatemala, the Minister of Economy or his successor; 
	e.	in the case of Honduras, the Secretary of Industry and Commerce or his successor; 
	f.	in the case of Nicaragua, the Minister of Economy and Development or his successor; Y
	•	in the case of the Dominican Republic, the Secretary of State for Industry and Commerce or his successor. 
Annex II to Article 18.01 : Committees
Committees :

	•	Commodity Trade Committee.
	•	Rules of Origin Technical Committee.
	•	Customs Procedures Committee.
	•	Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
	•	Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade.
	•	Committee on Trade in Services.
	•	Committee on Temporary Entry of Business Persons.
	•	Committee on Intellectual Property.
	•	Committee on Trade and Free Competition.

Chapter XIX : Transfer
Article 19.01 : Information Center
	1.	
	2.	Each Party shall designate a unit or office as an Information Center to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement. 
	3.	When requested by a Party, the Information Center of the other Party will indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.
Article 19.02 : Publication
	•	Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative resolutions of general application that refer to any matter covered by this Agreement are published as soon as possible or made available for the knowledge of the Parties and any interested party. 
Article 19.03 : Provision of information
	•	Each Party, at the request of another Party, will provide information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any current or proposed measures. 
Article 19.04 : Hearing, legality and due process guarantees
	1.	
	2.	The Parties reaffirm the guarantees of hearing, legality and due process enshrined in their respective legislation. 
	3.	Each Party shall ensure that in the judicial and administrative procedures related to the application of any measure that affects the regulations of this Agreement, the essential formalities of the procedure are observed, and the legal cause of the same is founded and motivated.

PART FOUR: FINAL PROVISIONS
Chapter XX: Final Provisions
Article 20.01 : Observance of the Treaty
	•	Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional provisions, compliance with the provisions of this Agreement in its respective territory. 
Article 20.02 : Relationship with other international treaties and agreements
	1.	
	2.	The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them in accordance with the WTO Agreement and other treaties and agreements to which they are party. 
	3.	In the event of incompatibility between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in the preceding paragraph and the provisions of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.
Article 20.03 : Evaluation of the Treaty
	•	The Parties will periodically evaluate the development of this Agreement in order to seek its improvement and consolidate the integration process in the region, promoting an active participation of the productive sectors. 
Article 20.04 : Amendments
	•	The Parties may agree to any amendments to this Agreement, which shall enter into force in accordance with their constitutional procedures. 
Article 20.05 : Accession
	1.	
	2.	Any State or group of States may adhere to this Treaty subject to the terms and conditions that are agreed between that State or group of States and the Council, and once its adhesion has been approved in accordance with the applicable legal procedures of each one. from them. 
	3.	The accession will enter into force in accordance with what is stipulated in the corresponding instrument.
Article 20.06 : Reserves
	•	This Treaty may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations. 
Article 20.07 : Validity
	1.	This Agreement will enter into force on January 1, 1999, once the Parties exchange their respective instruments of ratification that certify that the necessary legal formalities have been completed.
	2.	In the case of Nicaragua, for the Treaty to enter into force, it will also be required that the protocols indicated in Chapter III (National Treatment and Market Access for Goods) and Chapter IV (Rules of Origin) have been previously ratified by its Assembly. .
Article 20.08 : Succession of treaties
	•	Any reference to any other international treaty or agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms to a successor treaty or agreement to which the Parties are party. 
Article 20.09 : Annexes
	•	The annexes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof. 
Article 20.10 : Complaint
	1.	
	2.	Any Party may denounce this Agreement. The denunciation will take effect 180 days after it is communicated to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term. 
	3.	In the case of the accession of a country or group of countries in accordance with the provisions of Article 20.05, notwithstanding that a Party has denounced the Treaty, it will remain in force for the other Parties. 
	4.	In case of denunciation, the Treaty will remain in force for the other Parties, provided that one of them is the Dominican Republic.
 
In witness whereof the Presidents of the Republics of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic and the Minister of Economy of Guatemala duly accredited with full powers, sign this Treaty in the City of Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, on April 16, 1998.

