Agreement between the Kingdom of Denmark and the Kingdom of Norway
concerning the Delimitation of the Continental Shelf in the Area between Jan
Mayen and Greenland and concerning the Boundary between the Fishery Zones in
the Area
(18 December 1995)
The Government of the Kingdom of Norway and the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark,
Referring to the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 14 June 1993 in the case concerning maritime
delimitation in the area between Greenland and Jan Mayen,
Having agreed to draw the delimitation line between the fishery zones and to delimit the continental shelf in accordance
with that judgment,
Having in this connection completed a geodetic calculation of the delimitation criteria laid down by the Court,
Desiring to continue cooperation on reciprocal fisheries and on the flexible exploitation of the living marine resources
in the area,
Having also agreed that a final determination of the further course of the delimitation line south of point No. 4 as
specified in the Agreement must be effected in consultation with Iceland,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The delimitation line between the Parties' parts of the continental shelf in the area between Greenland and Jan Mayen is
established as straight lines between the following points, in the order indicated below:
Point No. 1: 74&#186; 21' 46.9"N 05&#186; 00' 27.7" W
Point No. 2: 72&#186; 49' 22.2"N 11&#186; 28' 28.7" W
Point No. 3: 71&#186; 52' 50.8"N 12&#186; 46' 01.3" W
Point No. 4: 69&#186; 54' 34.4"N 13&#186; 37' 46.4" W
All straight lines are geodetic lines.
The points listed above are defined by geographic latitude and longitude in accordance with the World Geodetic
System 1984 (WGS84).
By way of illustration, the delimitation line and the points listed above have been drawn on the sketch-map annexed to
this Agreement.
Article 2
If natural resources are discovered in or on the continental shelf of one of the Parties and the other Party is of the
opinion that the said resources extend onto its continental shelf, the latter Party may by presenting the evidence on which the
opinion is based, e.g. geological or geophysical data, submit this opinion to the first-mentioned Party.
If such an opinion is put forward, the Parties shall institute deliberations, at which the information available to both of
the Parties is submitted, on the extent of the resources and the possibility of exploitation. If it is established in the course of these
deliberations that the resources extend across both Parties' parts of the continental shelf and that the resources in one of the
Parties' areas are exp loitable, wholly or in part, from that of the other Party or that the exploitation of the resources in one of the
Parties' areas would affect the possibility of exploiting the resources in that of the other Party, an agreement shall be made, at the
request of either of the Parties, concerning exploitation of the said resources.
Article 3
The boundary between the fishery zone around Jan Mayen and the fishery zone around Greenland coincides with the
delimitation line specified in article 1.
Article 4
This Agreement shall be signed and enters into force upon signature.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective Governments for that purpose,
have signed the present Agreement.
DONE in duplicate at Oslo on 18 December 1995 in the Norwegian and Danish languages, both texts being equally
authoritative.
