ENERGY CHARTER PROTOCOL ON ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RELATED
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS (ANNEX 3 TO THE FINAL ACT OF
THE EUROPEAN ENERGY CHARTER CONFERENCE)
PREAMBLE
The Contracting Parties to this Protocol,
Having regard to the European Energy Charter adopted in the Concluding Document
of the Hague Conference on the European Energy Charter, signed at The Hague on 17 December
1991; and in particular to the declarations therein that cooperation is necessary in
the field of energy efficiency and related environmental protection;
Having regard also to the Energy Charter Treaty, opened for signature from 17 December
1994 to 16 June 1995;
Mindful of the work undertaken by international organizations and fora in the field of
energy efficiency and environmental aspects of the energy cycle;
Aware of the improvements in supply security, and of the significant economic and environmental
gains, which result from the implementation of cost-effective energy efficiency
measures; and aware of their importance for restructuring economies and improving
living standards;
Recognizing that improvements in energy efficiency reduce negative environmental
consequences of the energy cycle including global warming and acidification;
Convinced that energy prices should reflect as far as possible a competitive market, ensuring
market-oriented price formation, including fuller reflection of environmental costs
and benefits, and recognizing that such price formation is vital to progress in energy efficiency
and associated environmental protection;
Appreciating the vital role of the private sector including small and medium-sized enterprises
in promoting and implementing energy efficiency measures, and intent on ensuring
a favourable institutional framework for economically viable investment in energy
efficiency;
Recognizing that commercial forms of cooperation may need to be complemented by
intergovernmental cooperation, particularly in the area of energy policy formulation and
analysis as well as in other areas which are essential to the enhancement of energy efficiency
but not suitable for private funding; and
Desiring to undertake cooperative and coordinated action in the field of energy efficiency
and related environmental protection and to adopt a Protocol providing a framework
for using energy as economically and efficiently as possible:
Have agreed as follows:
ART I. INTRODUCTION
Article 1. Scope and Objectives of the Protocol
(1) This Protocol defines policy principles for the promotion of energy efficiency as
a considerable source of energy and for consequently reducing adverse Environmental Impacts
of energy systems. It furthermore provides guidance on the development of energy
efficiency programmes, indicates areas of cooperation and provides a framework for the
development of cooperative and coordinated action. Such action may include the prospecting
for, exploration, production, conversion, storage, transport, distribution, and consumption
of energy, and may relate to any economic sector.
(2) The objectives of this Protocol are:
(a) The promotion of energy efficiency policies consistent with sustainable development;
(b) The creation of framework conditions which induce producers and consumers to
use energy as economically, efficiently and environmentally soundly as possible, particularly
through the organization of efficient energy markets and a fuller reflection of environmental
costs and benefits; and
(c) The fostering of cooperation in the field of energy efficiency.
Article 2. Definitions
As used in this Protocol:
(1) "Charter" means the European Energy Charter adopted in the Concluding Document
of the Hague Conference on the European Energy Charter signed at The Hague on 17
December 1991; signature of the Concluding Document is considered to be signature of the
Charter.
(2) "Contracting Party" means a state or Regional Economic Integration Organization
which has consented to be bound by this Protocol and for which the Protocol is in force.
(3) "Regional Economic Integration Organization" means an organization constituted
by states to which they have transferred competence over certain matters a number of which
are govemed by this Protocol, including the authority to take decisions binding on them in
respect of those matters.
(4) "Energy Cycle" means the entire energy chain, including activities related to prospecting
for, exploration, production, conversion, storage, transport, distribution and consumption
of the various forms of energy, and the treatment and disposal of wastes, as well
as the decommissioning, cessation or closure of these activities, minimizing harmful Environmental
Impacts.
(5) "Cost-Effectiveness" means to achieve a defined objective at the lowest cost or
to achieve the greatest benefit at a given cost.
(6) "Improving Energy Efficiency" means acting to maintain the same unit of output
(of a good or service) without reducing the quality or performance of the output, while reducing
the amount of energy required to produce that output.
(7) "Environmental Impact" means any effect caused by a given activity on the environment,
including human health and safety, flora, fauna, soil, air, water, climate, landscape
and historical monuments or other physical structures or the interactions among these
factors; it also includes effects on cultural heritage or socio-economic conditions resulting
from alterations to those factors.
PART II. POLICY PRINCIPLES
Article 3. Basic Principles
Contracting Parties shall be guided by the following principles:
(1) Contracting Parties shall co-operate and, as appropriate, assist each other in developing
and implementing energy efficiency policies, laws and regulations.
(2) Contracting Parties shall establish energy efficiency policies and appropriate legal
and regulatory frameworks which promote, inter alia:
(a) Efficient functioning of market mechanisms including market-oriented price formation
and a fuller reflection of environmental costs and benefits;
(b) Reduction of barriers to energy efficiency, thus stimulating investments;
(c) Mechanisms for financing energy efficiency initiatives;
(d) Education and awareness;
(e) Dissemination and transfer of technologies;
(f) Transparency of legal and regulatory frameworks.
(3) Contracting Parties shall strive to achieve the full benefit of energy efficiency
throughout the Energy Cycle. To this end they shall, to the best of their competence, formulate
and implement energy efficiency policies and cooperative or coordinated actions
based on Cost-Effectiveness and economic efficiency, taking due account of environmental
aspects.
(4) Energy efficiency policies shall include both short-term measures for the adjustment
of previous practices and long-term measures to improve energy efficiency throughout
the Energy Cycle.
(5) When cooperating to achieve the objectives of this Protocol, Contracting Parties
shall take into account the differences in adverse effects and abatement costs between Contracting
Parties.
(6) Contracting Parties recognize the vital role of the private sector. They shall encourage
action by energy utilities, responsible authorities and specialised agencies, and
close cooperation between industry and administrations.
(7) Cooperative or coordinated action shall take into account relevant principles
adopted in international agreements, aimed at protection and improvement of the environment,
to which Contracting Parties are parties.
(8) Contracting Parties shall take full advantage of the work and expertise of competent
international or other bodies and shall take care to avoid duplication.
Article 4. Division of Responsibility and Coordination
Each Contracting Party shall strive to ensure that energy efficiency policies are coordinated
among all of its responsible authorities.
Article 5. Strategies and Policy Aims
Contracting Parties shall formulate strategies and policy aims for Improving Energy
Efficiency and thereby reducing Environmental Impacts of the Energy Cycle as appropriate
in relation to their own specific energy conditions. These strategies and policy aims shall
be transparent to all interested parties.
Article 6. Financing and Financial Incentives
(1) Contracting Parties shall encourage the implementation of new approaches and
methods for financing energy efficiency and energy-related environmental protection investments,
such as joint venture arrangements between energy users and external investors
(hereinafter referred to as "Third Party Financing").
(2) Contracting Parties shall endeavour to take advantage of and promote access to
private capital markets and existing international financing institutions in order to facilitate
investments in Improving Energy Efficiency and in environmental protection related to energy
efficiency.
(3) Contracting Parties may, subject to the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty
and to their other international legal obligations, provide fiscal or financial incentives to energy
users in order to facilitate market penetration of energy efficiency technologies, products
and services. They shall strive to do so in a manner that both ensures transparency
and minimizes the distortion of international markets.
Article 7. Promotion of Energy Efficient Technology
(1) Consistent with the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty, Contracting Parties
shall encourage commercial trade and cooperation in energy efficient and environmentally
sound technologies, energy related services and management practices.
(2) Contracting Parties shall promote the use of these technologies, services and management
practices throughout the Energy Cycle.
Article 8. Domestic Programmes
(1) In order to achieve the policy aims formulated according to Article 5, each Contracting
Party shall develop, implement and regularly update energy efficiency programmes
best suited to its circumstances.
(2) These programmes may include activities such as the:
(a) Development of long-term energy demand and supply scenarios to guide decisionmaking;
(b) Assessment of the energy, environmental and economic impact of actions taken;
(c) Definition of standards designed to improve the efficiency of energy using equipment,
and efforts to harmonize these internationally to avoid trade distortions;
(d) Development and encouragement of private initiative and industrial co-operation,
including joint ventures;
(e) Promotion of the use of the most energy efficient technologies that are economically
viable and environmentally sound;
(f) Encouragement of innovative approaches for investments in energy efficiency improvements,
such as Third Party Financing and co-financing;
(g) Development of appropriate energy balances and data bases, for example with
data on energy demand at a sufficiently detailed level and on technologies for Improving
Energy Efficiency;
(h) Promotion of the creation of advisory and consultancy services which may be operated
by public or private industry or utilities and which provide information about energy
efficiency programmes and technologies, and assist consumers and enterprises;
(i) Support and promotion of cogeneration and of measures to increase the efficiency
of district heat production and distribution systems to buildings and industry;
(j) Establishment of specialized energy efficiency bodies at appropriate levels, that
are efficiently funded and staffed to develop and implement policies.
(3) In implementing their energy efficiency programmes, Contracting Parties shall
ensure that adequate institutional and legal infrastructures exist.
PART III. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
Article 9. Areas of Cooperation
The cooperation between Contracting Parties may take any appropriate form. Areas
of possible cooperation are listed in the Annex.
PART IV. ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 10. Role of the Charter Conference
(1) All decisions made by the Charter Conference in accordance with this Protocol
shall be made by only those Contracting Parties to the Energy Charter Treaty who are Contracting
Parties to this Protocol.
(2) The Charter Conference shall endeavour to adopt, within 180 days after the entry
into force of this Protocol, procedures for keeping under review and facilitating the implementation
of its provisions, including reporting requirements, as well as for identifying areas
of cooperation in accordance with Article 9.
Article 11. Secretariat and Financing
(1) The Secretariat established under Article 35 of the Energy Charter Treaty shall
provide the Charter Conference with all necessary assistance for the performance of its duties
under this Protocol and provide such other services in support of the Protocol as may
be required from time to time, subject to approval by the Charter Conference.
(2) The costs of the Secretariat and Charter Conference arising from this Protocol
shall be met by the Contracting Parties to this Protocol according to their capacity to pay,
determined according to the formula specified in Annex B to the Energy Charter Treaty.
Article 12. Voting
(1) Unanimity of Contracting Parties Present and Voting at the meeting of the Charter
Conference where such matters fall to be decided shall be required for decisions to:
(a) Adopt amendments to this Protocol; and
(b) Approve accessions to this Protocol under Article 16.
Contracting Parties shall make every effort to reach agreement by consensus on any
other matter requiring their decision under this Protocol. If agreement cannot be reached
by consensus, decisions on non-budgetary matters shall be taken by a three-fourths majority
of Contracting Parties Present and Voting at the meeting of the Charter Conference at
which such matters fall to be decided.
Decisions on budgetary matters shall be taken by a qualified majority of Contracting
Parties whose assessed contributions under Article 11(2) represent, in combination, at least
three-fourths of the total assessed contributions.
(2) For purposes of this Article, "Contracting Parties Present and Voting" means Contracting
Parties to this Protocol present and casting affirmative or negative votes, provided
that the Charter Conference may decide upon rules of procedure to enable such decisions
to be taken by Contracting Parties by correspondence.
(3) Except as provided in paragraph (1) in relation to budgetary matters, no decision
referred to in this Article shall be valid unless it has the support of a simple majority of Contracting
Parties.
(4) A Regional Economic Integration Organization shall, when voting, have a number
of votes equal to the number of its member states which are Contracting Parties to this
Protocol; provided that such an Organization shall not exercise its right to vote if its member
states exercise theirs, and vice versa.
(5) In the event of persistent arrears in a Contracting Party's discharge of financial
obligations under this Protocol, the Charter Conference may suspend that Contracting Party's
voting rights in whole or in part.
Article 13. Relation to the Energy Charter Treaty
(1) In the event of inconsistency between the provisions of this Protocol and the provisions
of the Energy Charter Treaty, the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty shall, to
the extent of the inconsistency, prevail.
(2) Article 10(1) and Article 12(1) to (3) shall not apply to votes in the Charter Conference
on amendments to this Protocol which assign duties or functions to the Charter
Conference or the Secretariat, the establishment of which is provided for in the Energy
Charter Treaty.
PART V. FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 14. Signature
This Protocol shall be open for signature at Lisbon from 17 December 1994 to 16 June
1995 by the states and Regional Economic Integration Organizations whose representatives
have signed the Charter and the Energy Charter Treaty.
Article 15. Ratification, Acceptance or Approval
This Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by signatories. Instruments
of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
Article 16. Accession
This Protocol shall be open for accession, from the date on which the Protocol is closed
for signature, by states and Regional Economic Integration Organizations which have
signed the Charter and are Contracting Parties to the Energy Charter Treaty, on terms to be
approved by the Charter Conference. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with
the Depositary.
Article 17. Amendments
(1) Any Contracting Party may propose amendments to this Protocol.
(2) The text of any proposed amendment to this Protocol shall be communicated to
Contracting Parties by the Secretariat at least three months before the date on which it is
proposed for adoption by the Charter Conference.
(3) Amendments to this Protocol, texts of which have been adopted by the Charter
Conference, shall be communicated by the Secretariat to the Depositary which shall submit
them to all Contracting Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval.
(4) Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval of amendments to this Protocol
shall be deposited with the Depositary. Amendments shall enter into force between Contracting
Parties having ratified, accepted or approved them on the thirtieth day after deposit
with the Depositary of instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval by at least three
fourths of the Contracting Parties. Thereafter the amendments shall enter into force for any
other Contracting Party on the thirtieth day after that Contracting Party deposits its instrument
of ratification, acceptance or approval of the amendments.
Article 18. Entry into Force
(1) This Protocol shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after the date of deposit of
the fifteenth instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval thereof, or of accession
thereto, by a state or Regional Economic Integration Organization which is a signatory to
the Charter and a Contracting Party to the Energy Charter Treaty or on the same date as the
Energy Charter Treaty enters into force, whichever is later.
(2) For each state or Regional Economic Integration Organization for which the Energy
Charter Treaty has entered into force and which ratifies, accepts, or approves this Protocol
or accedes thereto after the Protocol has entered into force in accordance with
paragraph (1), the Protocol shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after the date of deposit
by such state or Regional Economic Integration Organization of its instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession.
(3) For the purposes of paragraph (1), any instrument deposited by a Regional Economic
Integration Organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by
member states of such Organization.
Article 19. Reservations
No reservations may be made to this Protocol.
Article 20. Withdrawal
(1) At any time after this Protocol has entered into force for a Contracting Party, that
Contracting Party may give written notification to the Depositary of its withdrawal from
the Protocol.
(2) Any Contracting Party which withdraws from the Energy Charter Treaty shall be
considered as also having withdrawn from this Protocol.
(3) The effective date of withdrawal under paragraph (1) shall be ninety days after
receipt of notification by the Depositary. The effective date of withdrawal under paragraph
(2) shall be the same as the effective date of withdrawal from the Energy Charter Treaty.
Article 21. Depositary
The Government of the Portuguese Republic shall be the Depositary of this Protocol.
Article 22. Authentic Texts
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed
this Protocol in English, French, German, Italian, Russian and Spanish, of which every text
is equally authentic, in one original, which will be deposited with the Government of the
Portuguese Republic.
Done at Lisbon on the seventeenth day of December in the year one thousand nine hundred
and ninety-four.



ANNEX
ILLUSTRATIVE AND NON-EXHAUSTIVE LIST OF POSSIBLE AREAS OF COOPERATION PURSUANT
TO ARTICLE 9
Development of energy efficiency programmes, including identifying energy efficiency
barriers and potentials, and the development of energy labelling and efficiency standards;
Assessment of the Environmental Impacts of the Energy Cycle;
Development of economic, legislative and regulatory measures;
Technology transfer, technical assistance and industrial joint ventures subject to international
property rights regimes and other applicable international agreements;
Research and development;
Education, training, information and statistics;
Identification and assessment of measures such as fiscal or other market-based instruments,
including tradeable permits to take account of external, notably environmental,
costs and benefits.
Energy analysis and policy formulation:
--assessment of energy efficiency potentials;
--energy demand analysis and statistics;
--development of legislative and regulatory measures;
--integrated resource planning and demand side management;
--Environmental Impact assessment, including major energy projects.
Evaluation of economic instruments for Improving Energy Efficiency and environmental
objectives.
Energy efficiency analysis in refining, conversion, transport and distribution of hydrocarbons.
Improving Energy Efficiency in power generation and transmission:
--cogeneration;
--plant component (boilers, turbines, generators, etc);
--network integration.
Improving Energy Efficiency in the building sector:
--thermal insulation standards, passive solar and ventilation;
--space heating and air conditioning systems;
--high efficiency low NOx burners;
--metering technologies and individual metering;
--domestic appliances and lighting.
Municipalities and local community services:
--district heating systems;
--efficient gas distribution systems;
--energy planning technologies;
--twinning of towns or of other relevant territorial entities;
--energy management in cities and in public buildings;
--waste management and energy recovery of waste.
Improving Energy Efficiency in the industrial sector:
--joint ventures;
--energy cascading, cogeneration and waste heat recovery;
--energy audits.
Improving Energy Efficiency in the transport sector:
--motor vehicle performance standards;
--development of efficient transport infrastructures.
Information:
--awareness creation;
--data bases: access, technical specifications, information systems;
--dissemination, collection and collation of technical information;
--behavioural studies.
Training and education:
--exchanges of energy managers, officials, engineers and students;
--organization of international training courses.
Financing:
--development of legal framework;
--Third Party Financing;
--joint ventures;
--cofmancing.
