Euro-Mediterranean Agreement
establishing an Association between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, of the other part

THE KINGDOM OF BELGIUM,
THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK,
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC,
THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN,
THE FRENCH REPUBLIC,
IRELAND,
THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC,
THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBOURG,
THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS,
THE REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA,
THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC,
THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND,
THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN,
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
Contracting Parties to the Treaty establishing the European Community and the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community,
hereinafter referred to as the "Member States", and
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY,
THE EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL COMMUNITY,
hereinafter referred to as "the Community",
of the one part, and
THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN,
hereinafter referred to as "Jordan",
of the other part,
CONSIDERING the importance of the existing traditional links between the Community, its Member States and Jordan, and the common values that they share,
CONSIDERING that the Community, its Member States and Jordan wish to strengthen those links and to establish lasting relations based on reciprocity and partnership and to further integrate Jordan's economy into the European economy,
CONSIDERING the importance which the Parties attach to the principles of the United Nations Charter, particularly the observance of human rights, democratic principles and political and economic freedoms which form the very basis of the Association,
CONSIDERING the political and economic developments which have taken place in Europe and in the Middle East in the past years,
CONSCIOUS of the need to associate their efforts to strengthen political stability and economic development in the region through the encouragement of regional cooperation,
DESIROUS of establishing and developing regular political dialogue on bilateral and international issues of mutual interest,
CONVINCED of the need to strengthen the process of social and economic modernisation that Jordan has undertaken with the objective of the full integration of its economy in the world economies and of its participation in the community of democratic countries,
CONSIDERING the difference in economic and social development existing between Jordan and the Community,
DESIROUS of establishing cooperation, supported by a regular dialogue, in economic, scientific, technological, cultural, audiovisual and social matters with a view to improving mutual knowledge and understanding,
CONSIDERING the commitment of the Community and Jordan to free trade, and in particular to compliance with the rights and obligations arising out of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (1994) (GATT),
CONVINCED that the Association Agreement will create a new climate for their economic relations and in particular for the development of trade, investment and economic and technological cooperation,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
Article 1
1. An Association is hereby established between the Community and its Member States, of the one part, and Jordan, of the other part.
2. The aims of this Agreement are:
- to provide an appropriate framework for the political dialogue, allowing the development of close political relations between the Parties,
- to establish the conditions for the progressive liberalisation of trade in goods, services and capital,
- to foster the development of balanced economic and social relations between the Parties through dialogue and cooperation,
- to improve living and employment conditions, and enhance productivity and financial stability,
- to encourage regional cooperation with a view to the consolidation of peaceful coexistence and economic and political stability,
- to promote cooperation in other areas which are of reciprocal interest.

Article 2
Relations between the Parties, as well as all the provisions of the Agreement itself, shall be based on respect of democratic principles and fundamental human rights as set out in the universal declaration on human rights, which guides their internal and international policy and constitutes an essential element of this Agreement.

TITLE I
POLITICAL DIALOGUE
Article 3
1. A regular political dialogue shall be established between the Parties. It shall strengthen their relations, contribute to the development of a lasting partnership and increase mutual understanding and solidarity.
2. The political dialogue and cooperation will in particular:
- develop better mutual understanding and an increasing convergence of positions on international issues, and in particular on those issues likely to have substantial effects on one or the other Party,
- enable each Party to consider the position and interests of the other,
- enhance regional security and stability,
- promote common initiatives.

Article 4
The political dialogue shall cover all subjects of common interest, and shall aim to open the way to new forms of cooperation with a view to common goals, in particular peace, security, human rights, democracy and regional development.

Article 5
1. The political dialogue shall facilitate the pursuit of joint initiatives and shall take place at regular intervals and whenever necessary, in particular:
(a) at ministerial level, mainly in the framework of the Association Council;
(b) at senior official level between representatives of Jordan, of the one part, and of the Presidency of the Council and of the Commission, of the other;
(c) by taking full advantage of all diplomatic channels including regular briefings by officials, consultations on the occasion of international meetings and contacts between diplomatic representatives in third countries;
(d) by any other means which would make a useful contribution to consolidating, developing and stepping up this dialogue.
2. There shall be a political dialogue between the European Parliament and the Jordanian Parliament.

TITLE II
FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS
BASIC PRINCIPLES
Article 6
The Community and Jordan shall gradually establish a free trade area over a transitional period lasting a maximum of 12 years starting from the date of the entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in conformity with those of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (1994), hereinafter referred to as the "GATT".

CHAPTER 1
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
Article 7
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to products originating in the Community and Jordan other than those listed in Annex II to the Treaty establishing the European Community.

Article 8
No new customs duties on imports, or any other charge having equivalent effect, shall be introduced on trade between the Community and Jordan.

Article 9
Imports into the Community of products originating in Jordan shall be allowed free of customs duties and of any other charge having equivalent effect and free of quantitative restrictions and of any other measure having equivalent effect.

Article 10
1. (a) The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the retention by the Community of an agricultural component in respect of goods originating in Jordan and listed in Annex I.
(b) The agricultural component may take the form of a flat-rate amount or an ad valorem duty.
(c) The provisions of Chapter 2 applicable to agricultural products shall apply mutatis mutandis to the agricultural component.
2. (a) The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the retention by Jordan of an agricultural component in respect of goods originating in the Community and listed in Annex II.
(b) The agricultural components which, pursuant to subparagraph (a), Jordan may charge on imports from the Community shall not exceed 50 % of the basic duty rate charged on imports from countries not benefiting from preferential trading arrangements but benefiting from most-favoured-nation treatment.
(c) If Jordan proves that the equivalence of the duties applicable to the agricultural products incorporated in the goods listed in Annex II exceed the maximum rate set out in subparagraph (b) the Association Council may agree on a higher rate.
(d) Jordan may enlarge the list of goods to which this agricultural component applies, provided the goods are included in Annex I. Before its adoption, this agricultural component shall be notified for examination to the Association Committee which may take any decision needed.
(e) For the products listed in Annex II originating in the Community, Jordan shall apply from the entry into force of the Agreement customs duties on import and charges having equivalent effect not higher than those in force on 1 January 1996.
3. As regards the industrial element of the products listed in Annex II originating in the Community, Jordan shall progressively abolish the customs duties on imports or charges having equivalent effect according to the provisions of Article 11.
4. Where, in trade between the Community and Jordan, the charge applicable to a basic agricultural product is reduced, or where such reductions are the result of mutual concessions for processed agricultural products, the agricultural components applied in conformity with paragraphs 1 and 2 may be reduced.
5. The reduction provided for in paragraph 4, the list of goods concerned and, where applicable, the tariff quotas to which the reduction refers, shall be established by the Association Council.

Article 11
1. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect applicable on import into Jordan of products originating in the Community, other than those listed in Annexes II, III and IV, shall be abolished upon the entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Pursuant to Article 10(2)(b) and (3), the total customs duties and charges having equivalent effect applicable on import into Jordan of processed agricultural products originating in the Community listed in Annex II shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the following schedule:
- four years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced by 10 % of the basic duty,
- five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced by 20 % of the basic duty,
- six years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced by 30 % of the basic duty,
- seven years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced by 40 % of the basic duty,
- eight years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced by 50 % of the basic duty.
3. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect applicable on import into Jordan of products originating in the Community listed in list A of Annex III shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the following schedule:
- on the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 80 % of the basic duty,
- one year after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 60 % of the basic duty,
- two years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 40 % of the basic duty,
- three years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 20 % of the basic duty,
- four years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement the remaining duty and charge shall be abolished.
4. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect applicable on import into Jordan of products originating in the Community listed in list B of Annex III shall be progressively abolished in accordance with the following schedule:
- four years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 90 % of the basic duty,
- five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 80 % of the basic duty,
- six years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 70 % of the basic duty,
- seven years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 60 % of the basic duty,
- eight years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 50 % of the basic duty,
- nine years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 40 % of the basic duty,
- 10 years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 30 % of the basic duty,
- 11 years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement each duty and charge shall be reduced to 20 % of the basic duty,
- 12 years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement the remaining duty and charge shall be abolished.
5. As regards the products listed in Annex IV, the arrangements to be applied shall be re-examined by the Association Council four years after the date of entry into force of the Agreement. At the time of that re-examination, the Association Council shall establish a tariff dismantling schedule for the products appearing in Annex IV.
6. In the event of serious difficulties for a given product, the relevant timetables in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 may be reviewed by the Association Committee by common accord on the understanding that the timetable for which the review has been requested may not be extended in respect of the product concerned beyond the maximum transitional period of 12 years. If the Association Committee has not taken a decision within 30 days of its application to review the timetable, Jordan may suspend the timetable provisionally for a period which may not exceed one year.
7. For each product the basic duty to which the successive reductions laid down in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 are to be applied shall be that actually applied vis-à-vis the Community on 1 January 1996.
8. If, after 1 January 1996, any tariff reduction is applied on an erga omnes basis, the reduced duties shall replace the basic duties referred to in paragraph 7 as from the date when such reductions are applied.
9. Jordan shall notify the Community of its basic duties.

Article 12
The provisions concerning the abolition of customs duties on imports shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.

Article 13
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration which derogate from the provisions of Article 11 may be taken by Jordan in the form of an increase or reintroduction of customs duties.
These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where these difficulties produce major social problems.
Customs duties applicable on import into Jordan of products originating in the Community introduced by these measures may not exceed 25 % ad valorem and shall maintain an element of preference for products originating in the Community. The total yearly average value of imports of the products which are subject to these measures may not exceed 20 % of the total yearly average value of imports of industrial products originating in the Community during the last three years for which statistics are available.
These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding five years unless a longer duration is authorised by the Association Committee. They shall cease to apply at the latest on the expiry of the maximum transitional period of 12 years.
No such measures may be introduced in respect of a product if more than four years have elapsed since the elimination of all duties and quantitative restrictions or charges or measures having equivalent effect concerning that product.
Jordan shall inform the Association Committee of any exceptional measures it intends to take and, at the request of the Community, consultations shall be held on such measures and the sectors to which they apply before they are implemented. When taking such measures Jordan shall provide the Committee with a timetable for the elimination of the customs duties introduced under this Article. This timetable shall provide for a phasing-out of these duties in equal annual instalments starting at the latest two years after their introduction. The Association Committee may decide on a different timetable.
2. By way of derogation from the fourth subparagraph of paragraph 1, the Association Committee may exceptionally, in order to take account of the difficulties involved in setting up a new industry and when certain sectors are undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, authorise Jordan to maintain the measures already taken pursuant to paragraph 1 for a maximum period of three years beyond the 12-year transitional period.

CHAPTER 2
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
Article 14
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products originating in the Community and Jordan and listed in Annex II to the Treaty establishing the European Community.

Article 15
The Community and Jordan shall gradually implement greater liberalisation of their reciprocal trade in agricultural products.

Article 16
1. Agricultural products originating in Jordan shall benefit on import into the Community from the provisions set out in Protocol 1.
2. Agricultural products originating in the Community shall benefit on import into Jordan from the provisions set out in Protocol 2.

Article 17
1. From 1 January 2002, the Community and Jordan shall assess the situation with a view to determining the liberalisation measures to be applied by the Community and Jordan with effect from 1 January 2003 in accordance with the objective set out in Article 15.
2. Without prejudice to the provisions of the preceding paragraph and taking account of the patterns of trade in agricultural products between the Parties and the particular sensitivity of such products, the Community and Jordan may examine on a regular basis in the Association Council, product by product and on a reciprocal basis, the possibilities of granting each other further concessions.

CHAPTER 3
COMMON PROVISIONS
Article 18
1. No new quantitative restriction on imports and measures having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade between the Community and Jordan.
2. Quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect on trade between the Community and Jordan shall be abolished upon the entry into force of this Agreement.
3. The Community and Jordan shall not apply to exports between themselves either customs duties or charges having equivalent effect, or quantitative restrictions or measures having equivalent effect.

Article 19
1. In the event of specific rules being introduced as a result of the implementation of its agricultural policy or of any alteration of the current rules or in the event of any alteration or extension of the provisions relating to the implementation of its agricultural policy, the Party concerned may amend the arrangements resulting from the Agreement in respect of the products concerned.
2. In such cases the Party concerned shall inform the Association Committee. At the request of the other Party, the Association Committee shall meet to take due account of the interests of the other Party.
3. If the Community or Jordan, in applying paragraph 1, modifies the arrangements made by this Agreement for agricultural products, they shall accord imports originating in the other Party an advantage comparable to that provided for in this Agreement.
4. The application of this Article may be the subject of consultations in the Association Council.

Article 20
1. Products originating in Jordan shall not on importation into the Community be accorded a treatment more favourable than that which the Member States apply among themselves.
2. Application of the provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to Council Regulation (EEC) No 1911/91 of 26 June 1991 on the application of the provisions of Community law to the Canary Islands.

Article 21
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the products of one Party and like products originating in the territory of the other Party.
2. Products exported to the territory of one of the Parties may not benefit from repayment of indirect internal taxation in excess of the amount of indirect taxation imposed on them either directly or indirectly.

Article 22
1. The Agreement shall not preclude the maintenance or establishment of customs unions, free trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade, except in so far as they alter the trade arrangements provided for in the Agreement.
2. Consultation between the Community and Jordan shall take place within the Association Council concerning agreements establishing customs unions or free trade areas and, where appropriate, on other major issues related to their respective trade policy with third countries. In particular, in the event of a third country acceding to the Union, such consultation shall take place so as to ensure that account may be taken of the mutual interests of the Community and Jordan.

Article 23
If one of the Parties finds that dumping is taking place in trade with the other Party within the meaning of Article VI of the GATT, it may take appropriate measures against this practice in accordance with the Agreement on implementation of Article VI of the GATT and with its relevant internal legislation, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 26.

Article 24
Where any product is being imported in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause:
- serious injury to domestic producers of like or directly competitive products in all or part of the territory of one of the Parties, or
- serious disturbances in any sector of the economy,
the Party concerned may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 26.

Article 25
Where compliance with the provisions of Article 18(3) leads to:
(i) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party maintains, for the product concerned, quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures having equivalent effect; or
(ii) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Party,
and where the situations above referred to give rise, or are likely to give rise to major difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 26. The measures shall be non-discriminatory and be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.

Article 26
1. In the event of the Community or Jordan subjecting imports of products liable to give rise to the difficulties referred to in Article 24 to an administrative procedure, the purpose of which is to provide rapid information on the trend of trade flows, it shall inform the other Party.
2. In the cases specified in Articles 23, 24 and 25, before taking the measures provided for therein, or, as soon as possible in cases to which paragraph 3(d) applies, the Party in question shall supply the Association Committee with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties.
In the selection of appropriate measures, priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the Agreement.
The safeguard measures shall be notified immediately to the Association Committee and shall be the subject of periodic consultations within the Committee, particularly with a view to their abolition as soon as circumstances permit.
3. For the implementation of paragraph 2, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) as regards Article 23, the exporting Party shall be informed of the dumping case as soon as the authorities of the importing Party have initiated an investigation. Where no end has been put to the dumping within the meaning of Article VI of GATT or no other satisfactory solution has been reached within 30 days of the notification being made, the importing Party may adopt the appropriate measures;
(b) as regards Article 24, the difficulties arising from the situation referred to in that Article shall be referred for examination to the Association Committee, which may take any decision needed to put an end to such difficulties.
If the Association Committee or the exporting Party has not taken a decision putting an end to the difficulties or no other satisfactory solution has been reached within 30 days of the matter being referred, the importing Party may adopt the appropriate measures to remedy the problem. These measures must not exceed the scope of what is necessary to remedy the difficulties which have arisen;
(c) as regards Article 25, the difficulties arising from the situations referred to in that Article shall be referred for examination to the Association Committee.
The Association Committee may take any decision needed to put an end to the difficulties. If it has not taken such a decision within 30 days of the matter being referred to it, the exporting Party may apply appropriate measures on the exportation of the product concerned;
(d) where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior information or examination, as the case may be, impossible, the Party concerned may, in the situations specified in Articles 23, 24 and 25, apply forthwith such precautionary measures as are strictly necessary to remedy the situation, and shall inform the other Party immediately.

Article 27
Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; or the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property or regulations concerning gold and silver. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.

Article 28
The concept of "originating products" for the application of the provisions of this title and the methods of administrative cooperation relating to them are set out in Protocol 3.

Article 29
The Combined Nomenclature shall be used for the classification of goods in trade between the Parties.

TITLE III
RIGHT OF ESTABLISHMENT AND SERVICES
CHAPTER 1
RIGHT OF ESTABLISHMENT
Article 30
1. (a) The Community and its Member States shall grant for the establishment of Jordanian companies treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like companies of any third country.
(b) Without prejudice to the reservations listed in Annex V, the Community and its Member States shall grant to subsidiaries of Jordanian companies established in a Member State treatment no less favourable than that accorded to any like Community company, in respect of their operations.
(c) The Community and its Member States shall grant to branches of Jordanian companies, established in a Member State, treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like branches of companies of any third country, in respect of their operations.
2. (a) Without prejudice to the reservations listed in Annex VI, Jordan shall grant for the establishment of Community companies in its territory treatment no less favourable than that accorded to its own companies or to companies of any third country, whichever is the better.
(b) Jordan shall grant to subsidiaries and branches of Community companies, established in its territory, in respect of their operations, treatment no less favourable than that accorded to its own companies or branches, or to Jordanian subsidiaries or branches of companies of any third country, whichever is the better.
3. The provisions of paragraphs 1(b) and 2(b) cannot be used so as to circumvent a Party's legislation and regulations applicable to access to specific sectors or activities by subsidiaries or branches of companies of the other Party established in the territory of such first Party.
The treatment referred to in paragraphs 1(b), 1(c) and 2(b) shall benefit companies, subsidiaries, and branches established in the Community and Jordan respectively at the date of entry into force of this Agreement and companies, subsidiaries and branches established after that date once they are established.

Article 31
1. The provisions of Article 30 shall not apply to air transport, inland waterways transport and maritime transport.
2. However, in respect of activities undertaken by shipping agencies for the provision of international maritime transport services, including intermodal activities involving a sea leg, each Party shall permit to the companies of the other Party their commercial presence in its territory in the form of subsidiaries or branches, under conditions of establishment and operation no less favourable than those accorded to its own companies or to subsidiaries or branches of companies of any third country whichever are the better. Such activities include, but are not limited to:
(a) marketing and sales of maritime transport and related services through direct contact with customers, from quotation to invoicing, whether these services are operated or offered by the service supplier itself or by service suppliers with which the service seller has established standing business arrangements;
(b) purchase and use, on their own account or on behalf of their customer (and the resale to their customers) of any transport and related services, including inward transport services by any mode, particularly inland waterways, road and rail, necessary for the supply of an integrated service;
(c) preparation of documentation concerning transport documents, customs documents, or other documents related to the origin and character of the goods transported;
(d) provision of business information of any means, including computerised information systems and electronic data interchange (subject to any non-discriminatory restrictions concerning telecommunications);
(e) setting up of any business arrangement, including participation in the company's stock and the appointment of personnel recruited locally (or, in the case of foreign personnel, subject to the relevant provisions of this Agreement), with any locally established shipping agency;
(f) acting on behalf of the companies, organising the call of the ship or taking over cargoes when required.

Article 32
For the purpose of this Agreement:
(a) a "Community company" or "Jordanian company" respectively shall mean a company set up in accordance with the laws of a Member State or of Jordan respectively and having its registered office or central administration or principal place of business in the territory of the Community or Jordan respectively.
However, should the company, set up in accordance with the laws of a Member State or Jordan respectively, have only its registered office in the territory of the Community or Jordan respectively, the company shall be considered a Community or Jordanian company respectively if its operations possess a real and continuous link with the economy of one of the Member States or Jordan respectively;
(b) "subsidiary" of a company shall mean a company which is controlled by the first company;
(c) "branch" of a company shall mean a place of business not having legal personality which has the appearance of permanency, such as the extension of a parent body, has a management and is materially equipped to negotiate business with third parties so that the latter, although knowing that there will if necessary be a legal link with the parent body, the head office of which is abroad, do not have to deal directly with such parent body but may transact business at the place of business constituting the extension;
(d) "establishment" shall mean the right of Community or Jordanian companies as referred to in point (a) to take up economic activities by means of the setting up of subsidiaries and branches in Jordan or in the Community respectively;
(e) "operation" shall mean the pursuit of economic activities;
(f) "economic activities" shall mean activities of an industrial, commercial and professional character;
(g) "national of a Member State or of Jordan" shall mean a physical person who is a national of one of the Member States or of Jordan respectively;
(h) with regard to international maritime transport, including intermodal operations involving a sea leg, nationals of the Member States or of Jordan established outside the Community or Jordan respectively, and shipping companies established outside the Community or Jordan and controlled by nationals of a Member State or Jordanian nationals respectively, shall also be beneficiaries of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 2 if their vessels are registered in that Member State or in Jordan respectively in accordance with their respective legislation.

Article 33
1. The Parties shall use their best endeavours to avoid taking any measures or actions which render the conditions for the establishment and operation of each other's companies more restrictive than the situation existing on the day preceding the date of signature of the Agreement.
2. The provisions of this Article are without prejudice to those of Article 44. The situations covered by Article 44 shall be solely governed by its provisions to the exclusion of any other.

Article 34
1. A Community company or Jordanian company established in the territory of Jordan or the Community respectively shall be entitled to employ, or have employed by one of its subsidiaries or branches, in accordance with the legislation in force in the host country of establishment, in the territory of Jordan and the Community respectively, employees who are nationals of Community Member States and Jordan respectively, provided that such employees are key personnel as defined in paragraph 2, and that they are employed exclusively by such companies, subsidiaries or branches. The residence and work permits of such employees shall only cover the period of such employment.
2. Key personnel of the abovementioned companies herein referred to as "organisations" are "intra-corporate transferees" as defined in (c) in the following categories, provided that the organisation is a legal person and that the persons concerned have been employed by it or have been partners in it (other than as majority shareholders), for at least the year immediately preceding such movement:
(a) persons working in a senior position with an organisation, who primarily direct the management of the establishment, receiving general supervision or direction principally from the board of directors or stockholders of the business or their equivalent, including:
- directing the establishment or a department or subdivision of the establishment,
- supervising and controlling the work of other supervisory, professional or managerial employees,
- having the authority personally to recruit and dismiss or recommend recruiting, dismissing or other personnel actions;
(b) persons working within an organisation who possess uncommon knowledge essential to the establishment's service, research equipment, techniques or management. The assessment of such knowledge may reflect, apart from knowledge specific to the establishment, a high level of qualification referring to a type of work or trade requiring specific technical knowledge, including membership of an accredited profession;
(c) an "intra-corporate transferee" is defined as a natural person working within an organisation in the territory of a Party, and being temporarily transferred in the context of pursuit of economic activities in the territory of the other Party; the organisation concerned must have its principal place of business in the territory of a Party and the transfer be to an establishment (branch, subsidiary) of that organisation, effectively pursuing like economic activities in the territory of the other Party.
3. The entry into and the temporary presence within the respective territories of Jordan and the Community of nationals of the Member States or of Jordan respectively, shall be permitted, when these representatives of companies are persons working in a senior position, as defined in paragraph 2(a), within a company, and are responsible for the establishment of a Jordanian or a Community company, in the Community or Jordan respectively, when:
- those representatives are not engaged in making direct sales or supplying services, and
- the company has no other representative, office, branch or subsidiary in a Community Member State or Jordan respectively.

Article 35
In order to make it easier for Community nationals and Jordanian nationals to take up and pursue regulated professional activities in Jordan and the Community respectively, the Association Council shall examine what steps are necessary to be taken to provide for the mutual recognition of qualifications.

Article 36
The provisions of Article 30 do not preclude the application by a Party of particular rules concerning the establishment and operation in its territory of branches of companies of another Party not incorporated in the territory of the first Party, which are justified by legal or technical differences between such branches as compared to branches of companies incorporated in its territory or, as regards financial services, for prudential reasons. The difference in treatment shall not go beyond what is strictly necessary as a result of such legal or technical differences or, as regards financial services, for prudential reasons.

CHAPTER 2
CROSS-BORDER SUPPLY OF SERVICES
Article 37
1. The Parties shall use their best endeavours to allow progressively the supply of services by Community or Jordanian companies which are established in the territory of a Party other than that of the person for whom the services are intended, taking into account the development of the services sectors in the Parties.
2. The Association Council shall make recommendations for the implementation of the objective mentioned in paragraph 1.

Article 38
With a view to assuring a coordinated development of transport between the Parties, adapted to their commercial needs, the conditions of mutual market access and provision of services in transport by road, rail and inland waterways and, if applicable, in air transport may be dealt with by specific agreements where appropriate negotiated between the Parties after the entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 39
1. With regard to maritime transport the Parties undertake to apply effectively the principle of unrestricted access to the international market and traffic on a commercial basis.
(a) The above provision does not prejudice the rights and obligations arising under the United Nations Convention on a Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences, as applicable to a Party to this Agreement. Non-conference lines shall be free to operate in competition with a conference line as long as they adhere to the principle of fair competition on a commercial basis.
(b) The Parties affirm their commitment to a freely competitive environment as being an essential feature of the dry and liquid bulk trade.
2. In applying the principles of paragraph 1, the Parties shall:
(a) not introduce cargo-sharing arrangements in future bilateral Agreements with third countries concerning dry and liquid bulk and liner trade. However, this does not exclude the possibility of such arrangements concerning liner cargo in those exceptional circumstances where liner shipping companies from one or other Party to this Agreement would not otherwise have an effective opportunity to ply for trade to and from the third country concerned;
(b) abolish, upon entry into force of this Agreement, all unilateral measures, administrative, technical and other obstacles which could constitute a disguised restriction or have discriminatory effects on the free supply of services in international maritime transport.
Each Party shall grant, inter alia, a treatment no less favourable than that accorded to its own ships, for the ships used for the transport of goods, passengers or both, and operated by nationals or companies of the other Party, with respect to access to ports, the use of infrastructure and auxiliary maritime services of those ports, as well as related fees and charges, customs facilities and the assignment of berths and facilities for loading and unloading.

CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 40
1. The Parties undertake to consider development of this title with a view to the establishment of an "economic integration agreement" as defined in Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
2. The objective provided for in paragraph 1 shall be subject to a first examination by the Association Council at the latest five years after the entry into force of this Agreement.
3. The Association Council shall, when making such examination, take into account progress made in the approximation of laws between the Parties in the relevant activities.

Article 41
1. The provisions of this Title shall be applied subject to limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health.
2. They shall not apply to activities which in the territory of either Party are connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of official authority.

Article 42
For the purpose of this title, nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties from applying their laws and regulations regarding entry and stay, work, labour conditions and establishment of natural persons and supply of services, provided that, in so doing, they do not apply them in a manner as to nullify or impair the benefits accruing to any Party under the terms of a specific provision of the Agreement. This provision does not prejudice the application of Article 41.

Article 43
Companies which are controlled and exclusively owned by Jordanian companies and Community companies jointly shall also be beneficiaries of the provisions of this title.

Article 44
Treatment granted by either Party to the other hereunder shall, as from the day one month prior to the date of entry into force of the relevant obligations of the GATS, in respect of sectors or measures covered by the GATS, in no case be more favourable than that accorded by such first Party under the provisions of the GATS and this in respect of each service sector, subsector and mode of supply.

Article 45
For the purpose of this title, no account shall be taken of treatment accorded by the Community, its Member States or Jordan pursuant to commitments entered into in economic integration agreements in accordance with the principles of Article V of the GATS.

Article 46
1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Agreement, a Party shall not be prevented from taking measures for prudential reasons, including for the protection of investors, depositors, policy holders or persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial service supplier, or to ensure the integrity and stability of the financial system. Where such measures do not conform with the provisions of the Agreement, they shall not be used as a means of avoiding the obligations of a Party under the Agreement.
2. Nothing in the Agreement shall be construed to require a Party to disclose information relating to the affairs and accounts of individual customers or any confidential or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.

Article 47
The provisions of this Agreement shall not prejudice the application by each Party of any measures necessary to prevent the circumvention of its measures concerning third country access to its market, through the provisions of this Agreement.

TITLE IV
PAYMENTS, CAPITAL MOVEMENTS AND OTHER ECONOMIC MATTERS
CHAPTER 1
PAYMENTS AND CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
Article 48
Subject to the provisions of Articles 51 and 52, current payments connected with the movement of goods, persons, services and capital within the framework of this Agreement shall be free of restrictions.

Article 49
1. Within the framework of the provisions of this Agreement, subject to the provisions of Articles 50 and 51, and without prejudice to Annex VI referred to in Article 30(2)(a), there shall be no restrictions on the movement of capital from the Community to Jordan and on the movement of capital involving direct investment from Jordan to the Community.
2. The outflow of Jordanian capital to the Community, other than direct investment, shall be subject to the prevailing laws in Jordan.
3. The Parties will hold consultations with a view to achieving complete liberalisation of capital movements as soon as conditions are met.

Article 50
Subject to other provisions in this Agreement and other international obligations of the Community and Jordan, the provisions of Article 49 shall be without prejudice to the application of any restrictions which exist between them on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, in respect of the movement of capital between them involving direct investment, including real estate, and establishment.
However, the transfer abroad of investments made in Jordan by Community residents or in the Community by Jordanian residents and of any profits stemming therefrom shall not be affected.

Article 51
Where, in exceptional circumstances, movements of capital between the Community and Jordan cause, or threaten to cause, serious difficulties for the operation of exchange-rate policy or monetary policy in the Community or Jordan, the Community or Jordan respectively may, in conformity with the conditions laid down within the framework of the GATS and with Articles VIII and XIV of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, take safeguard measures with regard to movements of capital between the Community and Jordan for a period not exceeding six months if such measures are strictly necessary.

Article 52
Where one or more Member States of the Community or Jordan face or risk facing serious difficulties concerning balance of payments, the Community and Jordan respectively may, in conformity with the conditions laid down within the framework of the GATT and with Articles VIII and XIV of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, take restrictive measures with regard to current payments if such measures are strictly necessary. The Community or Jordan, as appropriate, shall inform the other Party immediately thereof and shall provide as soon as possible a timetable for the removal of such measures.

CHAPTER 2
COMPETITION AND OTHER ECONOMIC MATTERS
Article 53
1. The following are incompatible with the proper functioning of the Agreement, in so far as they may affect trade between the Community and Jordan:
(a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition;
(b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the Community or Jordan as a whole or in a substantial part thereof;
(c) any public aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods.
2. Any practice contrary to this Article shall be assessed on the basis of the criteria resulting from the application of the rules contained in Articles 85, 86 and 92 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, and, for products covered by the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community, by those contained in Articles 65 and 66 of that Treaty and the Community rules on State aids, including secondary legislation.
3. The Association Council shall, within five years of the entry into force of the Agreement, adopt by decision the necessary rules for the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2.
Until these rules are adopted, the provisions of the Agreement on interpretation and application of Articles VI, XVI and XXIII of the GATT shall be applied as the rules for the implementation of paragraph 1(c) and the relevant parts of paragraph 2.
4. (a) For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraph 1(c), the Parties recognise that, during the first five years of the entry into force of the Agreement, any public aid granted by Jordan to undertakings shall be assessed taking into account the fact that Jordan shall be regarded as an area identical to those areas of the Community where the standard of living is abnormally low or where there is serious underemployment, as described in Article 92(3)(a) of the Treaty establishing the European Community.
The Association Council shall, taking into account the economic situation of Jordan, decide whether that period should be extended for further periods of five years.
(b) Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of public aid, inter alia, by reporting annually to the other Party on the total amount and the distribution of the aid given and by providing, upon request, information on aid schemes. Upon request by one Party, the other Party shall provide information on particular individual cases of public aid.
5. With regard to products referred to in Title II, Chapter 2:
- paragraph 1(c) does not apply,
- any practices contrary to paragraph 1(a) shall be assessed according to the criteria established by the Community on the basis of Articles 42 and 43 of the Treaty establishing the European Community and in particular those established in Council Regulation No 26/62.
6. If the Community or Jordan considers that a particular practice is incompatible with the terms of paragraph 1, and:
- is not adequately dealt with under the implementing rules referred to in paragraph 3, or
- in the absence of such rules, and if such practice causes or threatens to cause serious prejudice to the interest of the other Party or material injury to its domestic industry, including its services industry,
it may take appropriate measures after consultation within the Association Committee or after 30 working days following referral for such consultation.
With reference to practices incompatible with paragraph 1(c) of this Article, such appropriate measures, when the GATT is applicable to them, may only be adopted in accordance with the procedures and under the conditions laid down by the GATT or by any other relevant instrument negotiated under its auspices and applicable to the Parties.
7. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary adopted in conformity with paragraph 3, the Parties shall exchange information taking into account the limitations imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy.

Article 54
The Member States and Jordan shall progressively adjust, without prejudice to their commitments respectively taken or to be taken under the GATT, any State monopolies of a commercial character, so as to ensure that, by the end of the fifth year following the entry into force of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed exists between nationals of the Member States and Jordan. The Association Committee will be informed about the measures adopted to implement this objective.

Article 55
With regard to public enterprises and enterprises to which special or exclusive rights have been granted, the Association Council shall ensure that as from the fifth year following the date of entry into force of this Agreement there is neither enacted nor maintained any measure distorting trade between the Community and Jordan to an extent contrary to the Parties' interests. This provision should not obstruct the performance in law or in fact of the particular tasks assigned to these enterprises.

Article 56
1. Pursuant to the provisions of this Article and of Annex VII, the Parties shall grant and ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights in accordance with the highest international standards, including effective means of enforcing such rights.
2. The implementation of this Article and of Annex VII shall be regularly reviewed by the Parties. If problems in the area of intellectual, industrial and commercial property affecting trading conditions were to occur, urgent consultation shall be undertaken, at the request of either Party, with a view to reaching mutually satisfactory solutions.

Article 57
The Parties shall aim to reduce differences in standardisation and conformity assessment. To this end the Parties shall conclude where appropriate agreements on mutual recognition in the field of conformity assessment.

Article 58
The Parties agree on the objective of a gradual liberalisation of public procurement. The Association Council will hold consultations on the implementation of this objective.

TITLE V
ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Article 59
Objectives
1. The Parties undertake to intensify economic cooperation in their mutual interest and in accordance with the overall objectives of the Agreement.
2. The aim of economic cooperation shall be to support Jordan's own efforts to achieve sustainable economic and social development.

Article 60
Scope
1. Cooperation shall focus primarily on sectors suffering from internal difficulties or affected by the overall process of liberalisation of the Jordanian economy, and in particular by the liberalisation of trade between Jordan and the Community.
2. Similarly, cooperation shall focus on areas likely to bring the economies of the Community and Jordan closer together, particularly those which will generate growth and employment.
3. The Parties will encourage economic cooperation between Jordan and other countries of the region.
4. Conservation of the environment and ecological balance shall be taken into account in the implementation of the various sectors of economic cooperation to which it is relevant.
5. The Parties may agree to extend economic cooperation to other sectors not covered by the provisions of this Title.

Article 61
Methods and modalities
Economic cooperation shall be implemented in particular by:
(a) a regular economic dialogue between the Parties, which covers all areas of macroeconomic policy;
(b) regular exchange of information and ideas in every sector of cooperation including meetings of officials and experts;
(c) transfer of advice, expertise and training;
(d) implementation of joint actions such as seminars and workshops;
(e) technical, administrative and regulatory assistance;
(f) encouragement of joint ventures.

Article 62
Regional cooperation
The Parties will encourage operations having a regional impact or associating other countries of the region, with a view to promoting regional cooperation.
Such operations may include:
- trade at intra-regional level,
- environmental issues,
- development of economic infrastructures,
- scientific and technological research,
- cultural matters,
- customs matters,

Article 63
Education and training
The Parties shall cooperate with the objective of identifying and employing the most effective means of improving significantly the education and vocational training situation, in particular with regard to public and private enterprises, trade-related services, public administrations and authorities, technical agencies, standardisation and certification bodies and other relevant organisations. In this context, vocational training for industrial restructuring will receive special attention.
Cooperation shall also encourage the establishment of links between specialised bodies in the Community and in Jordan and shall promote the exchange of information and experiences and the pooling of technical resources.

Article 64
Scientific and technological cooperation
Cooperation has the objective of:
(a) encouraging the establishment of durable links between the scientific communities of the Parties, notably through:
- the access of Jordan to Community R & D programmes, in conformity with the existing provisions concerning the participation of third countries,
- the participation of Jordan in the networks of decentralised cooperation,
- the promotion of synergy between training and research;
(b) strengthening the research capacity of Jordan;
(c) stimulating technological innovation, transfer of new technologies, and dissemination of know-how, in particular with a view to accelerating the adjustment of Jordanian industrial capability.

Article 65
Environment
1. Cooperation is aimed at preventing deterioration of the environment, controlling pollution and ensuring the rational use of natural resources, with a view to ensuring sustainable development and promoting regional environmental projects.
2. Cooperation shall focus, in particular, on:
- desertification,
- quality of sea water and the control and prevention of marine pollution,
- water resource management,
- appropriate use of energy,
- waste management,
- the impact of industrial development on the environment in general and the safety of industrial plant in particular,
- the impact of agriculture on soil and water quality,
- environmental education and awareness,
- use of advanced tools of environment management, environmental monitoring methods and surveillance, including in particular the use of the Environmental Information System (EIS) and environmental impact assessment techniques,
- salinisation.

Article 66
Industrial cooperation
Cooperation shall promote and encourage in particular:
- industrial cooperation between economic operators in the Community and in Jordan, including access for Jordan to the Community's networks for the rapprochement of businesses and to networks created in the context of decentralised cooperation,
- the modernisation and restructuring of Jordanian industry,
- the establishment and promotion of an environment favourable to the development of private enterprise, in order to stimulate the growth and the diversification of industrial production,
- cooperation between small and medium-sized enterprises in the Community and in Jordan,
- technology transfer, innovation and R & D,
- diversification of industrial output in Jordan,
- the enhancement of human resources,
- improvement of access to investment finance,
- stimulation of innovation,
- improvement of information support services.

Article 67
Investments and promotion of investments
The objective of cooperation will be the creation of a favourable and stable environment for investment in Jordan. The cooperation will entail the development of:
- harmonised and simplified administrative procedures; co-investment machinery, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises of both Parties; and information channels and means of identifying investment opportunities,
- a legal environment conducive to investment between the two Parties, where appropriate through the conclusion by the Member States and Jordan of investment protection agreements and agreements to prevent double taxation,
- access to the capital market for the financing of productive investments,
- joint ventures between Jordanian and Community business.

Article 68
Standardisation and conformity assessment
Cooperation in this field will be aimed in particular at:
(a) increasing the application of Community rules in the field of standardisation, metrology, quality standards, and recognition of conformity;
(b) upgrading the level of Jordanian conformity assessment bodies, with a view to the establishment, in due time and to the extent feasible, of agreements of mutual recognition of conformity assessment;
(c) developing structures and bodies for the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property, for standardisation and for setting quality standards.

Article 69
Approximation of laws
The Parties shall use their best endeavours to approximate their respective laws in order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement.

Article 70
Financial services
The Parties shall cooperate with a view to the approximation of their standards and rules, in particular:
(a) to strengthen and restructure the financial sector in Jordan;
(b) to improve accounting and supervisory and regulatory systems of banking, insurance and other financial sectors in Jordan.

Article 71
Agriculture
The Parties shall focus cooperation in particular on:
- support for policies implemented by them to diversify production,
- promotion of environment-friendly agriculture,
- closer relations between businesses, groups and organisations representing trades and professions in Jordan and in the Community on a voluntary basis,
- technical assistance and training,
- harmonisation of phytosanitary and veterinary standards,
- integrated rural development, including improvement in basic services and development of associated economic activities,
- cooperation among rural regions, exchange of experience and know-how concerning rural development.

Article 72
Transport
Cooperation is aimed at:
- the restructuring and modernisation of road, port and airport infrastructures linked to the main trans-European communication routes of common interest,
- the establishment and enforcement of operating standards comparable to those prevailing in the Community,
- the upgrading of technical equipment to bring it up to Community standards for road/rail transport, container traffic and transhipment,
- the gradual easing of transit requirements,
- the improvement of management of airports, railways and air traffic control, including cooperation between the relevant national bodies.

Article 73
Information infrastructures and telecommunications
Cooperation shall focus on:
(a) telecommunications in general;
(b) standardisation, conformity testing and certification for information technology and telecommunications;
(c) dissemination of new information technologies, particularly in relation to networks and the interconnection of networks (ISDN (integrated services digital networks) and EDI (electronic data interchange));
(d) stimulating research on and development of new communication and information technology facilities to develop the market in equipment, services and applications related to information technology and to communications, services and installations.

Article 74
Energy
The priority areas of cooperation will be:
- the promotion of renewable energies and indigenous energy sources,
- the promotion of energy-saving and energy efficiency,
- applied research into databank networks in the economic and social sectors, linking Community and Jordanian operators in particular,
- support for the modernisation and development of energy networks and for their link-up to Community networks.
Cooperation will also focus on facilitating transit of gas, oil and electricity.

Article 75
Tourism
Priorities for cooperation in this sphere shall be:
- improving the knowledge of the tourist industry and ensuring greater consistency of policies affecting tourism,
- promoting a good seasonal spread of tourism,
- promoting cooperation between regions and cities of neighbouring countries,
- improving information for tourists and the protection of their interests,
- highlighting the importance of the cultural heritage for tourism,
- ensuring that the interaction between tourism and the environment is suitably maintained,
- making tourism more competitive through support for increased professionalism, in particular with regard to hotel management,
- exchanging information on planned tourism development and tourism marketing projects, tourism shows, exhibitions, conventions and publications.

Article 76
Customs
1. The Parties commit themselves to developing customs cooperation to ensure that the provisions on trade are observed. Cooperation will focus in particular on:
(a) the simplification of controls and procedures concerning the customs clearance of goods;
(b) the use of the single administrative document and a system to link up the Community's and Jordan's transit arrangements.
2. Without prejudice to other forms of cooperation envisaged in this Agreement, notably for the fight against drugs and money laundering, the Parties' administrations will provide mutual assistance in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 4.

Article 77
Cooperation on statistics
The main objective of cooperation in this field will be to harmonise methodology in order to create a reliable basis for handling statistics on trade, population, migration and generally all the fields which are covered by this Agreement and lend themselves to the establishment of statistics.

Article 78
Money laundering
1. The Parties shall cooperate with a view in particular to preventing the use of their financial systems to launder the proceeds arising from criminal activities in general and drug trafficking in particular.
2. Cooperation in this field shall include, in particular, technical and administrative assistance aimed at establishing standards relating to the fight against money laundering, equivalent to those adopted by the Community and other relevant international bodies, in particular the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).

Article 79
Fight against drugs
1. The Parties shall cooperate with a view in particular to:
- improving the effectiveness of policies and measures to counter the supply of, and illicit trafficking in, narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and the reduction of the abuse of these products,
- encouraging a joint approach to reducing the illicit consumption thereof.
2. The Parties shall determine together, in accordance with their respective legislation, the strategies and cooperation methods appropriate for attaining these objectives. Their operations, other than joint operations, shall form the subject of consultations and close coordination.
The relevant public and private sector bodies, in accordance with their own powers, working with the competent bodies of Jordan, the Community and its Member States, may take part in these operations.
3. Cooperation shall take the form of exchanges of information and, where appropriate, joint activities on:
- establishment or extension of social and health institutions and information centres for the treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts,
- implementation of projects in the areas of prevention, training and epidemiological research,
- establishment of standards relating to the prevention of the diversion of precursors and other essential substances used for the illicit production of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, equivalent to those adopted by the Community and the international authorities concerned, notably by the Chemical Action Task Force (CATF).

TITLE VI
COOPERATION IN SOCIAL AND CULTURAL MATTERS
CHAPTER 1
SOCIAL DIALOGUE
Article 80
1. A regular dialogue shall be established between the Parties on all social issues of mutual interest.
2. This dialogue shall be used to seek ways and means to further progress as regards the movement of workers and the equal treatment and social integration of Jordanian and Community nationals legally residing in their host countries.
3. The dialogue shall focus on problems related to:
(a) migrant communities' living and working conditions;
(b) migration;
(c) illegal immigration and the conditions attaching to the repatriation of illegal immigrants under the legislation on residence and establishment in the host country;
(d) projects and programmes on equality of treatment for Jordanian and Community nationals, reciprocal awareness of cultures and civilizations, the development of tolerance and the elimination of discrimination.

Article 81
Social dialogue shall be conducted at the same level and following the same procedures as those provided for in Title I of this Agreement, which can be used as a framework for this dialogue.

CHAPTER 2
SOCIAL COOPERATION ACTIONS
Article 82
1. The Parties acknowledge the importance of social development which should go hand in hand with any economic development. They give particular priority to respect of basic social rights.
2. To consolidate social cooperation between the Parties, actions and programmes shall be undertaken on any issue of interest to them.
Priority shall be given to the following actions:
(a) reduction of migratory pressures through job creation and the development of training in areas with a high emigration rate;
(b) reintegration of repatriated illegal immigrants;
(c) promotion of the role of women in social and economic development, particularly through education and the media, in line with Jordanian policy in this area;
(d) development and consolidation of Jordanian family planning and mother and child protection programmes;
(e) improving the social security system;
(f) improving the healthcare system;
(g) improving living conditions in underprivileged, densely populated areas;
(h) implementation and financing of exchange and leisure programmes for mixed groups of young Jordanians and Europeans residing in the Member States, with a view to promoting mutual cultural understanding and tolerance.

Article 83
Cooperation projects may be coordinated with the Member States and the appropriate international organisations.

Article 84
A working party shall be set up by the Association Council by the end of the first year following entry into force of this Agreement. Its brief shall be to evaluate the implementation of the provisions of Chapters 1 and 2 on an ongoing basis.

CHAPTER 3
CULTURAL COOPERATION AND EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
Article 85
1. To foster mutual knowledge and understanding, and in line with projects that have already been developed along these lines, the Parties shall undertake, in a spirit of mutual cultural respect, to establish firm foundations for a continuing cultural dialogue and to promote long-term cultural cooperation in any appropriate field of activity.
2. The Parties shall, in identifying cooperation projects and programmes and joint activities, give special attention to young people, to self-expression and communication skills using written and audiovisual media, to heritage conservation issues and to the dissemination of culture.
3. The Parties agree that existing cultural cooperation programmes in the Community and the Member States can be extended to Jordan.
4. The Parties shall promote activities of mutual interest in the field of information and communications.

TITLE VII
FINANCIAL COOPERATION
Article 86
In order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement, a financial cooperation package shall be made available to Jordan in accordance with the appropriate procedures and the financial resources required.
These procedures shall be agreed by both Parties using the most appropriate instruments after the Agreement has entered into force.
In addition to the areas covered by Titles V and VI of the Agreement, financial cooperation shall focus on:
- promoting reforms designed to modernise the economy,
- upgrading economic infrastructure,
- promoting private investment and job-creating activities,
- responding to the economic repercussions for Jordan of the gradual introduction of a free trade area, notably by upgrading and restructuring industry,
- accompanying the policies implemented in the social sector.

Article 87
In the framework of the existing Community Financial Instruments aimed at supporting the structural adjustment programmes in the Mediterranean countries, and in close cooperation with the Jordanian authorities and other donors, particularly with other international financial institutions, the Community will examine suitable ways of supporting structural policies carried out by Jordan to restore financial equilibrium in the main financial aggregates and encourage the creation of an economic environment conducive to increased growth, while at the same time improving the social well-being of the population.

Article 88
In order to ensure that a coordinated approach is adopted to any exceptional macroeconomic and financial problems that might arise as a result of the implementation of this Agreement, the Parties shall use the regular economic dialogue provided for in Title V to give particular attention to monitoring trade and financial trends in relations between the Community and Jordan.

TITLE VIII
INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 89
An Association Council is hereby established which shall meet at ministerial level once a year and when circumstances require, at the initiative of its Chairman and in accordance with the conditions laid down in its Rules of Procedure.
It shall examine any major issues arising within the framework of this Agreement and any other bilateral or international issues of mutual interest.

Article 90
1. The Association Council shall consist of the members of the Council of the European Union and members of the Commission of the European Communities, on the one hand, and members of the Government of Jordan, on the other.
2. Members of the Association Council may arrange to be represented in accordance with the provisions laid down in its Rules of Procedure.
3. The Association Council shall establish its Rules of Procedure.
4. The Association Council shall be chaired in turn by a member of the Council of the European Union and a member of the Government of Jordan, in accordance with the provisions laid down in its Rules of Procedure.

Article 91
The Association Council shall, for the purpose of attaining the objectives of the Agreement, have the power to take decisions in the cases provided for therein.
The decisions taken shall be binding on the Parties which shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. The Association Council may also make appropriate recommendations.
It shall draw up its decisions and recommendations by agreement between the two Parties.

Article 92
1. Subject to the powers of the Council, an Association Committee is hereby established which shall be responsible for the implementation of the Agreement.
2. The Association Council may delegate to the Association Committee, in full or in part, any of its powers.

Article 93
1. The Association Committee, which shall meet at official level, shall consist of representatives of members of the Council of the European Union and of members of the Commission of the European Communities, on the one hand, and of representatives of the Government of Jordan, on the other.
2. The Association Committee shall establish its Rules of Procedure.
3. The Association Committee shall be chaired in turn by a representative of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union and by a representative of the Government of Jordan.

Article 94
1. The Association Committee shall have the power to take decisions for the management of the Agreement as well as in the areas in which the Council has delegated its powers to it.
2. It shall draw up its decisions by agreement between the two Parties. These decisions shall be binding on the Parties which shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken.

Article 95
The Association Council may decide to set up any working group or body necessary for the implementation of the Agreement.

Article 96
The Association Council shall take all appropriate measures to facilitate cooperation and contacts between the European Parliament and the Jordanian Parliament.

Article 97
1. Each of the Parties may refer to the Association Council any dispute relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement.
2. The Association Council may settle the dispute by means of a decision.
3. Each Party shall be bound to take the measures involved in carrying out the decision referred to in paragraph 2.
4. In the event of it not being possible to settle the dispute in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, either Party may notify the other of the appointment of an arbitrator; the other Party must then appoint a second arbitrator within two months. For the application of this procedure, the Community and the Member States shall be deemed to be one Party to the dispute.
The Association Council shall appoint a third arbitrator.
The arbitrators' decisions shall be taken by majority vote.
Each Party to the dispute must take the steps required to implement the decision of the arbitrators.

Article 98
Nothing in the Agreement shall prevent a Party from taking any measures:
(a) which it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests;
(b) which relate to the production of, or trade in, arms, munitions or war materials or to research, development or production indispensable for defence purposes, provided that such measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military purposes;
(c) which it considers essential to its own security in the event of serious internal disturbances affecting the maintenance of law and order, in time of war or serious international tension constituting threat of war or in order to carry out obligations it has accepted for the purpose of maintaining peace and international security.

Article 99
In the fields covered by this Agreement and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein:
- the arrangements applied by Jordan in respect of the Community shall not give rise to any discrimination between the Member States, their nationals or their companies or firms,
- the arrangements applied by the Community in respect of Jordan shall not give rise to discrimination between Jordanian nationals or its companies or firms.

Article 100
As regards direct taxation, nothing in the Agreement shall have the effect of:
- extending the fiscal advantages granted by either Party in any international agreement or arrangement by which it is bound,
- preventing the adoption or application by either Party of any measure aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion of taxes,
- opposing the right of either Party to apply the relevant provisions of its tax legislation to taxpayers who are not in identical situations, in particular as regards their place of residence.

Article 101
1. The Parties shall take any general or specific measures required to fulfil their obligations under the Agreement. They shall see to it that the objectives set out in the Agreement are attained.
2. If either Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation under the Agreement, it may take appropriate measures. Before so doing, except in cases of special urgency, it shall supply the Association Council with all relevant information required for a thorough examination of the situation with a view to seeking a solution acceptable to the Parties.
In the selection of measures priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the Agreement. These measures shall be notified immediately to the Association Council and shall be the subject of consultations within the Association Council if the other Party so requests.

Article 102
Protocols 1 to 4 and Annexes I to VII shall form an integral part of this Agreement. Declarations and Exchanges of Letters shall appear in the Final Act, which shall likewise form an integral part of this Agreement.

Article 103
For the purposes of this Agreement the term "Parties" shall mean, on the one part, the Community or the Member States, or the Community and the Member States, in accordance with their respective powers, and, on the other part, Jordan.

Article 104
The Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period.
Each of the Parties may denounce the Agreement by notifying the other Party. The Agreement shall cease to apply six months after the date of such notification.

Article 105
This Agreement shall apply, on the one hand, to the territories in which the Treaties establishing the European Community, and the European Coal and Steel Community are applied and under the conditions laid down in those Treaties and, on the other hand, to the territory of Jordan.

Article 106
This Agreement, drawn up in duplicate in the Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish and Arabic languages, each of these texts being equally authentic, shall be deposited with the General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union.

Article 107
1. This Agreement will be approved by the Parties in accordance with their own procedures.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date on which the Parties notify each other that the procedures referred to in the first paragraph have been completed.
2. Upon its entry into force this Agreement shall replace the Cooperation Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, and the Agreement between the Member States of the European Coal and Steel Community and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, signed in Brussels on 18 January 1977.



Hecho en Bruselas, el veinticuatro de noviembre de mil novecientos noventa y siete./Udfærdiget i Bruxelles, den fireogtyvende november nitten hundrede og sygoghalvfems./Geschehen zu Brüssel am vierundzwanzigsten November neunzehnhundertsiebenundneunzig./Έγινε στις Βρυξέλλες, στις είκοσι τέσσερις Νοεμβρίου χίλια εννιακόσια ενενήντα επτά./Done at Brussels on the twenty-fourth day of November in the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-seven./Fait à Bruxelles, le vingt-quatre novembre mil neuf cent quatre-vingt-dix-sept./Fatto a Bruxelles, addì ventiquattro novembre millenovecentonovantasette./Gedaan te Brussel, de vierentwintigste november negentienhonderd zevenennegentig./Feito em Bruxelas, em vinte e quatro de Novembro de mil novecentos e noventa e sete./Tehty Brysselissä kahdentenakymmenentenäneljäntenä päivänä marraskuuta vuonna tuhatyhdeksänsataayhdeksänkymmentäseitsemän./Som skedde i Bryssel den tjugofjärde november nittonhundranittiosju./
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.002401.TIF">

Pour le Royaume de Belgique/Voor het Koninkrijk België/Für das Königreich Belgien
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.002501.TIF">
Cette signature engage également la Communauté française, la Communauté flamande, la Communauté germanophone, la Région wallonne, la Région flamande et la Région de Bruxelles-Capitale.
Deze handtekening verbindt eveneens de Vlaamse Gemeenschap, de Franse Gemeenschap, de Duitstalige Gemeenschap, het Vlaamse Gewest, het Waalse Gewest en het Brusselse Hoofdstedelijke Gewest.
Diese Unterschrift verbindet zugleich die Deutschsprachige Gemeinschaft, die Flämische Gemeinschaft, die Französische Gemeinschaft, die Wallonische Region, die Flämische Region und die Region Brüssel-Hauptstadt.

På Kongeriget Danmarks vegne
ANNEX TEXT: 

LIST OF ANNEXES


>TABLE>


ANNEX I

List of products referred to in Article 10(1)
>TABLE>


ANNEX II

List of products referred to in Articles 10(2) and 11(2)
>TABLE>


ANNEX III

Lists of industrial products originating in the Community to which is applicable, on importation into Jordan, the schedule for tariff dismantling referred to in article 11(3) and (4)
ANNEX V

Community reservations list referred to in Article 30(1)(b)
Mining
In some Member States, a concession may be required for mining and mineral rights for non-EC-controlled companies.
Fishing
Access to and use of the biological resources and fishing grounds situated in the maritime waters coming under the sovereignty or within the jurisdiction of Member States of the Community is restricted to fishing vessels flying the flag of a Community territory unless otherwise provided for.
Real estate purchase
In some Member States, the purchase of real estate is subject to limitations.
Audiovisual services including radio
National treatment concerning production and distribution, including broadcasting and other forms of transmission to the public, may be reserved to audiovisual works meeting certain origin criteria.
Telecommunications services including mobile and satellite services
Reserved services
In some Member States market access concerning complementary services and infrastructures is restricted.
Agriculture
In some Member States national treatment is not applicable to non-EC-controlled companies which wish to undertake an agricultural enterprise. The acquisition of vineyards by non-EC-controlled companies is subject to notification, or, as necessary, authorisation.
News agency services
In some Member States limitations exist on foreign participation in publishing companies and broadcasting companies.


ANNEX VI

Jordanian reservations to national treatment referred to in Article 30(2)(a)
With the aim of improving the national treatment conditions in all sectors, the above list of reservations is subject to review within two years after the entry into force of the Agreement.
- Non-Jordanian investors may own no more than 50 % of any project or economic activity in the following sectors:
(a) construction contracting;
(b) trade and trade services;
(c) mining;
- Non-Jordanian investors may purchase securities listed on the Amman financial market in Jordanian currency, provided that the funds are transferred from a convertible foreign currency.
- Non-Jordanian ownership in a public share-holding company may not exceed 50 % unless the percentage of non-Jordanian ownership was more than 50 % at the time of closing of subscription, in which case the maximum limit on non-Jordanian ownership shall be fixed at that percentage.
- The minimum amount of non-Jordanian investment in any project shall be JOD 100000 (one hundred thousand Jordanian dinars), except for investment in the Amman financial market, where the minimum investment amount shall be JOD 1000 (one thousand Jordanian dinars).
The purchase, sale or rental of immovable assets by a non-Jordanian is subject to the prior consent of the Cabinet of Ministers.


ANNEX VII

Intellectual, industrial and commercial property referred to in Article 56
1. By the end of the fifth year after the entry into force of the Agreement, Jordan shall accede to the following multilateral conventions on property rights:
- Berne Convention for the protection of literary and artistic works (Paris Act 1971),
- the Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations (Rome, 1961),
- Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks (Geneva Act 1977 and amended in 1979),
- Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks (Stockholm Act 1967 and amended in 1979),
- Protocol relating to the Madrid Agreement concerning the International Registration of Marks (Madrid 1989),
- Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of Micro-organisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure (1977, modified in 1980),
- the International Convention for Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) (Geneva Act 1991).
2. Not later than the seventh year after the entry into force of the Agreement, Jordan shall accede to the following multilateral conventions:
- Patent Cooperation Treaty (Washington 1970, amended in 1979 and modified in 1984).
3. Jordan undertakes to provide for adequate and effective protection of patents for chemicals and pharmaceuticals in line with Articles 27 to 34 of the WTO Agreement on trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights, by the end of the third year from the entry into force of this Agreement or from its accession to the WTO, whichever is the earlier.
4. The Association Council may decide that paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall apply to other multilateral conventions in this field.
5. The Parties confirm the importance they attach to the obligations arising from the following multilateral convention:
- the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (Stockholm Act 1967, amended in 1979).


LIST OF PROTOCOLS


>TABLE>


PROTOCOL 1
concerning the arrangements applicable to the importation into the Community of agricultural products originating in Jordan

1. The products listed in the Annex, originating in Jordan, shall be admitted for importation into the Community, according to the conditions contained herein and in the Annex.
2. (a) Customs duties shall be either eliminated or reduced as indicated in column A.
(b) For certain products, for which the Common Customs Tariff provides for the application of an ad valorem duty and a specific duty, the rates of reduction, indicated in columns A and C, shall apply only to the ad valorem duty.
3. For certain products, customs duties shall be eliminated within the limit of the tariff quotas listed in column B for each of them. For the quantities imported in excess of the quotas, the common customs duties shall, according to the product concerned, be applied in full or reduced, as indicated in column C.
4. For some products indicated in paragraph 3 and in column D, the tariff quotas shall be increased from the entry into force of this Agreement on the basis of four equal annual instalments, each corresponding to 3 % of these amounts.
5. For some products indicated in column D, the Community may fix a reference quantity if, in the light of the annual review of trade flows which it shall carry out, it establishes that the volume of imports of a product or products threatens to cause difficulties on the Community market. Should the volume of imports of one of the products exceed the reference quantity, the Community may make the product in question subject to a tariff quota, the volume of which shall be equal to the reference quantity. For quantities imported in excess of the quota, the customs duty shall, according to the product concerned, be applied in full or reduced, as indicated in column C.


ANNEX


>TABLE>


PROTOCOL 2
concerning the arrangements applicable to the importation into Jordan of agricultural products originating in the Community

1. The products listed in the Annex originating in the Community shall be admitted for importation into Jordan according to the conditions contained hereafter and in the Annex.
2. Import duties and charges having an equivalent effect shall not be higher than those indicated in column A.


ANNEX


>TABLE>


PROTOCOL 3
concerning the definition of the concept of "originating products" and methods of administrative cooperation


CONTENTS
>TABLE>

TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) "manufacture": means any kind of working or processing including assembly or specific operations;
(b) "material": means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the manufacture of the product;
(c) "product": means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in another manufacturing operation;
(d) "goods": means both materials and products;
(e) "customs value": means the value as determined in accordance with the 1994 Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);
(f) "ex-works price": means the price paid for the product ex-works to the manufacturer in the Community or Jordan in whose undertaking the last working or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product obtained is exported;
(g) "value of materials": means the customs value at the time of importation of the non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in the Community or Jordan;
(h) "value of originating materials": means the value of such materials as defined in subparagraph (g) applied mutatis mutandis;
(i) "added value": shall be taken to be the ex-works price minus the customs value of each of the products incorporated which did not originate in the country in which those products were obtained;
(j) "chapters" and "headings": mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes) used in the nomenclature which makes up the harmonised commodity description and coding system, referred to in this Protocol as "the Harmonised System" or "HS";
(k) "classified": refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular heading;
(l) "consignment": means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single invoice;
(m) "territories": includes territorial waters.

TITLE II
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
Article 2
General requirements
1. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in the Community:
(a) products wholly obtained in the Community within the meaning of Article 4 of this Protocol;
(b) products obtained in the Community incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in the Community within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol.
2. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be considered as originating in Jordan:
(a) products wholly obtained in Jordan within the meaning of Article 4 of this Protocol;
(b) products obtained in Jordan incorporating materials which have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing in Jordan within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol.

Article 3
Bilateral cumulation of origin
1. Materials originating in the Community shall be considered as materials originating in Jordan when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred to in Article 6(1) of this Protocol.
2. Materials originating in Jordan shall be considered as materials originating in the Community when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or processing, provided they have undergone working or processing going beyond that referred to in Article 6(1) of this Protocol.

Article 4
Wholly obtained products
1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in the Community or Jordan:
(a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed;
(b) vegetable products harvested there;
(c) live animals born and raised there;
(d) products from live animals raised there;
(e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;
(f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the territorial waters of the Community or Jordan by their vessels;
(g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in subparagraph (f);
(h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including used tyres fit only for retreading or for use as waste;
(i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there;
(j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside their territorial waters provided that they have sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;
(k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in subparagraphs (a) to (j).
2. The terms "their vessels" and "their factory ships" in paragraph 1(f) and (g) shall apply only to vessels and factory ships:
(a) which are registered or recorded in an EC Member State or in Jordan;
(b) which sail under the flag of an EC Member State or of Jordan;
(c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50 % by nationals of EC Member States or of Jordan, or by a company with its head office in one of these States, of which the manager or managers, Chairman of the Board of Directors or the Supervisory Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are nationals of EC Member States or of Jordan and of which, in addition, in the case of partnerships or limited companies, at least half the capital belongs to those States or to public bodies or nationals of the said States;
(d) of which the master and officers are nationals of EC Member States or of Jordan; and
(e) of which at least 75 % of the crew are nationals of EC Member States or of Jordan.

Article 5
Sufficiently worked or processed products
1. For the purposes of Article 2, products which are not wholly obtained are considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the list in Annex II are fulfilled.
The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by this Agreement, the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. Accordingly, it follows that if a product, which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the conditions set out in the list, should not be used in the manufacture of a product may nevertheless be used, provided that:
(a) their total value does not exceed 10 % of the ex-works price of the product;
(b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating materials are not exceeded through the application of this paragraph.
This paragraph shall not apply to products falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonised System.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply except as provided in Article 6.

Article 6
Insufficient working or processing operations
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Article 5 are satisfied:
(a) operations to ensure the preservation of products in good condition during transport and storage (ventilation, spreading out, drying, chilling, placing in salt, sulphur dioxide or other aqueous solutions, removal of damaged parts, and like operations);
(b) simple operations consisting of removal of dust, sifting or screening, sorting, classifying, matching (including the making-up of sets of articles), washing, painting, cutting up;
(c) (i) changes of packaging and breaking up and assembly of packages;
(ii) simple placing in bottles, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards, etc., and all other simple packaging operations;
(d) affixing marks, labels and other like distinguishing signs on products or their packaging;
(e) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds, where one or more components of the mixtures does not meet the conditions laid down in this Protocol to enable them to be considered as originating in the Community or Jordan;
(f) simple assembly of parts to constitute a complete product;
(g) a combination of two or more operations specified in subparagraphs (a) to (f);
(h) slaughter of animals.
2. All the operations carried out in either the Community or Jordan on a given product shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of paragraph 1.

Article 7
Unit of qualification
1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System.
Accordingly, it follows that:
(a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the terms of the Harmonised System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit of qualification;
(b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the same heading of the Harmonised System, each product must be taken individually when applying the provisions of this Protocol.
2. Where, under general rule 5 of the Harmonised System, packaging is included with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin.

Article 8
Accessories, spare parts and tools
Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.

Article 9
Sets
Sets, as defined in general rule 3 of the Harmonised System, shall be regarded as originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works price of the set.

Article 10
Neutral elements
In order to determine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:
(a) energy and fuel;
(b) plant and equipment;
(c) machines and tools;
(d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final composition of the product.

TITLE III
TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Article 11
Principle of territoriality
1. The conditions set out in Title II relative to the acquisition of originating status must be fulfilled without interruption in the Community or Jordan.
2. If originating goods exported from the Community or Jordan to another country are returned, they must be considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(a) the goods returned are the same goods as those exported; and
(b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in good condition while in that country or while being exported.

Article 12
Direct transport
1. The preferential treatment provided for under the Agreement applies only to products, satisfying the requirements of this Protocol, which are transported directly between the Community and Jordan. However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion arise, transhipment or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to preserve them in good condition.
Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of the Community or Jordan.
2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the customs authorities of the importing country by the production of:
(a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting country through the country of transit; or
(b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:
(i) giving an exact description of the products;
(ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where applicable, the names of the ships, or the other means of transport used; and
(iii) certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the transit country; or
(c) failing these, any substantiating documents.

Article 13
Exhibitions
1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in another country and sold after the exhibition for importation in the Community or Jordan shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(a) an exporter has consigned these products from the Community or Jordan to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;
(b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in the Community or Jordan;
(c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the state in which they were sent for exhibition; and
(d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.
2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon. Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which they have been exhibited may be required.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during which the products remain under customs control.

TITLE IV
DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
Article 14
Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
1. Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in the Community or in Jordan for which a proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of Title V shall not be subject in the Community or Jordan to drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.
2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund, remission or non-payment, partial or complete, of customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect, applicable in the Community or Jordan to materials used in the manufacture, where such refund, remission or non-payment applies, expressly or in effect, when products obtained from the said materials are exported and not when they are retained for home use there.
3. The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit at any time, upon request from the customs authorities, all appropriate documents proving that no drawback has been obtained in respect of the non-originating materials used in the manufacture of the products concerned and that all customs duties or charges having equivalent effect applicable to such materials have actually been paid.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging within the meaning of Article 7(2), accessories, spare parts and tools within the meaning of Article 8 and products in a set within the meaning of Article 9 when such items are non-originating.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials which are of the kind to which the Agreement applies. Furthermore, they shall not preclude the application of an export refund system for agricultural products, applicable upon export in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement.
6. The provisions of this Article shall not apply for four years following the entry into force of the Agreement. These provisions may be reviewed by common accord.

TITLE V
PROOF OF ORIGIN
Article 15
General requirements
1. Products originating in the Community shall, on importation into Jordan and products originating in Jordan shall, on importation into the Community benefit from this Agreement upon submission of either:
(a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which appears in Annex III; or
(b) in the cases specified in Article 20(1), a declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV, given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified (hereinafter referred to as the "invoice declaration").
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 25, benefit from this Agreement without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above.

Article 16
Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1
1. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting country on application having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorised representative.
2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out both the movement certificate EUR.1 and the application form, specimens of which appear in Annex III. These forms shall be completed in one of the languages in which this Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If they are handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products must be given in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty space being crossed through.
3. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country where the movement certificate EUR.1 is issued, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
4. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities of an EC Member State or Jordan if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the Community or Jordan and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
5. The issuing customs authorities shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate. The issuing customs authorities shall also ensure that the forms referred to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
6. The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1 shall be indicated in box 11 of the certificate.
7. A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs authorities and made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or ensured.

Article 17
Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 16(7), a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:
(a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or
(b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement certificate EUR.1 was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.
2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates, and state the reasons for his request.
3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the corresponding file.
4. Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively must be endorsed with one of the following phrases:
"NACHTRÄGLICH AUSGESTELLT", "DÉLIVRÉ A POSTERIORI", "RILASCIATO A POSTERIORI", "AFGEGEVEN A POSTERIORI", "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY", "UDSTEDT EFTERFØLGENDE", "ΕΚΔΟΘΕΝ ΕΚ ΤΩΝ ΥΣΤΕΡΩΝ", "EXPEDIDO A POSTERIORI", "EMITIDO A POSTERIORI", "ANNETTU JÄLKIKÄTEEN", "UTFÄRDAT I EFTERHAND",
">PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.007401.TIF">".
5. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the movement certificate EUR.1.

Article 18
Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.1
1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.1, the exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their possession.
2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with one of the following words:
"DUPLIKAT", "DUPLICATA", "DUPLICATO", "DUPLICAAT", "DUPLICATE", "ΑΝΤΙΓΡΑΦΟ", "DUPLICADO", "SEGUNDA VIA", "KAKSOISKAPPALE",
">PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.007402.TIF">".
3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the "Remarks" box of the duplicate movement certificate EUR.1.
4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as from that date.

Article 19
Issue of movement certificates EUR.1 on the basis of a proof of origin issued or made out previously
When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in the Community or Jordan, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of these products elsewhere within the Community or Jordan. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1 shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.

Article 20
Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
1. An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 15(1)(b) may be made out:
(a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21; or
(b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing originating products whose total value does not exceed ECU 6000.
2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the Community or Jordan and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV, using one of the linguistic versions set out in that Annex and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the exporting country. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed characters.
5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 shall not be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of the exporting country a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.
6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in the importing country no longer than two years after the importation of the products to which it relates.

Article 21
Approved exporter
1. The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorise any exporter who makes frequent shipments of products under this Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation must offer to the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider appropriate.
3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs authorisation number which shall appear on the invoice declaration.
4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the approved exporter.
5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in paragraph 1, does not fulfil the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the authorisation.

Article 22
Validity of proof of origin
1. A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the exporting country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the importing country.
2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.
3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing country may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the said final date.

Article 23
Submission of proof of origin
Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement.

Article 24
Importation by instalments
Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs authorities of the importing country; dismantled or non-assembled products within the meaning of general rule 2(a) of the Harmonised System falling within sections XVI and XVII or heading Nos 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonised System are imported by instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.

Article 25
Exemptions from proof of origin
1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, this declaration can be made on the customs declaration C2/CP3 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.
2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.
3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed ECU 500 in the case of small packages or ECU 1200 in the case of products forming part of travellers' personal luggage.

Article 26
Supporting documents
The documents referred to in Articles 16(3) and 20(3) used for the purpose of proving that products covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice declaration can be considered as products originating in the Community or in Jordan and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol may consist, inter alia, of the following:
(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;
(b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in the Community or Jordan where these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
(c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in the Community or Jordan, issued or made out in the Community or Jordan, where these documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
(d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in the Community or Jordan in accordance with this Protocol.

Article 27
Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the documents referred to in Article 16(3).
2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least three years a copy of this invoice declaration as well as the documents referred to in Article 20(3).
3. The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the application form referred to in Article 16(2).
4. The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep for at least three years the movement certificates EUR.1 and the invoice declarations submitted to them.

Article 28
Discrepancies and formal errors
1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products submitted.
2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in this document.

Article 29
Amounts expressed in ECU
1. Amounts in the national currency of the exporting country equivalent to the amounts expressed in ECU shall be fixed by the exporting country and communicated to the importing countries through the Commission of the European Communities.
2. When the amounts exceed the corresponding amounts fixed by the importing country, the latter shall accept them if the products are invoiced in the currency of the exporting country. When the products are invoiced in the currency of another EC Member State, the importing country shall recognise the amount notified by the country concerned.
3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that national currency of the amounts expressed in ECU as at the first working day in October 1996.
4. The amounts expressed in ECU and their equivalents in the national currencies of the EC Member States and Jordan shall be reviewed by the Association Committee at the request of the Community or Jordan. When carrying out this review, the Association Committee shall ensure that there will be no decrease in the amounts to be used in any national currency and shall furthermore consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in ECU.

TITLE VI
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION
Article 30
Mutual assistance
1. The customs authorities of the EC Member States and of Jordan shall provide each other, through the Commission of the European Communities, with specimen impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of movement certificates EUR.1 and with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for verifying those certificates and invoice declarations.
2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the Community and Jordan shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.1 or the invoice declarations and the correctness of the information given in these documents.

Article 31
Verification of proofs of origin
1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs authorities of the importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of these documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.
3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting country. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.
4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.
5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in the Community or in Jordan and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within 10 months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.

Article 32
Dispute settlement
Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 31 which cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification or where they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Association Committee.
In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the importing country shall be under the legislation of the said country.

Article 33
Penalties
Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential treatment for products.

Article 34
Free zones
1. The Community and Jordan shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products traded under cover of a proof of origin which in the course of transport use a free zone situated in their territory, are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.
2. By means of an exemption to the provisions contained in paragraph 1, when products originating in the Community or Jordan are imported into a free zone under cover of a proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned shall issue a new EUR.1 certificate at the exporter's request, if the treatment or processing undergone is in conformity with the provisions of this Protocol.

TITLE VII
CEUTA AND MELILLA
Article 35
Application of the Protocol
1. The term "Community" used in Article 2 does not cover Ceuta and Melilla.
2. Products originating in Jordan, when imported into Ceuta or Melilla, shall enjoy in all respects the same customs regime as that which is applied to products originating in the customs territory of the Community under Protocol 2 of the Act of Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic to the European Communities. Jordan shall grant to imports of products covered by the Agreement and originating in Ceuta and Melilla the same customs regime as that which is granted to products imported from and originating in the Community.
3. For the purpose of the application of paragraph 2 concerning products originating in Ceuta and Melilla, this Protocol shall apply mutatis mutandis subject to the special conditions set out in Article 36.

Article 36
Special conditions
1. Providing they have been transported directly in accordance with the provisions of Article 12, the following shall be considered as:
1. products originating in Ceuta and Melilla:
(a) products wholly obtained in Ceuta and Melilla;
(b) products obtained in Ceuta and Melilla in the manufacture of which products other than those referred to in (a) are used, provided that:
(i) the said products have undergone sufficient working or processing within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol; or that
(ii) those products are originating in Jordan or in the Community within the meaning of this Protocol, provided that they have been submitted to working or processing which goes beyond the insufficient working or processing referred to in Article 6(1).
2. products originating in Jordan:
(a) products wholly obtained in Jordan;
(b) products obtained in Jordan, in the manufacture of which products other than those referred to in (a) are used, provided that:
(i) the said products have undergone sufficient working or processing within the meaning of Article 5 of this Protocol; or that
(ii) those products are originating in Ceuta and Melilla or in the Community within the meaning of this Protocol, provided that they have been submitted to working or processing which goes beyond the insufficient working or processing referred to in Article 6(1).
2. Ceuta and Melilla shall be considered as a single territory.
3. The exporter or his authorised representative shall enter "Jordan" and "Ceuta and Melilla" in box 2 of movement certificates EUR.1 or on invoice declarations. In addition, in the case of products originating in Ceuta and Melilla, this shall be indicated in box 4 of movement certificates EUR.1 or on invoice declarations.
4. The Spanish customs authorities shall be responsible for the application of this Protocol in Ceuta and Melilla.

TITLE VIII
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 37
Amendments to the Protocol
The Association Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this Protocol.

Article 38
Implementation of the Protocol
The Community and Jordan shall each take the steps necessary to implement this Protocol.

Article 39
Goods in transit or storage
The provisions of the Agreement may be applied to goods which comply with the provisions of this Protocol and which on the date of entry into force of the Agreement are either in transit or are in the Community or in Jordan or, in temporary storage in bonded warehouses or in free zones, subject to the submission to the customs authorities of the importing State, within four months of that date, of a movement certificate EUR.1 issued retrospectively by the competent authorities of the exporting State together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly.




ANNEX I

Introductory notes to the list in Annex II
Note 1
The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be considered as sufficiently worked or processed within the meaning of Article 5 of the Protocol.
Note 2
2.1. The first two columns in the list describe the product obtained. The first column gives the heading number or chapter number used in the Harmonised System and the second column gives the description of goods used in that system for that heading or chapter. For each entry in the first two columns a rule is specified in columns 3 or 4. Where, in some cases, the entry in the first column is preceded by an "ex", this signifies that the rules in columns 3 or 4 apply only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.
2.2. Where several heading numbers are grouped together in column 1 or a chapter number is given and the description of products in column 2 is therefore given in general terms, the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4 apply to all products which, under the Harmonised System, are classified in headings of the chapter or in any of the headings grouped together in column 1.
2.3. Where there are different rules in the list applying to different products within a heading, each indent contains the description of that part of the heading covered by the adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4.
2.4. Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is specified in both columns 3 and 4, the exporter may opt, as an alternative, to apply either the rule set out in column 3 or that set out in column 4. If no origin rule is given in column 4, the rule set out in column 3 has to be applied.
Note 3
3.1. The provisions of Article 5 of the Protocol concerning products having acquired originating status which are used in the manufacture of other products apply regardless of whether this status has been acquired inside the factory where these products are used or in another factory in the Community or in Jordan.
Example
An engine of heading No 8407, for which the rule states that the value of the non-originating materials which may be incorporated may not exceed 40 % of the ex-works price, is made from "other alloy steel roughly shaped by forging" of heading No ex 7224.
If this forging has been forged in the Community from a non-originating ingot, it has already acquired originating status by virtue of the rule for heading No ex 7224 in the list. The forging can then count as originating in the value calculation for the engine regardless of whether it was produced in the same factory or in another factory in the Community. The value of the non-originating ingot is thus not taken into account when adding up the value of the non-originating materials used.
3.2. The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of working or processing required and the carrying-out of more working or processing also confers originating status; conversely, the carrying-out of less working or processing cannot confer originating status. Thus if a rule provides that non-originating material at a certain level of manufacture may be used, the use of such material at an earlier stage of manufacture is allowed and the use of such material at a later stage is not.
3.3. Without prejudice to note 3.2 where a rule states that "materials of any heading" may be used, materials of the same heading as the product may also be used, subject, however, to any specific limitations which may also be contained in the rule. However, the expression "manufacture from materials of any heading, including other materials of heading No ..." means that only materials classified in the same heading as the product of a different description than that of the product as given in column 2 of the list may be used.
3.4. When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be manufactured from more than one material, this means that any one or more materials may be used. It does not require that all be used.
Example
The rule for fabrics of heading Nos 5208 to 5212 provides that natural fibres may be used and that chemical materials, among other materials, may also be used. This does not mean that both have to be used; it is possible to use one or the other or both.
3.5. Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be manufactured from a particular material, the condition obviously does not prevent the use of other materials which, because of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See also note 6.2 in relation to textiles).
Example
The rule for prepared foods of heading No 1904 which specifically excludes the use of cereals and their derivatives does not prevent the use of mineral salts, chemicals and other additives which are not products from cereals.
However, this does not apply to products which, although they cannot be manufactured from the particular materials specified in the list, can be produced from a material of the same nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.
Example
In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made from non-woven materials, if the use of only non-originating yarn is allowed for this class of article, it is not possible to start from non-woven cloth, even if non-woven cloths cannot normally be made from yarn. In such cases, the starting material would normally be at the stage before yarn, that is the fibre stage.
3.6. Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the maximum value of non-originating materials that can be used, then these percentages may not be added together. In other words, the maximum value of all the non-originating materials used may never exceed the higher of the percentages given. Furthermore, the individual percentages must not be exceeded in relation to the particular materials they apply to.
Note 4
4.1. The term "natural fibres" is used in the list to refer to fibres other than artificial or synthetic fibres. It is restricted to the stages before spinning takes place, including waste, and, unless otherwise specified, includes fibres that have been carded, combed or otherwise processed but not spun.
4.2. The term "natural fibres" includes horsehair of heading No 0503, silk of heading Nos 5002 and 5003 as well as the wool fibres, fine or coarse animal hair of heading Nos 5101 to 5105, the cotton fibres of heading Nos 5201 to 5203 and the other vegetable fibres of heading Nos 5301 to 5305.
4.3. The terms "textile pulp", "chemical materials" and "paper-making materials" are used in the list to describe the materials not classified in Chapters 50 to 63, which can be used to manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or yarns.
4.4. The term "man-made staple fibres" is used in the list to refer to synthetic or artificial filament tow, staple fibres or waste, of heading Nos 5501 to 5507.
Note 5
5.1. Where for a given product in the list a reference is made to this note, the conditions set out in column 3 shall not be applied to any basic textile materials, used in the manufacture of this product, which, taken together, represent 10 % or less of the total weight of all the basic textile materials used (see also notes 5.3 and 5.4).
5.2. However, the tolerance mentioned in note 5.1 may only be applied to mixed products which have been made from two or more basic textile materials.
The following are the basic textile materials:
- silk,
- wool,
- coarse animal hair,
- fine animal hair,
- horsehair,
- cotton,
- paper-making materials and paper,
- flax,
- true hemp,
- jute and other textile bast fibres,
- sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave,
- coconut, abaca, ramie and other vegetable textile fibres,
- synthetic man-made filaments,
- artificial man-made filaments,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polypropylene,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyamide,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyacrylonitrile,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyimide,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polytetrafluoroethylene,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyphenylene sulphide,
- synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyvinyl chloride,
- other synthetic man-made staple fibres,
- artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose,
- other artificial man-made staple fibres,
- yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped,
- yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyester whether or not gimped,
- products of heading No 5605 (metallised yarn) incorporating strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of a transparent or coloured adhesive between two layers of plastic film,
- other products of heading No 5605.
Example
A yarn of heading No 5205 made from cotton fibres of heading No 5203 and synthetic staple fibres of heading No 5506 is a mixed yarn. Therefore, non-originating synthetic staple fibres that do not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) may be used up to a weight of 10 % of the yarn.
Example
A woollen fabric of heading No 5112 made from woollen yarn of heading No 5107 and synthetic yarn of staple fibres of heading No 5509 is a mixed fabric. Therefore synthetic yarn which does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) or woollen yarn that does not satisfy the origin rules (which require manufacture from natural fibres, not carded or combed or otherwise prepared for spinning) or a combination of the two may be used provided their total weight does not exceed 10 % of the weight of the fabric.
Example
Tufted textile fabric of heading No 5802 made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and cotton fabric of heading No 5210 is only a mixed product if the cotton fabric is itself a mixed fabric being made from yarns classified in two separate headings or if the cotton yarns used are themselves mixtures.
Example
If the tufted textile fabric concerned had been made from cotton yarn of heading No 5205 and synthetic fabric of heading No 5407, then, obviously, the yarns used are two separate basic textile materials and the tufted textile fabric is accordingly a mixed product.
Example
A carpet with tufts made from both artificial yarns and cotton yarns and with a jute backing is a mixed product because three basic textile materials are used. Thus, any non-originating materials that are at a later stage of manufacture than the rule allows may be used, provided their total weight does not exceed 10 % of the weight of the textile materials of the carpet. Thus, both the jute backing and/or the artificial yarns could be imported at that stage of manufacture, provided the weight conditions are met.
5.3. In the case of products incorporating "yarn made of polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether whether or not gimped" this tolerance is 20 % in respect of this yarn.
5.4. In the case of products incorporating "strip consisting of a core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by means of an adhesive between two layers of plastic film", this tolerance is 30 % in respect of this strip.
Note 6
6.1. In the case of those textile products which are marked in the list by a footnote referring to this note, textile materials, with the exception of linings and interlinings, which do not satisfy the rule set out in the list in column 3 for the made-up product concerned may be used provided that they are classified in a heading other than that of the product and that their value does not exceed 8 % of the ex-works price of the product.
6.2. Without prejudice to note 6.3, materials which are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63 may be used freely in the manufacture of textile products, whether or not they contain textiles.
Example
If a rule in the list provides that for a particular textile item, such as trousers, yarn must be used, this does not prevent the use of metal items, such as buttons, because buttons are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63. For the same reason, it does not prevent the use of slide fasteners even though slide fasteners normally contain textiles.
6.3. Where a percentage rules applies, the value of materials which are not classified within Chapters 50 to 63 must be taken into account when calculating the value of the non-originating materials incorporated.
Note 7
7.1. For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, the "specific processes" are the following:
(a) vacuum distillation;
(b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process(1);
(c) cracking;
(d) reforming;
(e) extraction by means of selective solvents;
(f) the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;
(g) polymerisation;
(h) alkylation;
(i) isomerisation;
7.2. For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2710, 2711 and 2712, the "specific processes" are the following:
(a) vacuum distillation;
(b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process(2);
(c) cracking;
(d) reforming;
(e) extraction by means of selective solvents;
(f) the process comprising all the following operations: processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents; decolourisation and purification with naturally active earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;
(g) polymerisation;
(h) alkylation;
(ij) isomerisation;
(k) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, desulphurisation with hydrogen resulting in a reduction of at least 85 % of the sulphur content of the products processed (ASTM D 1266-59 T method);
(l) in respect of products falling within heading No 2710 only, deparaffining by a process other than filtering;
(m) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, treatment with hydrogen at a pressure of more than 20 bar and a temperature of more than 250 °C with the use of a catalyst, other than to effect desulphurisation, when the hydrogen constitutes an active element in a chemical reaction.
The further treatment with hydrogen of lubricating oils of heading No ex 2710 (e.g. hydrofinishing or decolourisation) in order, more especially, to improve colour or stability shall not, however, be deemed to be a specific process;
(n) in respect of fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, atmospheric distillation, on condition that less than 30 % of these products distils, by volume, including losses, at 300 °C by the ASTM D 86 method;
(o) in respect of heavy oils other than gas oils and fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710 only, treatment by means of a high-frequency electrical brushdischarge.
7.3. For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex 2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, simple operations such as cleaning, decanting, desalting, water separation, filtering, colouring, marking, obtaining a sulphur content as a result of mixing products with different sulphur contents, any combination of these operations or like operations do not confer origin.

(1) See additional explanatory note 4(b) to Chapter 27 of the Combined Nomenclature.
(2) See additional explanatory note 4(b) to Chapter 27 of the Combined Nomenclature.


ANNEX II

List of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials in order that the product manufactured can obtain originating status
The products mentioned in the list may not all be covered by the Agreement. It is therefore necessary to consult the other parts of the Agreement.
>TABLE>


ANNEX III

MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE EUR.1 AND APPLICATION FOR A MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE EUR.1
Printing instructions
1. Each form shall measure 210 mm × 297 mm; a tolerance of up to minus 5 mm or plus 8 mm in the length may be allowed. The paper used must be white, sized for writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than 25 g/m2. It shall have a printed green guilloche pattern background making any falsification by mechanical or chemical means apparent to the eye.
2. The competent authorities of the Member States of the Community and of Jordan may reserve the right to print the forms themselves or may have them printed by approved printers. In the latter case, each form must include a reference to such approval. Each form must bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which the printer can be identified. It shall also bear a serial number either printed or not, by which it can be identified.
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.015601.TIF">
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.015701.TIF">
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.015801.TIF">
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.015901.TIF">


ANNEX IV

INVOICE DECLARATION
The invoice declaration, the text of which is given below, must be made out in accordance with the footnotes. However, the footnotes do not have to be reproduced.
Spanish
El exportador de los productos incluidos en el presente documento (autorización aduanera n°...(1)) declara que, salvo indicación en sentido contrario, estos productos gozan de un origen preferencial...(2).
Danish
Eksportøren af varer, der er omfattet af nærværende dokument, (toldmyndighedernes tilladelse nr...(3)), erklærer, at varerne, medmindre andet tydeligt er angivet, har præferenceoprindelse i...(4).
German
Der Ausführer (Ermächtigter Ausführer; Bewilligungs-Nr...(5)), der Waren, auf die sich dieses Handelspapier bezieht, erklärt, dass diese Waren, soweit nicht anders angegeben, präferenzbegünstigte... Ursprungswaren sind(6)).
Greek
Ο εξαγωγέας τωv πρoϊόvτωv πoυ καλύπτovται από τo παρόv έγγραφo (άδεια τελωvείoυ υπ'αριθ...(7)) δηλώvει ότι, εκτός εάv δηλώvεται σαφώς άλλως, τα πρoϊόvτα αυτά είvαι πρoτιμησιακής καταγωγής...(8).
English
The exporter of the products covered by this document (customs authorisation No ...(9)) declares that, except where otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of ... preferential origin(10).
French
L'exportateur des produits couverts par le présent document (autorisation douanière n°...(11)), déclare que, sauf indication claire du contraire, ces produits ont l'origine préférentielle ...(12).
Italian
L'esportatore delle merci contemplate nel presente documento (autorizzazione doganale n. ...(13)) dichiara che, salvo indicazione contraria, le merci sono di origine preferenziale ...(14).
Dutch
De exporteur van de goederen waarop dit document van toepassing is (douanevergunning nr. ...(15)), verklaart dat, behoudens uitdrukkelijke andersluidende vermelding, deze goederen van preferentiële ... oorsprong zijn(16).
Portuguese
O exportador dos produtos cobertos pelo presente documento (autorização aduaneira n.o ...(17)), declara que, salvo indicacão expressa em contrário, estes produtos são de origem preferencial ...(18).
Finnish
Tässä asiakirjassa mainittujen tuotteiden viejä (tullin lupan:o ...(19)) ilmoittaa, että nämä tuotteet ovat, ellei toisin ole selvästi merkitty, etuuskohteluun oikeutettuja ... alkuperätuotteita(20).
Swedish
Exportören av de varor som omfattas av detta dokument (tullmyndighetens tillstånd nr. ...(21)) försäkrar att dessa varor, om inte annat tydligt markerats, har förmånsberättigande ... ursprung(22).
Arabic
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016101.TIF">
(23)(24)
...(25)
(Place and date)
...(26).)
(Signature of the exporter; the name of the person signing the declaration has to be indicated in clear script)

(1) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(2) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(3) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(4) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(5) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(6) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(7) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(8) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(9) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(10) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(11) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(12) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(13) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(14) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(15) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(16) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(17) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(18) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(19) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(20) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(21) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(22) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(23) When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 21 of the Protocol, the authorisation number of the approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted or the space left blank.
(24) Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla within the meaning of Article 36 of the Protocol, the exporter must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made out by means of the symbol "CM".
(25) These indications may be omitted if the information is contained on the document itself.
(26) See Article 20(5) of the Protocol. In cases where the exporter is not required to sign, the exemption of signature also implies the exemption of the name of the signatory.


PROTOCOL 4
on mutual assistance between administrative authorities in customs matters

Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) "customs legislation" shall mean any legal or regulatory provisions applicable on the territories of the Parties and governing the import, export, transit of goods and their placing under any customs procedure, including measures of prohibition, restriction and control adopted by the said Parties;
(b) "applicant authority" shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been appointed by a Party for this purpose and which makes a request for assistance in customs matters;
(b) "requested authority" shall mean a competent administrative authority which has been appointed by a Party for this purpose and which receives a request for assistance in customs matters;
(d) "personal data" shall mean all information relating to an identified or identifiable individual.

Article 2
Scope
1. The Parties shall assist each other, in the areas within their jurisdiction, in the manner and under the conditions laid down in this Protocol, in preventing, detecting and investigating operations in breach of customs legislation.
2. Assistance in customs matters, as provided for in this Protocol, shall apply to any administrative authority of the Parties which is competent for the application of this Protocol. It shall not prejudice the rules governing mutual assistance in criminal matters. Nor shall it cover information obtained under powers exercised at the request of the judicial authorities, unless those authorities so agree.

Article 3
Assistance on request
1. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall furnish it with all relevant information which may enable it to ensure that customs legislation is correctly applied, including information regarding operations noted or planned which are or could be in breach of such legislation.
2. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall inform it whether goods exported from the territory of one of the Parties have been properly imported into the territory of another Party, specifying, where appropriate, the customs procedure applied to the goods.
3. At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, within the framework of its laws, take the necessary steps to ensure that a special watch is kept on:
(a) natural or legal persons of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are breaching or have breached customs legislation;
(b) places where goods are stored in a way that gives grounds for suspecting that they are intended to supply operations in breach of customs legislation;
(c) movements of goods notified as possibly giving rise to breaches of customs legislation;
(d) means of transport for which there are reasonable grounds for believing that they have been, are or might be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.

Article 4
Spontaneous assistance
The Parties shall provide each other, in accordance with their laws, rules and other legal instruments, with assistance if they consider that to be necessary for the correct application of customs legislation, particularly when they obtain information pertaining to:
- operations which are, or appear to be in breach of such legislation and which may be of interest to the other Party,
- new means or methods employed in carrying out such operations,
- goods known to be subject to breaches of customs legislation,
- natural or legal persons of whom there are reasonable grounds for believing that they are breaching or have breached customs legislation,
- means of transport for which there are reasonable grounds for believing that they have been, are or might be used in operations in breach of customs legislation.

Article 5
Delivery/notification
At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall, in accordance with its legislation, take all necessary measures in order:
- to deliver all documents,
- to notify all decisions,
falling within the scope of this Protocol to an addressee, residing or established in its territory. In such a case Article 6(3) shall apply as far as the request is concerned.

Article 6
Form and substance of requests for assistance
1. Requests pursuant to this Protocol shall be made in writing. They shall be accompanied by the documents necessary to enable compliance with the request. When required because of the urgency of the situation, oral requests may be accepted, but must be confirmed in writing as soon as possible.
2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include the following information:
(a) the applicant authority making the request;
(b) the measure requested;
(c) the object of and the reason for the request;
(d) the laws, rules and other legal elements involved;
(e) indications as exact and comprehensive as possible on the natural or legal persons who are the target of the investigations;
(f) a summary of the relevant facts and of the enquiries already carried out, except in cases provided for in Article 5.
3. Requests shall be submitted in an official language of the requested authority or in a language acceptable to that authority.
4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements, its correction or completion may be requested; precautionary measures may, however, be ordered.

Article 7
Execution of requests
1. In order to comply with a request for assistance, the requested authority shall proceed, within the limits of its competence and available resources, as though it were acting on its own account or at the request of other authorities of that same Party, by supplying information already possessed, by carrying out appropriate enquiries or by arranging for them to be carried out. This provision shall also apply to the administrative department to which the request has been addressed by the requested authority when the latter cannot act on its own.
2. Requests for assistance shall be executed in accordance with the laws, rules and other legal instruments of the requested Party.
3. Duly authorised officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, obtain from the offices of the requested authority or other authority for which the requested authority is responsible, information relating to operations which are or may be in breach of customs legislation which the applicant authority needs for the purposes of this Protocol.
4. Officials of a Party may, with the agreement of the other Party involved and subject to the conditions laid down by the latter, be present at enquiries carried out in the latter's territory.

Article 8
Form in which information is to be communicated
1. The requested authority shall communicate results of enquiries to the applicant authority in the form of documents, certified copies of documents, reports and the like.
2. The documents provided for in paragraph 1 may be replaced by computerised information produced in any form for the same purpose.

Article 9
Exceptions to the obligation to provide assistance
1. The Parties may refuse to give assistance as provided for in this Protocol, where to do so would:
(a) be likely to prejudice the sovereignty of Jordan or that of a Member State of the Community which has been asked for assistance under this Protocol; or
(b) be likely to prejudice public policy, security or other essential interests, in particular in the cases referred to under Article 10(2); or
(c) involve currency or tax regulations other than customs legislation; or
(d) violate an industrial, commercial or professional secret.
2. Where the applicant authority requests assistance which it would itself be unable to provide if so asked, it shall draw attention to that fact in its request. It shall then be left to the requested authority to decide how to respond to such a request.
3. If assistance is refused, the decision and the reasons therefor must be notified to the applicant authority without delay.

Article 10
Information exchange and confidentiality
1. Any information communicated in whatsoever form pursuant to this Protocol shall be of a confidential or restricted nature. It shall be covered by the obligation of official secrecy and shall enjoy the protection extended to like information under the relevant laws of the Party which received it and the corresponding provisions applying to the Community institutions.
2. Personal data may be exchanged only where the receiving Party undertakes to protect such data in at least an equivalent way to the one applicable to that particular case in the supplying Party.
3. Information obtained shall be used solely for the purposes of this Protocol. Where one of the Parties requests the use of such information for other purposes, it shall ask for the prior written consent of the authority which furnished the information. Moreover, it shall be subject to any restrictions laid down by that authority.
4. Paragraph 3 shall not impede the use of information in any judicial or administrative proceedings subsequently instituted for failure to comply with customs legislation. The competent authority which supplied that information shall be notified of such use.
5. The Parties may, in their records of evidence, reports and testimonies and in proceedings and charges brought before the courts, use as evidence information obtained and documents consulted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.

Article 11
Experts and witnesses
1. An official of a requested authority may be authorised to appear, within the limitations of the authorisation granted, as an expert or witness in judicial or administrative proceedings regarding the matters covered by this Protocol in the jurisdiction of the other Party, and produce such objects, documents or authenticated copies thereof, as may be needed for the proceedings. The request for an appearance must indicate specifically on what matters and by virtue of what title or qualification the official will be questioned.
2. The authorised official shall enjoy the protection guaranteed by existing legislation to officials of the applicant authority on its territory

Article 12
Assistance expenses
The Parties shall waive all claims on each other for the reimbursement of expenses incurred pursuant to this Protocol, except, as appropriate, for expenses to experts, witnesses, interpreters and translators who are not public service employees.

Article 13
Application
1. The application of this Protocol shall be entrusted to the central customs authorities of Jordan, on the one hand, and the competent services of the Commission of the European Communities and, where appropriate, the customs authorities of the Member States of the Community, on the other. They shall decide on all practical measures and arrangements necessary for its application, taking into consideration rules in force in the field of data protection. They may, through the Customs Cooperation Committee, propose to the Association Council amendments which they consider should be made to this Protocol.
2. The Parties shall consult each other and subsequently keep each other informed of the detailed rules of implementation which are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Protocol.

Article 14
Complementarity
Without prejudice to Article 10, the agreements on mutual assistance which have been or may be concluded between one or more Member States of the Community and Jordan do not prejudice Community provisions governing the communication between the competent services of the Commission and the customs authorities of the Member States of any information obtained in customs matters which could be of Community interest.




Final Act

The plenipotentiaries of:
THE KINGDOM OF BELGIUM,
THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK,
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC,
THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN,
THE FRENCH REPUBLIC,
IRELAND,
THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC,
THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBOURG,
THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS,
THE REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA,
THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC,
THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND,
THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN,
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
Contracting Parties to the Treaty establishing the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY and the Treaty establishing the EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL COMMUNITY,
hereinafter referred to as "the Member States", and of
the EUROPEAN COMMUNITY and the EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL COMMUNITY,
hereinafter referred to as "the Community",
of the one part, and
the plenipotentiaries of the HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN,
hereinafter referred to as "Jordan",
of the other part,
meeting at Brussels on 24 november 1997 for the signature of the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an Association between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, of the other part, hereinafter referred to as the "Euro-Mediterranean Agreement", have adopted the following texts:
the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement, the Annexes thereto and the following Protocols:
Protocol 1 concerning the arrangements applicable to the importation into the Community of agricultural products originating in Jordan
Protocol 2 concerning the arrangements applicable to imports into Jordan of agricultural products originating in the Community
Protocol 3 concerning the definition of the concept of "originating products" and methods of administrative cooperation
Protocol 4 on mutual assistance between administrative authorities in customs matters.
The plenipotentiaries of the Member States and of the Community and the plenipotentiaries of Jordan have adopted the texts of the Joint Declarations listed below and annexed to this Final Act:
Joint Declaration relating to Article 28 of the Agreement
Joint Declaration relating to Articles 51 and 52 of the Agreement
Joint Declaration on intellectual, industrial and commercial property (Article 56 and Annex VII)
Joint Declaration relating to Article 62 of the Agreement
Joint Declaration on decentralised cooperation
Joint Declaration relating to Title VII of the Agreement
Joint Declaration relating to Article 101 of the Agreement
Joint Declaration on workers
Joint Declaration on cooperation for the prevention and control of illegal immigration
Joint Declaration on the protection of data
Joint Declaration concerning the Principality of Andorra
Joint Declaration concerning the Republic of San Marino.
The plenipotentiaries of the Member States and of the Community and the plenipotentiaries of Jordan have also taken note of the Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters mentioned below and attached to this Final Act:
Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the Community and Jordan concerning imports into the Community of fresh cut flowers and flower buds falling within subheading 0603 10 of the Common Customs Tariff.

Hecho en Bruselas, el veinticuatro de noviembre de mil novecientos noventa y siete./Udfærdiget i Bruxelles, den fireogtyvende november nitten hundrede og sygoghalvfems./Geschehen zu Brüssel am vierundzwanzigsten November neunzehnhundertsiebenundneunzig./Έγινε στις Βρυξέλλες, στις είκοσι τέσσερις Νοεμβρίου χίλια εννιακόσια ενενήντα επτά./Done at Brussels on the twenty-fourth day of November in the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-seven./Fait à Bruxelles, le vingt-quatre novembre mil neuf cent quatre-vingt-dix-sept./Fatto a Bruxelles, addì ventiquattro novembre millenovecentonovantasette./Gedaan te Brussel, de vierentwintigste november negentienhonderd zevenennegentig./Feito em Bruxelas, em vinte e quatro de Novembro de mil novecentos e noventa e sete./Tehty Brysselissä kahdentenakymmenentenäneljäntenä päivänä marraskuuta vuonna tuhatyhdeksänsataayhdeksänkymmentäseitsemän./Som skedde i Bryssel den tjugofjärde november nittonhundranittiosju./
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016801.TIF">

Pour le Royaume de Belgique/Voor het Koninkrijk België/Für das Königreich Belgien
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016802.TIF">
Cette signature engage également la Communauté française, la Communauté flamande, la Communauté germanophone, la Région wallonne, la Région flamande et la Région de Bruxelles-Capitale.
Deze handtekening verbindt eveneens de Vlaamse Gemeenschap, de Franse Gemeenschap, de Duitstalige Gemeenschap, het Vlaamse Gewest, het Waalse Gewest en het Brusselse Hoofdstedelijke Gewest.
Diese Unterschrift verbindet zugleich die Deutschsprachige Gemeinschaft, die Flämische Gemeinschaft, die Französische Gemeinschaft, die Wallonische Region, die Flämische Region und die Region Brüssel-Hauptstadt.

På Kongeriget Danmarks vegne
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016803.TIF">

Für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016901.TIF">

Για την Ελληνική Δημοκρατία
&gt;PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016902.TIF"&gt;

Por el Reino de España
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016903.TIF">

Pour la République française
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016904.TIF">

Thar cheann Na hÉireann
For Ireland
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.016905.TIF">

Per la Repubblica italiana
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017001.TIF">

Pour le Grand-Duché de Luxembourg
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017002.TIF">

Voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017003.TIF">

Für die Republik Österreich
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017004.TIF">

Pela República Portuguesa
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017101.TIF">

Suomen tasavallan puolesta
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017102.TIF">

För Konungariket Sverige
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017103.TIF">

For the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017104.TIF">

Por las Comunidades Europeas/For De Europæiske Fællesskaber/Für die Europäischen Gemeinschaften/Για τις Ευρωπαϊκές Κοινότητες/For the European Communities/Pour les Communautés européennes/Per le Comunità europee/Voor de Europese Gemeenschappen/Pelas Comunidades Europeias/Euroopan yhteisöjen puolesta/På Europeiska gemenskapernas vägnar
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017201.TIF">
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017202.TIF">


>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017203.TIF">
>PIC FILE= "L_2002129EN.017204.TIF">


JOINT DECLARATIONS




JOINT DECLARATION ON ARTICLE 28

In order to encourage the progressive establishment of a comprehensive Euro-Mediterranean free trade area, in line with the conclusions of the Cannes European Council and those of the Barcelona Conference, the Parties:
- agree to provide in Protocol 3 on the definition of "originating products" for the implementation of diagonal cumulation, before the conclusion and entry into force of free trade agreements between Mediterranean countries,
- reaffirm their commitment to the harmonisation of rules of origin across the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area. The Association Council shall take, where necessary, measures to revise the Protocol with a view to respecting this objective.


JOINT DECLARATION RELATING TO ARTICLES 51 AND 52

If, during the progressive implementation of the Agreement, Jordan experiences serious balance-of-payments difficulties, Jordan and the Community may hold consultations to work out the best ways and means of helping Jordan cope with these difficulties.
Such consultations will take place in conjunction with the International Monetary Fund.


JOINT DECLARATION ON INTELLECTUAL, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTY (ARTICLE 56 AND ANNEX VII)

For the purpose of this Agreement, intellectual, industrial and commercial property includes in particular copyright, including the copyright in computer programs, and neighbouring rights, patents, industrial designs, geographical indications, including appellations of origin, trademarks and service marks, topographies of integrated circuits, as well as protection against unfair competition as referred to in Article 10a of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (Stockholm Act, 1967) and protection of undisclosed information on "know-how".


JOINT DECLARATION ON ARTICLE 62

The Parties reaffirm their commitment to the Middle East peace process and their belief that peace should be consolidated through regional cooperation. The Community is prepared to support joint development projects submitted by Jordan and other regional parties, subject to relevant Community technical and budgetary procedures.


JOINT DECLARATION ON DECENTRALISED COOPERATION

The Parties reaffirm the importance they attach to decentralised cooperation programs as a means of encouraging exchanges of experience and transfer of knowledge in the Mediterranean region and between the European Community and its Mediterranean partners.


JOINT DECLARATION RELATING TO TITLE VII

The Community and Jordan will take appropriate action to encourage and assist Jordanian business, through technical and financial support, in modernising existing and setting up new facilities.


JOINT DECLARATION RELATING TO ARTICLE 101

1. The Parties agree, for the purposes of the correct interpretation and practical application of the Agreement, that the cases of special urgency referred to in Article 101 of the Agreement mean cases of substantial violation of the Agreement by one of the Parties. A substantial violation of the Agreement consists of:
- the repudiation of the Agreement not authorised by the general rules of international law,
- the violation of the essential elements of the Agreement set out in Article 2.
2. The Parties agree that the appropriate measures referred to in Article 101 are measures taken in accordance with international law. If one Party takes a measure in a case of special urgency in application of Article 101, the other Party may invoke the dispute settlement procedure.


JOINT DECLARATION ON WORKERS

The Parties reaffirm the importance they attach to fair treatment of foreign workers legally resident and employed on their territory. The Member States agree that, if Jordan so requests, they are each prepared to consider negotiating bilateral reciprocal agreements relating to working conditions and social security rights of Jordanian and Member States' workers legally resident and employed in their respective territory.


JOINT DECLARATION ON COOPERATION FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION

1. The Parties agree to cooperate in order to prevent and control illegal immigration. To this end either Party agrees to permit the return of its nationals illegally present on the territory of the other Party upon request by the latter and without further formalities. The Parties will also provide their nationals with appropriate identity documents for such purposes.
In respect of the Member States of the European Union, this obligation applies only in respect of those persons who are to be considered their nationals for Community purposes in accordance with Declaration No 2 to the Treaty on European Union.
2. Each Party agrees to conclude, upon request of the other Party, bilateral agreements regulating specific obligations concerning cooperation for the prevention and control of illegal immigration, including an obligation for permitting the return of nationals of other countries and stateless persons who have arrived on the territory of one Party from the other Party.
3. The Association Council shall examine what other joint efforts can be made to prevent and control illegal immigration.
4. Nothing in the implementation of this Joint Declaration shall be construed to contravene or diminish the respective obligations of each Party under applicable standards on human rights.


JOINT DECLARATION ON THE PROTECTION OF DATA

The Parties agree that the protection of data will be guaranteed in all areas where the exchange of personal data is envisaged.


JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING THE PRINCIPALITY OF ANDORRA

1. Products originating in the Principality of Andorra falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonised System shall be accepted by Jordan as originating in the Community within the meaning of this Agreement.
2. Protocol 3 shall apply mutatis mutandis for the purpose of defining the originating status of the abovementioned products.


JOINT DECLARATION CONCERNING THE REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO

1. Products originating in the Republic of San Marino shall be accepted by Jordan as originating in the Community within the meaning of this Agreement.
2. Protocol 3 shall apply mutatis mutandis for the purpose of defining the originating status of the abovementioned products.
