convention for the establishment of the european and mediterranean plant protection organisation (text as originally approved and as amended by the council on 27 april 1955, 9 may 1962, 18 september 1968, 19 september 1973, 23 september 1982 and 21 september 1988)source: copy provided by the european and mediterranean plant protection organisation secretariat.the governments parties to the present convention, being conscious of the importance of international co-operation in the prevention of the introduction and spread of pests and diseases of plants and plant products, and desiring to continue and extend the work formerly done in this field by the international committee for the control of the colorado beetle and by the european working party on infestation control, have agreed as follows: ARTICLE i. - aimsthere shall be established a european and mediterranean plant protection organization (hereinafter referred to as the organization), as a recognized regional plant protection organization under article viii of the international plant protection convention december 6, 1951, established by the food and agriculture organization of the united nations (fao). the aims of the organization are to pursue and develop international cooperation in controlling pests of plants and plant products and in preventing their sp; and especially their introduction across national boundaries ARTICLE ii. - definitionsa. for the purposes of the present convention, the term shall coral unmanufactured material of plant origin (including seeds in so far as they are included in the term plants) and those manufactured products which, by their nature or that of their processing, may create a risk for the spread of pests.b. for the purposes of the present convention, the term pests s means any form of r or animal life or any pathogenic agent, injurious or potentially injurious to plans plant products ARTICLE iii. - membershipa. membership of the organization shall be open to the following by adherence to present convention according to the provisions of article xx:1. the governments of the countries in schedule ii;2. the government of any other country which the council of the organization decide to invite to become a member.b. the government of any territory about which a declaration has been made under terms of article xxi may be admitted to membership by the council of organization, but only on the proposal of the member who made the declaration. . such decision shall require a two-thirds majority of the votes cast. territories admitted shall be such as can in the opinion of the council make a definite individual contribution to the work of the organization ARTICLE iv. - seata. the seat of the organization shall be in paris.b. the administrative meetings of the organization shall normally take place at its seat ARTICLE v. - functionsthe functions of the organization shall be:a. to advice member governments on the technical, administrative and legislative measures necessary to prevent the introduction and spread of pests or plants and plant products;b. to assist member governments where necessary in carrying out such measures;c. where practicable, to coordinate and stimulate international campaigns against pests of plants and plant products;d. to obtain information from member governments on the existence, outbreak or spread of pests of plants and plant products, and convey such information to member governments;e. to provide for the exchange of information on national phytosanitary legislation and other measures affecting the free movement of plants and plant products;f. to study the possibility of simplification and unification of phytosanitary regulations certificates;g. to facilitate cooperation in research on the pests of plants and plant products and methods of control and in exchange of relevant scientific information;h. to establish a documentation service and publish in an appropriate form materials for publicity purposes or for technical or scientific advancement as may be determined by the organization;i. to make recommendations to member governments on any of the matters referred to in this article;j. generally to take all necessary and appropriate action to achieve the aims of the organization ARTICLE vi. obligations of member governmentsa. member governments shall furnish to the organization so far as is practicable any information as the organizations may reasonably require in order to carry out its functions.b. member governments shall endeavour to implement the recommendations made by the council of the organization ARTICLE vii. - relationship with other organizationsthe organization shall cooperate with fao and with other bodies with regional responsibilities and shall uses its best endeavours to prevent overlapping of activities ARTICLE viii. - structure of the organizationthe organization shall consist of:a. the council;b. the administration, comprising the executive committee, the director-general and staff;c. the accounts verification panel;d. such bodies as council may decide to set up under article xiii a.5 ARTICLE ix. - the councila. the council of the organization shall consist of representatives of men governments.each member government shall be entitled to appoint one representative to the cot and one alternate.representatives and alternates appointed by member governments may be accompanied by associates and advisers.b. each member government shall have one vote in the council ARTICLE x. - sessions of the councila. the council shall ordinarily meet in regular session once in each year.b. extraordinary sessions of the council shall be called at any time when the chairman so requested in writing by at least one third of the member governments ARTICLE xi. - rulescouncil shall establish the rules of procedure of the organization and the financial r of the organization ARTICLE xii. - observerswith the consent of the council, any non-member government and any international body whose responsibilities are related to those of the organization may be represents any session of the council by one or more observers without the right to vote ARTICLE xiii. - functions of councilthe council shall:a. consider and decide upon:1. the progress report of the director-general on the work of the organization since t preceding regular session of the council;2. the policies and programme of activity of the organization;3. the budget;4. the annual accounts and balance sheet;5. the setting up and dissolution of ad hoc or permanent bodies to pursue the work the organization;6. the reports of such bodies;7. any proposals submitted by the executive committee;b. hold the statutory elections;c. appoint the director-general on such terms as it may determine ARTICLE xiv. - chairman and vice-chairmana. the council shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from amongst representation of member governments.b. the chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected for a period of three years and be eligible for one further term of office.c. the chairman and vice-chairman shall serve in the same capacity within both 1 council and the executive committee.d. the chairman and vice-chairman shall cease to represent their countries on election ARTICLE xv. - the executive committeea. the executive committee shall be composed of the chairman and vice-chairman a of seven representatives of member governments elected by the council.b. members of the executive committee shall normally hold office for three years and eligible for re-election.c. if a vacancy occurs in the executive committee before the expiration of the term appointment, the executive committee shall ask a member government to appoint a representative to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term.d. the executive committee shall meet at least once a year ARTICLE xvi. - functions of the executive committeethe executive committee shall:a. submit proposals for the organization's policies and programme of activity to the council;b. ensure that the activity of the organization conforms with the decisions of the council;c. submit the draft budget and the annual accounts and balance sheet to the council. the executive committee may approve a provisional budget pending its consideration by the council;d. undertake such other tasks as may be assigned to it under this convention or entreated to it by the council;e. adopt its own procedure ARTICLE xvii. - the director-generalthe director-general shall:a. be the head of the secretariat of the organization, which functions under its responsibility;b. carry out the programme approved by the council and such tasks as may be entreated to him by the executive committee;c. report at each regular session of the council on the activity of the organization and its financial position ARTICLE xviii. - financea. the expenditure of the organization shall be met by annual contributions from member governments and by such other receipts as may be approved by the council or executive committee.b. the amount of the annual contribution of each member government shall be based on the scale of contributions as specified in schedule i.c. governments newly adhering to the convention, if member of fao, enter the appropriate category on the scale in schedule i, and, if not members, the category decided by the council.d. on the recommendation of the executive committee, the council may decide to apply a coefficient to the basic contribution laid down in schedule i, in order to adjust it to the activities of the organization or to the economic situation of the moment. the decision is taken by a two-thirds majority of the member governments present and voting.e. annual contributions shall be payable at the beginning of the organization's financial year.f. the contributions of member governments shall be paid in currencies to be determined by the executive committee with the approval of the contributing governments concerned.g the first annual contribution of a government newly adhering to the convention be payable for the financial year of the organization during which the provision article xx are fulfilled.h. supplementary contributions may be paid by an individual government or group of governments towards special schemes or campaigns of control, which the organization may carry out in the interest of the government or group of governments.i. an accounts verification panel composed of representatives of three member governments shall be elected by the council. members of the panel shall be elected for three years and shall not be eligible for re-election during the next three years.j. the executive committee shall, with the approval of the council, appoint an auditor to audit the accounts of the organization each year.k. the accounts verification panel shall each year examine, with the auditor, the accounts and management of the organization and report to the council ARTICLE xix. - amendmentsa. texts of proposed amendments to the present convention and to schedule 1 t shall be communicated by the director-general to member governments at least months in advance of their consideration by the council.b. amendments to the convention shall come into effect when adopted by a two-majority of the members of the council present and voting, provided that amend involving new obligations for member governments - with the exception amendments to schedule i referred to in paragraph c. below - shall come into force with respect of each such government only on acceptance by it.c. amendments to schedule i shall be adopted by the council by a majority of two-of the member governments.d. acceptance of amendments shall be deposited with the french government who will inform all member governments of the receipt of acceptances and the entry into of amendments ARTICLE xx. - signature and acceptancea. the present convention shall remain open for signature or for accession, by governments which become parties to it, in accordance with the provisions of a iii, in the following circumstances:1. by signature without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or approval;2. by signature followed by ratification, acceptance or approval;3. by accession.b. instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval, or of accession, shall be deposited with the french government. the depositary shall inform all member government of the date on which each has signed or deposited an instrument ARTICLE xxi. - territorial applicationa. any government may at any time declare that its participation in the convention includes all or any of the territories for whose international relations it is responsible. such declaration shall be deposited with the french government.b. any declaration made by a member government under the preceding paragraph will take effect on the thirtieth day following its receipt by the french government.c. the french government shall immediately inform all governments parties to the convention of declarations made under this article ARTICLE xxii. - withdrawala. any member government may at any time after two years of membership withdrawal from this convention by giving written notice of withdrawal to the fri government. the withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of receipt o notification.b. the non-payment of two consecutive annual contributions shall under no. conditions imply the withdrawal from the convention of the defaulting met government.c. the application of the convention to a territory or territories under article xxi may be terminated by written notification to the french government by the participating government responsible for the international relations of such territory or territories. the notification shall take effect one year from the date of its receipt.d. the french government shall immediately inform all participating government notifications given under this article ARTICLE xxiii. - entry into forcea. the present convention shall enter into force on the date on which five government have become parties thereto in accordance with the provisions of article xx.b. the french government shall immediately inform all governments which have sib or accepted the convention of the date of entry into force of the convention.c. for each government which has deposited instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval, or of accession, after the convention has entered into force accordingly, paragraph a. of the present article, the convention shall enter into force from the on which this government has deposited its instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval, or of accession.schedule iscale of annual contributionsexpressed in french francs and derived from the scale as approved for pounds sterling council on 18 september, 1968 and based on the shares paid by fao member governments for the fao budget of 1966-1967.(see article xviii)category [tab] percentage paid to fao [tab] annual contributions in french francs [tab] member governments1 [tab] less than 0.01 [tab] 4 590 [tab] -2 [tab] 0.01 - 0.15 [tab] 9 180 [tab] algeria cyprus guernsey jersey luxembourg malta morocco tunisia3 [tab] 0.16 - 0.45 [tab] 13 770 [tab] bulgaria greece hungary ireland israel portugal4 [tab] 0.46 - 0.75 [tab] 18 360 [tab] austria finland norway romania turkey yugoslavia5 [tab] 0.76 - 1.35 [tab] 22 950 [tab] czechoslovakia denmark german democratic republic spain switzerland6 [tab] 1.36 - 2.00 [tab] 27 540 [tab] belgium netherlands poland sweden7 [tab] 2.01 - 2.50 [tab] 32 130 [tab] -8 [tab] 2.51 - 5.00 [tab] 36 720 [tab] italy9 [tab] 5.01 - 7.50 [tab] 41 310 [tab] -10 [tab] 7.51 - 10.00 [tab] 45 900 [tab] federal republic of germany france united kingdom ussrschedule iicountries of europe and the mediterranean areainvited in 1951 to accept the conventionalbaniaaustriabelgiumbyelorussian soviet socialist republicbulgariaczechoslovakiadenmarkegyptfederal republic of germanyfinlandfrance (also for algeria, tunisia and morocco)greecehungaryicelandirelandisraelitalylebanonliechtensteinluxembourgmonaconetherlandsnorwaypolandportugalromaniasan marinospainswedenswitzerlandsyriaturkeyukrainian soviet socialist republicunion of soviet socialist republicsunited kingdomyugoslaviasignatories to the original textin faith whereof the undersigned, duly authorised by their governments, have signet present convention and the schedules thereto.done in paris this 18th day of april 1951 in a single copy, which will remain deposit in the archives of the french government.done in paris this 18th day of april 1951 in a single copy, which will remain dept in the archives of the french government.for denmark: halvor skov, p. bovienfor belgium: guillaume, h. van orshovenfor spain: miguel benllochfor france: r. protinfor ireland: d. delaneyfor italy: a. melisfor luxembourg: e. wirionfor the netherlands: c. j. briejerfor portugal: francisco aranhafor the federal republic of germany: h. dreesfor the united kingdom: j. hensleyfor switzerland: a. chaponnierfor the f. p. r. of yugoslavia: g. nonveillerfor austria: f. beranfor greece: d. koulopouloscertified true copy of the original document deposited in the archives of the french republic.le ministre plenipotentiaire chef du service du protocol.edouard de la chauviniereeuropean and mediterranean plant protection organization member governments on 21 september 1988algeriaaustriabelgiumbulgariacyprusczechoslovakiadenmarkfederal republic of germanyfinlandfrancegerman democratic republicgreeceguernseyhungaryirelandisraelitalyjerseyluxembourgmaltamorocconetherlandsnorwaypolandportugalromaniaspainswedenswitzerlandtunisiaturkeyunion of soviet socialist republicsunited kingdomyugoslavia
