FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE EFTA STATES
AND
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
II
PREAMBLE
The Republic of Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway
and the Swiss Confederation (hereinafter referred to as “the EFTA States”),
and
the Republic of Korea (hereinafter referred to as “Korea”),
hereinafter collectively referred to as “the Parties”,
CONSIDERING the important links existing between Korea and the EFTA States;
WISHING to strengthen these links through the creation of a free trade area, thus
establishing close and lasting relations;
CONVINCED that the free trade area will create an expanded and secure market for
goods and services in their territories and create a stable and predictable environment
for investment, thus enhancing the competitiveness of their firms in global markets;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to the United Nations Charter and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;
RESOLVED by way of the removal of obstacles to trade through the creation of a free
trade area to contribute to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade
and provide a catalyst to broader international co-operation, in particular between
Europe and Asia;
AIMING to create new employment opportunities, improve living standards and
ensure a large and steadily growing real income in their respective territories through
the expansion of trade and investment flows;
CONVINCED that this Agreement will create conditions encouraging economic,
trade and investment relations between them;
BUILDING on their respective rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the WTO and the other agreements negotiated thereunder (hereinafter
referred to as “the WTO Agreement”) and other multilateral and bilateral instruments
of co-operation to which they are both parties; and
RECOGNISING that trade liberalisation should allow for the optimal use of the
world's resources in accordance with the objective of sustainable development,
seeking both to protect and preserve the environment;
HAVE AGREED, in pursuit of the above, as follows: 
III
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.1
Objectives
1. Korea and the EFTA States hereby establish a free trade area in accordance
with the provisions of this Agreement.
2. The objectives of this Agreement, which is based on trade relations between
market economies, are:
(a) to achieve the liberalisation and facilitation of trade in goods, in
conformity with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade 1994 (hereinafter referred to as “the GATT 1994”);
(b) to achieve the liberalisation of trade in services, in conformity with
Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (hereinafter
referred to as “the GATS”);
(c) to promote competition in their economies, particularly as it relates to
economic relations between the Parties;
(d) to achieve further liberalisation on a mutual basis of the government
procurement markets of the Parties;

(e) to ensure adequate and effective protection of intellectual property
rights, in accordance with international standards; and
(f) to contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade and by
developing an environment conducive to increased investment flows,
to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade.
ARTICLE 1.2
Geographical Scope
1. Without prejudice to Annex I, this Agreement shall apply:
(a) to the land territory, internal waters, and the territorial sea of a Party,
and the air-space above the territory in accordance with international
law; as well as 
IV
(b) beyond the territorial sea, with respect to measures taken by a Party in
the exercise of its sovereign right or jurisdiction in accordance with
international law.
2. Annex II applies with respect to Norway.
ARTICLE 1.3
Trade and Economic Relations Governed by this Agreement
1. The provisions of this Agreement apply to the trade and economic relations
between, on the one side, Korea and, on the other side, the EFTA States, but not to the
trade relations between individual EFTA States, unless otherwise provided for in this
Agreement.
2. As a result of the customs union established by the Treaty of 29 March 1923
between the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Swiss
Confederation shall represent the Principality of Liechtenstein in matters covered
thereby.
ARTICLE 1.4
Investment
 Regarding investment, reference is made to the agreement on investment
separately concluded between Korea, on the one hand, and Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Switzerland, on the other. This agreement shall for these Parties form part of the
instruments establishing the free trade area.
ARTICLE 1.5
Relationship to other Agreements
The provisions of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to the rights and
obligations of the Parties under the WTO Agreement and any other international
agreement to which they are party. 
V
ARTICLE 1.6
Regional and Local Government
Each Party shall ensure within its territory the observance of all obligations
and commitments under this Agreement by its respective regional and local
governments and authorities, and by non-governmental bodies in the exercise of
governmental powers delegated to them by central, regional and local governments or
authorities.
ARTICLE 1.7
Preferential Agreements
This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs
unions, free trade areas, arrangements for frontier trade and other preferential
agreements to the extent that these do not adversely affect the trade regime provided
for by this Agreement.
CHAPTER 2 TRADE IN GOODS
ARTICLE 2.1
Scope
1. This Chapter shall apply to the products listed below, which must originate in
an EFTA State or in Korea except when the rights and obligations of the Parties are
governed by the GATT 1994:
(a) all products falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System (hereinafter referred to as
“the HS”), excluding the products listed in Annex III;
(b) processed agricultural products as provided for in Annex IV; and
(c) fish and other marine products as provided for in Annex V.
2. Korea and each EFTA State have concluded agreements on trade in
agricultural products on a bilateral basis. These agreements form part of the
instruments establishing the free trade area between the EFTA States and Korea. 
VI
ARTICLE 2.2
Rules of Origin and Customs Procedures
The provisions on rules of origin and customs procedures are set out in
Annex I.
ARTICLE 2.3
Customs Duties
1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the EFTA States and Korea shall
abolish all customs duties and other duties or charges on imports and exports of
products originating in an EFTA State or in Korea except as otherwise provided for in
Annex VI.
2. No new customs duties and other duties or charges on imports and exports of
products originating in Korea or in an EFTA State shall be introduced.
3. “Customs duties and other duties or charges on imports and exports” includes
any duty or charge of any kind imposed in connection with the importation or
exportation of a product, including any form of surtax or surcharge in connection with
such importation or exportation, but does not include any charge imposed in
conformity with Articles III and VIII of the GATT 1994.
ARTICLE 2.4
Base Rate of Customs Duties
1. For each product the base rate of customs duties, to which the successive
reductions set out in Annexes IV, V and VI are to be applied, shall be the mostfavoured nation (hereinafter referred to as “MFN”) customs duty rate applied on 1
January 2005.
2. If at any moment a Party reduces its MFN customs duty rates for one or more
goods covered by this Agreement, that duty rate shall apply if and for as long as it is
lower than the customs duty rate calculated in accordance with the tariff elimination
schedule set out in Annexes IV, V and VI. During the application of the reduced
MFN rate, the Parties shall consult upon request with a view to continuing the
elimination schedule based on the reduced MFN customs duty rate. 
VII
3. The reduced customs duty rates calculated in accordance with Annexes IV, V
and VI shall be applied rounded to the first decimal place.
ARTICLE 2.5
Import and Export Restrictions
1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, all import or export prohibitions
or restrictions on trade in goods between the Parties, other than customs duties and
taxes, whether made effective through quotas, import or export licenses or other
measures, shall be eliminated on all products of each Party, except as specified in
Annex V.
2. No new measures as referred to in paragraph 1 shall be introduced.
ARTICLE 2.6
National Treatment
The Parties shall apply national treatment in accordance with Article III of the
GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes, which is hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.7
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of sanitary and
phytosanitary measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on the Application
of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
2. The Parties shall exchange names and addresses of contact points with sanitary
and phytosanitary expertise in order to facilitate technical consultations and the
exchange of information.
ARTICLE 2.8
Technical Regulations
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of technical regulations,
standards and conformity assessment shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on 
VIII
Technical Barriers to Trade (hereinafter referred to as “the TBT Agreement”), which
is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall strengthen their cooperation in the field of technical
regulations, standards and conformity assessment with a view to increasing the mutual
understanding of their respective systems and facilitating access to their respective
markets. To this end, they shall in particular cooperate in:
(a) reinforcing the role of international standards as a basis for technical
regulations, including conformity assessment procedures;

(b) promoting the accreditation of conformity assessment bodies on the
basis of relevant Standards and Guides of the International Standards
Organisation (ISO)/International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC);
and
(c) promoting the mutual acceptance of conformity assessment results of
bodies referred to in paragraph 2(b) which have been recognised under
an appropriate multilateral agreement between their respective
accreditation systems or bodies.
3. The Parties shall, within the context of this Article, expeditiously broaden the
exchange of information and give favourable consideration to any written request for
consultation.
4. The Parties recognise that a broad range of mechanisms exists to facilitate the
acceptance in a Party’s territory of the results of conformity assessment procedures
conducted in another Party’s territory, including:
(a) agreements on mutual acceptance of the results of conformity
assessment procedures with respect to specified regulations conducted
by bodies located in the territory of the other Party;
(b) accreditation procedures for qualifying conformity assessment bodies;
(c) government designation of conformity assessment bodies;
(d) recognition by one Party of the results of conformity assessments
performed in another Party’s territory;
(e) voluntary arrangements between conformity assessment bodies in each
Party’s territory; and
(f) the importing Party’s acceptance of a supplier’s declaration of
conformity. 
IX
The Parties shall, at the latest three years after the date of entry into force of
this Agreement, assess in the Joint Committee referred to in Article 8.1 (hereinafter
referred to as the “Joint Committee”) progress with regard to the acceptance of the
results of conformity assessment between them and, to the extent necessary, agree on
further steps.
5. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, the Parties agree to exchange information
and to hold expert consultations to address any matter that may arise from the
application of specific technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment
procedures and which according to Korea or one or more of the EFTA States has
created or is likely to create an obstacle to trade between the Parties, with a view to
working out an appropriate solution in conformity with the TBT Agreement. The Joint
Committee shall be informed of such consultations.
ARTICLE 2.9
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to subsidies and
countervailing measures shall be governed by Articles VI and XVI of the GATT 1994
and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, except as
provided for in paragraph 2.
2. Before a Party initiates an investigation to determine the existence, degree and
effect of any alleged subsidy in an EFTA State or in Korea, as provided for in Article
11 of the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the Party
considering initiating an investigation shall notify in writing the Party whose goods
are subject to investigation and allow for a 30 day period with a view to finding a
mutually acceptable solution. The consultations shall take place in the Joint
Committee if any Party so requests within ten days from the receipt of the notification.
ARTICLE 2.10
Anti-Dumping
1. The Parties retain their rights and obligations under Article VI of the GATT
1994 and the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994
(hereinafter referred to as the “WTO Agreement on Anti-Dumping”), subject to the
following:
 (a) The Parties shall endeavour to refrain from initiating anti-dumping
procedures against each other. To this end, when a Party receives a
properly documented application and before initiating an investigation
under the WTO Agreement on Anti-Dumping, the Party shall notify in 
X
writing the other Party whose goods are allegedly being dumped and
allow for consultations with a view to finding a mutually acceptable
solution. The outcome of the consultations shall be communicated to
the other Parties.
 (b) If a Party takes a decision to impose an anti-dumping duty pursuant to
Article 9.1 of the WTO Agreement on Anti-Dumping, the Party taking
such a decision shall apply the “lesser duty” rule by imposing a duty
which is less than the dumping margin where such lesser duty would
be adequate to remove the injury to the domestic industry.
2. Five years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall in the
Joint Committee review whether there is need to maintain the possibility to take antidumping measures between them. If the Parties decide, after the first review, to
maintain the possibility they shall thereafter conduct biennial reviews of this matter in
the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 2.11
Bilateral Safeguard Measures
1. Where, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty under this
Agreement, any product originating in a Party is being imported into the territory of
another Party in such increased quantities, in absolute terms or relative to domestic
production, and under such conditions as to constitute a substantial cause of serious
injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry of like or directly competitive
products in the territory of the importing Party, the importing Party may take
emergency measures to the minimum extent necessary to remedy or prevent the injury,
subject to the provisions of the following paragraphs of this Article.
2. Emergency measures shall only be taken upon clear evidence that increased
imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury pursuant to an
investigation in accordance with the procedures laid down in the WTO Agreement on
Safeguards.
3. The Party intending to take an emergency action under this Article shall
immediately, and in any case before taking a measure, make notification to the other
Parties and the Joint Committee. The notification shall contain all pertinent
information, which shall include evidence of serious injury or threat thereof caused by
increased imports, precise description of the product involved, and the proposed
measure, proposed date of introduction, expected duration and timetable for the
progressive removal of the measure. A Party that may be affected by the measure
shall be offered compensation in the form of substantially equivalent trade
liberalization in relation to the imports from any such Party. 
XI
4. If the conditions in paragraph 1 are met, the importing Party may:
(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of customs duty provided for
under this Agreement for the product; or
(b) increase the rate of customs duty for the product to a level not to
exceed the lesser of:
(i) the MFN rate of duty applied at the time the action is taken; or
(ii) the MFN rate of duty applied on the day immediately preceding
the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
5. Emergency measures shall be taken for a period not exceeding one year. In
very exceptional circumstances, after review by the Joint Committee, measures may
be taken up to a total maximum period of three years. No measures shall be applied to
the import of a product, which has previously been subject to such a measure, for a
period of, at least, three years since the expiry of the measure.
6. The Joint Committee shall, within 30 days from the date of notification,
examine the information provided under paragraph 3 in order to facilitate a mutually
acceptable resolution of the matter. In the absence of such resolution, the importing
Party may adopt a measure pursuant to paragraph 4 to remedy the problem, and, in the
absence of mutually agreed compensation, the Party against whose product the
measure is taken may take compensatory action. The safeguard measure and the
compensatory action shall be immediately notified to the other Parties and the Joint
Committee. In the selection of the safeguard measure and the compensatory action,
priority must be given to the action which least disturbs the functioning of this
Agreement. The compensatory action shall normally consist of suspension of
concessions having substantially equivalent trade effects or concessions substantially
equivalent to the value of the additional duties expected to result from the emergency
action. The Party taking such action shall apply the action only for the minimum
period necessary to achieve the substantially equivalent trade effects and in any event,
only while the measure under paragraph 4 is being applied.
7. Upon the termination of the measure, the rate of customs duty shall be the rate
which would have been in effect but for the measure.
8. In critical circumstances, where delay would cause damage which would be
difficult to repair, a Party may take a provisional emergency measure pursuant to a
preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased imports constitute
a substantial cause of serious injury, or threat thereof, to the domestic industry. The
Party intending to take such a measure shall immediately notify the other Parties and
the Joint Committee thereof. Within 30 days of the date of the notification, the
pertinent procedures set out in paragraphs 2 to 6, including for compensatory action, 
XII
shall be initiated. Any compensation shall be based on the total period of application
of the provisional emergency measure and of the emergency measure.
9. Any provisional measures shall be terminated within 200 days at the latest.
The period of application of any such provisional measure shall be counted as part of
the duration of the measure set out in paragraph 4 and any extension thereof. Any
tariff increases shall be promptly refunded if the investigation described in paragraph
2 does not result in a finding that the conditions of paragraph 1 are met.
10. Five years after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall
in the Joint Committee review whether there is need to maintain the possibility to take
safeguard measures between them. If the Parties decide, after the first review to
maintain the possibility, they shall thereafter conduct biennial review of this matter in
the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 2.12
Balance-of-Payments Difficulties
1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictive measures for
balance-of-payments purposes.
2. A Party in serious balance-of-payments difficulties, or under imminent threat
thereof, may, in accordance with the conditions established under the GATT 1994 and
the WTO Understanding on the Balance-of-Payments Provisions, adopt trade
restrictive measures, which shall be of limited duration and non-discriminatory, and
may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy the balance-of-payments situation.
The relevant provisions of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Understanding on the
Balance-of-Payments Provisions are hereby incorporated into and made part of this
Agreement.
3. The Party introducing a measure under this Article shall promptly notify the
other Parties and the Joint Committee thereof.
ARTICLE 2.13
Exceptions and other Rights and Obligations
The following rights and obligations of the Parties shall be governed by the
corresponding Articles of the GATT 1994, which are hereby incorporated into and
made part of this Agreement:
(a) in respect of state trading enterprises, by Article XVII and the
Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XVII; 
XIII
(b) in respect of general exceptions, by Article XX; and
(c) in respect of security exceptions, by Article XXI.
CHAPTER 3 TRADE IN SERVICES
ARTICLE 3.1
Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter applies to measures affecting trade in services taken by central,
regional or local governments and authorities as well as by non-governmental bodies
in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local governments or
authorities. It applies to measures in all services sectors except as provided for in
Article 4.1. It does not apply to measures affecting air traffic rights or measures
affecting services directly related to the exercise of air traffic rights, except as
provided for in paragraph 3 of the GATS Annex on Air Transport Services.
2. Articles 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 shall not apply to laws, regulations or requirements
governing the procurement by government agencies of services purchased for
governmental purposes and not for commercial resale or for use in the supply of
services for commercial sale.
ARTICLE 3.2
Incorporation of Provisions from the GATS
Wherever a provision of this Chapter provides that a provision of the GATS is
incorporated into and made part of this Chapter, the meaning of the terms used in the
GATS provision shall be understood as follows:
(a) “Member” shall mean “Party”, except that “among Members” shall
mean “among Members of the WTO”;
(b) “Schedules” shall mean the Schedules referred to in Article 3.16 and
contained in Annex VII; and
(c) “Specific Commitment” shall mean a specific commitment in a
Schedule referred to in Article 3.16. 
XIV
ARTICLE 3.3
Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter:
1. The following definitions of Article I of the GATS are incorporated into and
made part of this Chapter:
 (a) “trade in services”;
 (b) “services”; and
(c) “a service supplied in the exercise of governmental authority”.
2. “Service supplier” means any person that supplies, or seeks to supply, a
service.1
3. “Natural person of a Party” is, under its legislation, a national of that Party, or
a permanent resident of that Party if that Party accords substantially the same
treatment to its permanent residents as to its nationals in respect of measures affecting
trade in services.
4. “Juridical person of a Party” means a juridical person which is either:
(a) constituted or otherwise organised under the law of that Party, and
(i) is engaged in substantive business operations in the territory of
any Party; or
(ii) is engaged in substantive business operations in the territory of
any Member of the WTO and is owned or controlled by natural
persons of that Party or by juridical persons that meet the
conditions of paragraph 4(a)(i);

1
 Where the service is not supplied directly by a juridical person but through other forms of
commercial presence such as a branch or a representative office, the service supplier (i.e. the
juridical person) shall, nonetheless, through such commercial presence be accorded the
treatment provided for service suppliers under this Chapter. Such treatment shall be extended
to the commercial presence through which the service is supplied or sought to be supplied and
need not be extended to any other parts of the service supplier located outside the territory
where the service is supplied or sought to be supplied.
XV
or
(b) in the case of the supply of a service through commercial presence,
owned or controlled by:
(i) natural persons of that Party; or
(ii) juridical persons that meet the conditions of paragraph 4(a).
5. The following definitions of Article XXVIII of the GATS are hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Chapter:
 (a) “measure”;
 (b) “supply of a service”;
(c) “measures by Members affecting trade in services”;
 (d) “commercial presence”;
(e) “sector” of a service;
 (f) “service of another Member”;
(g) “monopoly supplier of a service”;
(h) “service consumer”;

(i) “person”;
 (j) “juridical person”;
(k) “owned”, “controlled” and “affiliated”; and
(l) “direct taxes”.
ARTICLE 3.4
Most Favoured Nation Treatment
1. Without prejudice to measures taken in accordance with Article VII of the
GATS, and except as provided for in its List of MFN-exemptions contained in Annex
VIII, a Party shall accord immediately and unconditionally, in respect of all measures
affecting the supply of services, to services and service suppliers of another Party 
XVI
treatment no less favourable than the treatment it accords to like services and service
suppliers of any non-Party.
2. Treatment granted under other agreements concluded by one of the Parties and
notified under Article V or Article V bis of the GATS shall not be subject to
paragraph 1.
3. If a Party enters into an agreement of the type referred to in paragraph 2, it
shall upon request from another Party afford adequate opportunity to that Party to
negotiate the benefits granted therein.
4. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of advantages accorded to
adjacent countries shall be governed by paragraph 3 of Article II of the GATS, which
is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.5
Market Access
Commitments on market access shall be governed by Article XVI of the
GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.6
National Treatment
Commitments on national treatment shall be governed by Article XVII of the
GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.7
Additional Commitments
Additional commitments shall be governed by Article XVIII of the GATS,
which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter. 
XVII
ARTICLE 3.8
Domestic Regulation
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of domestic regulation shall
be governed by Article VI of the GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.9
Recognition
1. Where a Party recognises, by agreement or arrangement, the education or
experience obtained, requirements met or licenses or certifications granted in the
territory of a non-Party, that Party shall accord another Party adequate opportunity to
negotiate its accession to such an agreement or arrangement, whether existing or
future, or to negotiate a comparable agreement or arrangement with it. Where a Party
accords recognition autonomously, it shall afford adequate opportunity for another
Party to demonstrate that the education or experience obtained, requirements met or
licenses or certifications granted in the territory of that other Party should also be
recognised.
2. Any such agreement or arrangement or autonomous recognition shall be in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the WTO Agreement and, in particular,
Article VII of the GATS.
3. Annex IX applies to mutual recognition of, inter alia, education or experience,
qualifications, licenses, certification or accreditation of service suppliers.
ARTICLE 3.10
Movement of Natural Persons
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of the movement of natural
persons of a Party supplying services shall be governed by the GATS Annex on
Movement of Natural Persons Supplying Services, which is hereby incorporated into
and made part of this Chapter. 
XVIII
ARTICLE 3.11
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of monopolies and
exclusive service suppliers shall be governed by paragraphs 1, 2 and 5 of Article VIII
of the GATS, which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.12
Business Practices
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of business practices shall
be governed by Article IX of the GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.13
Payments and Transfers
1. Subject to its specific commitments and except under the circumstances
envisaged in Article 3.14, a Party shall not apply restrictions on international transfers
and payments for current transactions relating to the supply of a service with another
Party.
2. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the Parties
under the Articles of the Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
including the use of exchange actions which are in conformity with the Articles of the
Agreement of the IMF, provided that a Party shall not impose restrictions on capital
transactions inconsistently with its specific commitments, except under Article 3.14 or
at the request of the IMF.
ARTICLE 3.14
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
1. The Parties shall endeavour to avoid the imposition of restrictions to safeguard
the balance of payments.
2. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of such restrictions shall be
governed by paragraphs 1 to 3 of Article XII of the GATS, which are hereby
incorporated into and made part of this Chapter. 
XIX
3. A Party adopting or maintaining such restrictions shall promptly notify the
Joint Committee thereof.
ARTICLE 3.15
Exceptions
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of general and security
exceptions shall be governed by Articles XIV and XIV bis of the GATS, which are
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.16
Schedules of Specific Commitments
1. Each Party shall set out in a Schedule the specific commitments it undertakes
under Articles 3.5, 3.6 and 3.7. With respect to sectors where such specific
commitments are undertaken, each Schedule shall specify the elements set forth in
paragraphs (a) to (d) of paragraph 1 of Article XX of the GATS.
2. Measures inconsistent with both Articles 3.5 and 3.6 shall be dealt with as
provided for in paragraph 2 of Article XX of the GATS.
3. The Parties’ Schedules of specific commitments are set out in Annex VII.
4. Particular aspects of market access, national treatment and additional
commitments applicable to telecommunications services and to co-production of
broadcasting programmes are dealt with in Annexes X and XI.
ARTICLE 3.17
Modification of Schedules
The Parties shall, upon written request by a Party, hold consultations to
consider any modification or withdrawal of a specific commitment in its Schedule of
specific commitments. The consultations shall be held within three months after the
requesting Party made its request. In the consultations, the Parties shall aim to ensure
that a general level of mutually advantageous commitments not less favourable to
trade than that provided for in the Schedule of specific commitments prior to such
consultations is maintained. Modifications of Schedules are subject to the procedures
set out in Article 8.1.
XX
ARTICLE 3.18
Transparency
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of transparency shall be
governed by paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article III and by Article III bis of the GATS,
which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 3.19
Review
With the objective of further liberalisation of trade in services between them,
the Parties commit themselves to review every two years their Schedules of specific
commitments and their Lists of MFN-exemptions. The first review shall take place
not later than three years after the entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 3.20
Annexes
The following Annexes attached to this Agreement form an integral part of this
Chapter:
- Annex VII (Schedules of Specific Commitments);
- Annex VIII (Lists of MFN-exemptions);
- Annex IX (Mutual Recognition);
- Annex X (Telecommunications Services); and
- Annex XI (Co-production of Broadcasting Programmes).
CHAPTER 4 FINANCIAL SERVICES
ARTICLE 4.1
Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter applies to measures affecting trade in financial services taken by
central, regional or local governments and authorities as well as by non-governmental
bodies in the exercise of powers delegated by central, regional or local governments
or authorities. 
XXI
2. Articles 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6 shall not apply to laws, regulations or requirements
governing the procurement by government agencies of financial services purchased
for governmental purposes and not for commercial resale or for use in the supply of
services for commercial sale.
3. Chapter 3 applies to measures described in paragraph 1 where this is
specifically provided for by this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.2
Incorporation of Provisions from the GATS
Article 3.2 shall apply to this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.3
Definitions
1. Except for its paragraph 1(c), Article 3.3 shall apply to this Chapter.
2. The following definitions of the GATS Annex on Financial Services are
incorporated into and made part of this Chapter:
(a) “services supplied in the exercise of governmental authority”
(paragraphs 1 (b) and (c) of the Annex);
(b) “a financial service” (paragraph 5 (a) of the Annex);
(c) “financial service supplier” (paragraph 5 (b) of the Annex); and
 (d) “public entity” (paragraph 5 (c) of the Annex).
ARTICLE 4.4
Most Favoured Nation Treatment
Article 3.4 shall apply to this Chapter. 
XXII
ARTICLE 4.5

Market Access
Commitments on market access shall be governed by Article XVI of the
GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.6
National Treatment
1. Commitments on national treatment shall be governed by Article XVII of the
GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
2. In addition, under terms and conditions that accord national treatment, each
Party shall grant to financial service suppliers of another Party established in its
territory access to payment and clearing systems operated by public entities and to
official funding and refinancing facilities available in the normal course of ordinary
business. This paragraph is not intended to confer access to a Party’s lender of last
resort facilities.
3. Where membership or participation in, or access to, a self-regulatory body,
securities or futures exchange or market, clearing agency, or any other organisation or
association is required by a Party in order for financial service suppliers of any other
Party to supply financial services on an equal basis with financial service suppliers of
the Party, or where the Party provides directly or indirectly such entities with
privileges or advantages in supplying financial services, the Party shall ensure that
such entities accord national treatment to financial service suppliers of any other Party
established in its territory.
ARTICLE 4.7
Additional Commitments
Additional commitments shall be governed by Article XVIII of the GATS,
which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter. 
XXIII
ARTICLE 4.8
Domestic Regulation
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of domestic regulation shall
be governed by Article VI of the GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Chapter.
2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or
maintaining reasonable measures for prudential reasons, including for:
(a) the protection of investors, depositors, policy-holders, policyclaimants, persons to whom a fiduciary duty is owed by a financial
service supplier, or any similar financial market participants; or
(b) ensuring the integrity and stability of a Party's financial system.
Where such measures do not conform with the provisions of this Chapter, they
shall not be used as a means of avoiding the Party’s commitments or obligations
under such provisions. Such measures shall not be more burdensome than necessary
to achieve their aim.
3. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to disclose
information relating to the affairs and accounts of individual consumers or any
confidential or proprietary information in the possession of public entities.
ARTICLE 4.9
Recognition
1. Article 3.9 shall apply to this Chapter.
2. In addition, where a Party recognises prudential measures of a non-Party in
determining how the Party’s measures relating to financial services shall be applied,
that Party shall afford adequate opportunity for another Party to negotiate its
accession to such agreement or arrangement, or to negotiate a comparable agreement
or arrangement with it, under circumstances in which there would be equivalent
regulation, oversight, implementation of such regulation and, if appropriate,
procedures concerning the sharing of information between the parties to the
agreement or arrangement. Where a Party accords such recognition autonomously, it
shall afford adequate opportunity for another Party to demonstrate that such
circumstances exist. 
XXIV
ARTICLE 4.10
Movement of Natural Persons
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of the movement of natural
persons of a Party supplying services shall be governed by the GATS Annex on
Movement of Natural Persons Supplying Services, which is hereby incorporated into
and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.11
Monopolies and Exclusive Service Suppliers
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of monopolies and
exclusive service suppliers shall be governed by paragraphs 1, 2 and 5 of Article VIII
of the GATS, which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.12
Business Practices
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of business practices shall
be governed by Article IX of the GATS, which is hereby incorporated into and made
part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.13
Payments and Transfers
Article 3.13 shall apply to this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.14
Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
Article 3.14 shall apply to this Chapter. 
XXV
ARTICLE 4.15
Exceptions
The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of general and security
exceptions shall be governed by Articles XIV and XIV bis of the GATS, which are
hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.16
Schedules of Specific Commitments
 Each Party shall set out in its schedule referred to in Article 3.16 the specific
commitments it undertakes for services defined under paragraph 2(b) of Article 4.3 in
accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 of Article 3.16.
ARTICLE 4.17
Modification of Schedules
Article 3.17 shall apply to this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.18
Transparency
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of transparency shall be
governed by paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article III and by Article III bis of the GATS,
which are hereby incorporated into and made part of this Chapter.
2. In addition, each Party commits to promote regulatory transparency in
financial services. Accordingly, the Parties undertake to consult, as appropriate, with
the goal of promoting objective and transparent regulatory processes in each Party,
taking into account:
(a) the work undertaken by the Parties in the GATS and the Parties’ work
in other fora relating to trade in financial services; and
(b) the importance of regulatory transparency of identifiable policy
objectives and clear and consistently applied regulatory processes that
are communicated or otherwise made available to the public. 
XXVI
ARTICLE 4.19
Review
Article 3.19 shall apply to this Chapter.
ARTICLE 4.20
Sub-Committee on Financial Services
1. A Sub-Committee on Financial Services (hereinafter referred to as “the SubCommittee”) is to be set up under the Joint Committee. The principal representative
of each Party shall be from an authority competent for this Agreement or from a
financial authority.
2. The mandate of the Sub-Committee shall be:
(a) to supervise the implementation of this Chapter, assess its functioning,
and oversee its further elaboration; and
(b) to consider issues regarding financial services that are referred to it by
a Party.
3. The Sub-Committee shall meet in conjunction with Joint Committee meetings,
or as otherwise agreed upon between the Parties.
4. The Sub-Committee shall be chaired jointly by Korea and one of the EFTA
States. It shall act by consensus.
ARTICLE 4.21
Dispute Settlement
1. Relevant Articles in Chapter 9 shall apply to the settlement of disputes arising
under this Chapter as modified by this Article.
2. Consultations regarding financial services held pursuant to Chapter 9 shall
include officials from an authority competent for this Agreement or from a financial
authority. The Parties shall report the results of their consultations to the SubCommittee.
3. Article 9.4 shall apply, with the following modifications: 
XXVII
(a) where the Parties to the disputes so agree, the arbitration panel shall be
composed entirely of individuals meeting the qualifications in
paragraph 4; and
(b) in any other case,
(i) each Party to the dispute may select individuals meeting the
qualifications set out in paragraph 7 of Article 9.5; and
(ii) if the Party complained against invokes Article 4.8, the chair of
the panel shall meet the qualifications set out in paragraph 4,
unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise.
4. Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, financial services panellists
shall:
(a) meet the qualifications set out in Article 9.5; and
(b) have expertise or experience in financial services law or practice,
which may include the regulation of financial institutions.
5. With regard to paragraph 5 of Article 9.10, the following shall apply wherever
practical. Where the measure under dispute affects:
(a) only the financial services sector, the complaining Party shall first seek
to suspend benefits only in the financial services sector;
(b) the financial services sector and any other sector, the complaining
Party shall first seek to suspend benefits in the respective sectors and
with an effect equivalent to the effect of the measure complained
against in each sector; or
(c) only a sector other than the financial services sector, the complaining
Party shall seek to avoid suspending benefits in the financial services
sector. 
XXVIII
CHAPTER 5 COMPETITION
ARTICLE 5.1
Rules of Competition concerning Enterprises
1. The Parties recognise that anti-competitive business conduct may frustrate the
benefits arising from this Agreement. Such conduct is therefore incompatible with the
proper functioning of this Agreement in so far as it may affect trade between an EFTA
State and Korea.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement, “anti-competitive business conduct”:
(a) means all agreements between enterprises, decisions by associations of
enterprises and concerted practices between enterprises, as well as
abuse by one or more enterprises of a dominant position in the
territories of the Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof,
which have, as their object or effect, the prevention, restriction or
distortion of competition; and
(b) may occur with regard to trade in goods or services. Such conduct may
be effected by private or public enterprises, or by enterprises to which
special or exclusive rights have been granted unless the particular tasks
assigned to them are obstructed.
3. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not be construed to create any
direct obligations for enterprises.
4. The Parties undertake to apply their respective competition laws with a view
to removing anti-competitive business conduct. To that end, they shall notify each
other of relevant enforcement activities and exchange information. No Party shall be
required to disclose information that is confidential according to its laws.
5. Upon request, competition authorities and/or other relevant authorities of the
Parties shall enter into consultations in order to facilitate the removal of anticompetitive business conduct. The Party addressed shall accord full and sympathetic
consideration to that request.
6. Upon request, consultations shall also be held in the Joint Committee if a Party
considers that an anti-competitive business conduct in the territory of another Party
continues to affect trade between them. Consultations shall be held within 30 days of
receipt of the request. The Parties concerned shall give to the Joint Committee all the
support and information in order for the Joint Committee to examine the case and to
assist the Parties concerned in removing the conduct objected to and, where 
XXIX
appropriate, in re-establishing the balance of rights and obligations under this
Agreement.
CHAPTER 6 GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE 6.1
Scope and Coverage
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties in respect of government procurement
shall be governed by the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement (hereinafter
referred to as “the GPA”).
2. The Parties agree to co-operate in the Joint Committee with the aim of
increasing the mutual understanding of their respective government procurement
systems, and achieving further liberalisation and mutual opening up of their
government procurement markets.
ARTICLE 6.2
Exchange of Information
To facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter regarding
government procurement, contact points, responsible for providing information on the
rules and regulations in the field of government procurement, are listed in Annex XII.
ARTICLE 6.3
Further Negotiations
1. Upon conclusion of bilateral negotiations between the Parties on further
liberalisation of their respective government procurement markets in the framework
of the negotiations aimed at amending the GPA, such liberalisation, including
provisions from the agreement amending the main part of the GPA in so far as they
are relevant for these additional liberalisations, shall be included in this Agreement.
The Joint Committee shall take a decision to this effect within three months after
conclusion of these bilateral negotiations. This decision shall be subject to ratification
or acceptance by the Parties. 
XXX
2. If a Party grants to a non-Party, after the entry into force of this Agreement,
additional benefits with regard to the access to its government procurement markets,
this Party shall agree to enter into negotiations on the possible extension of these
benefits to another Party on a reciprocal basis.
CHAPTER 7 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 7.1
Protection of Intellectual Property
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and non-discriminatory
protection of intellectual property rights, and provide for measures for the
enforcement of those rights against infringement, including counterfeiting and piracy,
in accordance with this Article as well as Annex XIII and the international agreements
referred to therein.
2. The Parties shall accord to each other’s nationals treatment no less favourable
than the treatment they accord to their own nationals. Exemptions from this obligation
must be in accordance with the substantive provisions of Articles 3 and 5 of the WTO
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (hereinafter
referred to as “the TRIPS Agreement”).
3. With regard to the protection of intellectual property, the Parties shall, in
accordance with the TRIPS Agreement, in particular Articles 4 and 5 thereof, grant to
each other’s nationals treatment no less favourable than that accorded to nationals of
any third State.
4. The Parties agree, upon request of any Party made to the Joint Committee, and
subject to consensus of the Parties, to review the provisions on intellectual property of
this Agreement as appropriate, with a view to avoiding or remedying trade distortions
caused by actual levels of protection of intellectual property rights, and to promoting
intellectual property that facilitates trade and investment relations between the Parties.
ARTICLE 7.2
Scope of Intellectual Property
“Intellectual property” refers in particular to copyright, including computer
programmes and compilations of data, as well as related rights, trademarks for goods
and services, geographical indications, including appellations of origin, industrial 
XXXI
designs, patents, plant varieties, layout-designs/topographies of integrated circuits, as
well as undisclosed information.
ARTICLE 7.3
Co-operation in the Field of Intellectual Property
1. The Parties, recognising the growing importance of intellectual property rights
as a factor of social, economic and cultural development, shall enhance their cooperation in this field.
2. The Parties agree, if circumstances permit, to co-operate on activities relating
to the identified or to future international conventions on harmonisation,
administration and enforcement of intellectual property rights and on activities in
international organisations, such as the WTO and the Word Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO), as well as to share experiences and exchange information on
relations of the Parties with third countries on matters concerning intellectual property.
3. The Parties, pursuant to paragraph 1, may co-operate in:
(a) programmes for personnel interchange, including for examiners,
between the Parties;
(b) the field of information systems on intellectual property;
(c) the promotion of mutual understanding of each Party’s policy,
activities and experiences in the field of intellectual property; and
(d) the promotion of education on intellectual property and invention
awareness.
CHAPTER 8 INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 8.1
The Joint Committee
1. The Parties hereby establish the Korea-EFTA Joint Committee. It shall be
composed of representatives of the Parties, which shall be headed by Ministers or by
senior officials delegated by them for this purpose. 
XXXII
2. The Joint Committee shall:
(a) supervise and review the implementation of this Agreement, inter alia
by means of a comprehensive review of the application of the
provisions of this Agreement, with due regard to any specific reviews
contained in this Agreement;

(b) keep under review the possibility of further removal of barriers to trade
and other restrictive measures concerning trade between Korea and the
EFTA States;
(c) oversee the further development of this Agreement;
(d) supervise the work of all sub-committees and working groups
established under this Agreement;
(e) endeavour to resolve disputes that may arise regarding the
interpretation or application of this Agreement; and
(f) consider any other matter that may affect the operation of this
Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. Except where
otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the sub-committees and working groups
shall work under a mandate established by the Joint Committee.
4. The Joint Committee shall take decisions as provided for in this Agreement,
and may make recommendations, by consensus.
5. The Joint Committee shall meet within one year of the entry into force of this
Agreement. Thereafter, it shall meet whenever necessary upon mutual agreement but
normally every two years. Its meetings shall be chaired jointly by Korea and one of
the EFTA States. The Joint Committee shall establish its rules of procedure.
6. Each Party may request at any time, through a notice in writing to the other
Parties, that a special meeting of the Joint Committee be held. Such a meeting shall
take place within 30 days of receipt of the request, unless the Parties agree otherwise.
7. The Joint Committee may decide to amend the Annexes and Appendices to
this Agreement. Subject to paragraph 8, it may set a date for the entry into force of
such decisions.
8. If a representative of a Party in the Joint Committee has accepted a decision
subject to the fulfilment of constitutional requirements, the decision shall enter into
force on the date that the last Party notifies that its internal requirements have been 
XXXIII
fulfilled, unless the decision itself specifies a later date. The Joint Committee may
decide that the decision shall enter into force for those Parties that have fulfilled their
internal requirements, provided that Korea is one of those Parties. A Party may apply
a decision of the Joint Committee provisionally until it enters into force, subject to the
constitutional requirements of this Party.
ARTICLE 8.2
Secretariat
1. The Parties hereby designate the following competent organs to serve as their
respective secretariats for purposes of this Agreement:
(a) in the case of Korea, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; and
(b) in the case of the EFTA States, the EFTA Secretariat.
2. Without prejudice to Article 10.7 and unless otherwise agreed by the Parties or
stated in this Agreement, all official communications or notifications to or by a Party
for purposes of this Agreement shall be made through its secretariat.
CHAPTER 9 DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
ARTICLE 9.1
Scope and Coverage
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply with respect to the avoidance or the
settlement of any dispute arising from this Agreement, taking into account the
modalities set out in Article 4.21 of this Agreement and Article 25 of Annex I.
2. Disputes on the same matter arising under both this Agreement and the WTO
Agreement may be settled in either forum at the discretion of the complaining Party.
The forum thus selected shall be used to the exclusion of the other.
3. For purposes of this Article, dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO
Agreement or this Agreement are deemed to be initiated upon a request for a panel by
a Party. 
XXXIV
4. Before a Party initiates dispute settlement proceedings under the WTO
Agreement against another Party or Parties as regards a matter arising under both this
Agreement and the WTO Agreement, it shall notify all the Parties of its intention.
5. The arbitration rules provided for in Articles 9.4 to 9.10 do not apply to
Articles 2.7, 2.9, 2.10 and Chapter 5.
ARTICLE 9.2
Good Offices, Conciliation or Mediation
1. Good offices, conciliation and mediation are procedures that are undertaken
voluntarily if the Parties involved so agree. They may begin at any time and be
terminated at any time.
2. Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation shall be
confidential and without prejudice to the Parties’ rights in any other proceedings.
ARTICLE 9.3
Consultations
1. The Parties shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and
application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through co-operation and
consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might
affect its operation.
2. Any one or more of the EFTA States may request in writing consultations with
Korea and vice-versa whenever a Party considers that a measure applied by the Party
or Parties to which the request is made is inconsistent with this Agreement or that any
benefit accruing to it directly or indirectly under this Agreement is impaired or
nullified by such measure. Consultations shall take place in the Joint Committee
unless the Party or Parties making or receiving the request for consultations disagree.
3. Consultations shall be held within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
request for consultations. Consultations on urgent matters, including those on
perishable agricultural goods, shall commence within 15 days from the receipt of the
request for consultations.
4. The Parties involved in the consultations shall provide sufficient information
to enable a full examination of how the measure or other matter might affect the
operation of this Agreement and treat any confidential or proprietary information
exchanged in the course of consultations in the same manner as the Party providing
the information. 
XXXV
5. The consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of
the Parties involved in any further proceedings.
6. The Parties involved in the consultations shall inform the other Parties of any
mutually agreed resolution of the matter.
ARTICLE 9.4
Establishment of Arbitration Panel
1. If the matter has not been resolved within 60 days, or 30 days in relation to a
matter of urgency, after the date of receipt of the request for consultations, it may be
referred to arbitration by one or more of the Parties involved by means of a written
request addressed to the Party or Parties complained against. A copy of this request
shall also be communicated to all Parties so that each Party may determine whether to
participate in the dispute.
2. Where more than one Party requests the establishment of an arbitration panel
relating to the same matter, a single arbitration panel shall be established to examine
these complaints whenever feasible2
.
3. A request for arbitration shall give the reason for the complaint including the
identification of the measure at issue and an indication of the legal basis of the
complaint.
ARTICLE 9.5
Arbitration Panel

1. The arbitration panel referred to in Article 9.4 shall consist of three members.
2. Each Party to the dispute shall appoint one member of the arbitration panel
within 15 days of the receipt of the request under Article 9.4.
3. The Parties to the dispute shall agree on the appointment of the third member
within 30 days of the appointment of the second member. The member thus appointed
shall chair the arbitration panel.
4. If all three members have not been designated or appointed within 45 days
from the date of receipt of the request referred to in Article 9.4, the necessary

2
 In the following, the terms “Party to the dispute”, “complaining Party”, “Party complained
against” are used regardless of whether two or more Parties are involved in a dispute. 
XXXVI
designations shall be made at the request of any Party to the dispute by the DirectorGeneral of the WTO within a further 30 days. Where the designation of the members
of the arbitration panel by the Director-General of the WTO is not made within the
specified period, the Parties to the dispute shall within the next ten days exchange lists
comprising four nominees each who shall not be nationals of either Party. The panel
members shall then be appointed in the presence of both Parties by lot from the lists
within ten days from the date of exchange of their respective lists. If a Party fails to
submit its list of four nominees, the panel members shall be appointed by lot from the
list already submitted by the other Party.
5. The chair of the arbitration panel shall not be a national of any of the Parties,
nor have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of any of the Parties, nor
be employed or previously have been employed by any of the Parties, nor have dealt
with the case in any capacity.
6. If a member dies, withdraws or is removed, a replacement shall be selected
within 15 days in accordance with the selection procedure followed to select him or
her. In such a case, any time period applicable to the arbitration panel proceedings
shall be suspended for a period beginning on the date the member dies, withdraws or
is removed and ending on the date the replacement is selected.
7. Any person appointed as a member of the arbitration panel shall have
expertise or experience in law, international trade, other matters covered by this
Agreement or in the resolution of disputes arising under international trade
agreements. A member shall be chosen strictly on the basis of objectivity, reliability,
sound judgement and independence and shall conduct himself or herself according to
these characteristics throughout the course of the arbitration proceedings. If a Party
believes that a member is in violation of the bases stated above, the Parties shall
consult and if they agree, the member shall be removed and a new member shall be
appointed in accordance with this Article, and following the procedure outlined in
paragraph 6.
8. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which
the chair is appointed.
ARTICLE 9.6
Procedures of the Arbitration Panel
1. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the arbitration panel
proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure that
shall be adopted at the first meeting of the Joint Committee. Pending the adoption of
those rules, the arbitration panel shall regulate its own procedures, unless the Parties
to the dispute agree otherwise. 
XXXVII
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, for all arbitration panel proceedings the
procedures shall ensure that:
(a) the Parties to the dispute have the right to at least one hearing before the
arbitration panel as well as the opportunity to provide initial and rebuttal
written submissions;

(b) the Parties to the dispute be invited to all the hearings held by the
arbitration panel;
(c) all submissions and comments made to the arbitration panel be available
to the Parties to the dispute, subject to any requirements of confidentiality;
and
(d) hearings, deliberations, initial report and all written submissions to and
communications with the arbitration panel be confidential.
3. Unless the Parties to the dispute otherwise agree within 20 days from the date
of delivery of the request for the establishment of the arbitration panel, the terms of
reference shall be:
“To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, the
matter referred to in the request for the establishment of an arbitration panel
pursuant to Article 9.4 and to make findings of law and fact together with the
reasons therefor as well as recommendations, if any, for the resolution of the
dispute.”
4. At the request of a Party to the dispute or on its own initiative, the arbitration
panel may seek scientific information and technical advice from experts as it deems
appropriate.
5. The arbitration panel shall make its ruling based on the provisions of this
Agreement, applied and interpreted in accordance with the rules of interpretation of
public international law.
6. Decisions of the arbitration panel shall be taken by a majority of its members.
Any member may furnish separate opinions on matters not unanimously agreed. No
arbitration panel may disclose which members are associated with majority or
minority opinions.

7. The expenses of the arbitration panel, including the remuneration of its
members, shall be borne by the Parties to the dispute in equal shares. 
XXXVIII
ARTICLE 9.7
Withdrawal of Complaint
A complaining Party may withdraw its complaint at any time before the initial
report has been issued. Such withdrawal is without prejudice to its right to introduce a
new complaint regarding the same issue at a later point in time.
ARTICLE 9.8
Initial Report
1. The arbitration panel shall present to the Parties to the dispute an initial report
within 90 days from the date of the establishment of the arbitration panel.
2. The arbitration panel shall base its report on the submissions and arguments of
the Parties to the dispute and on any scientific information and technical advice
obtained pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 9.6.
3. A Party to the dispute may submit written comments to the arbitration panel
on the initial report within 14 days of presentation of the report.
4. In such an event, and after considering the written comments, the arbitration
panel, on its own initiative or at the request of a Party to the dispute, may:
(a) request the views of any of the Parties to the dispute;
(b) reconsider its report; and/or
(c) make any further examination that it considers appropriate.
ARTICLE 9.9
Final Report
1. The arbitration panel shall present to the Parties to the dispute the final report,
containing the matters referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 9.8, including any separate
opinions on matters not unanimously agreed, within 30 days of presentation of the
initial report.
2. Unless the Parties to the dispute decide otherwise, the final report shall be
published 15 days after it is presented to them. 
XXXIX
ARTICLE 9.10
Implementation of Arbitration Panel Reports
1. The final report shall be final and binding on the Parties to the dispute. Each
Party to the dispute shall be bound to take the measures involved in carrying out the
final report.
2. On receipt of the final report of an arbitration panel, the Parties to the dispute
shall agree on:
(a) the means to resolve the dispute, which normally shall conform with
the determinations or recommendations, if any, of the arbitration panel;
and
(b) the reasonable period of time which may be necessary in order to
implement the means to resolve the dispute. If the Parties to the
dispute fail to agree, a Party to the dispute may request the original
arbitration panel to determine the length of the reasonable period of
time, in the light of the particular circumstances of the case. The
determination of the arbitration panel shall be presented within 15 days
from that request.
3. If, in its final report, the arbitration panel determines that a Party has not
conformed with its obligations under this Agreement or that a Party’s measure has
caused nullification or impairment, the means to resolve the dispute shall be,
whenever possible, to eliminate the inconsistency or the nullification or impairment.
4. If the Parties to the dispute are unable to agree on the means to resolve the
dispute pursuant to paragraph 2(a) within 30 days of issuance of the final report, or
have agreed on the means to resolve the dispute but the Party complained against fails
to implement the means within 30 days following the expiration of the reasonable
period of time determined in accordance with paragraph 2(b), the Party complained
against shall, if so requested by the complaining Party, enter into consultations with a
view to agreeing on a mutually acceptable compensation. If no such agreement has
been reached within 20 days from the request, the complaining Party shall be entitled
to suspend the application of benefits granted under this Agreement that are
equivalent to those affected by the measure found to violate this Agreement.
5. In considering the benefits to be suspended, the complaining Party shall first
seek to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors as that affected by the measure
that the arbitration panel has found to violate this Agreement. The complaining Party
that considers it is not practicable or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector
or sectors may suspend benefits in other sectors. 
XL
6. The complaining Party shall notify the other Party of the benefits which it
intends to suspend no later than 60 days before the date on which the suspension is
due to take effect. Within 15 days from that notification, any of the Parties to the
dispute may request the original arbitration panel to rule on whether the benefits
which the complaining Party intends to suspend are equivalent to those affected by the
measure found to violate this Agreement, and whether the proposed suspension is in
accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be given
within 45 days from that request. Benefits shall not be suspended until the arbitration
panel has issued its ruling.
7. The suspension of benefits shall be temporary and only be applied by the
complaining Party until the measure found to violate this Agreement has been
withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into conformity with this Agreement, or the
Parties to the dispute have reached agreement on a resolution of the dispute.
8. At the request of a Party to the dispute, the original arbitration panel shall rule
on the conformity with the final report of any implementing measures adopted after
the suspension of benefits and, in light of such ruling, whether the suspension of
benefits should be terminated or modified. The ruling of the arbitration panel shall be
given within 30 days from the date of that request.

9. The rulings provided for in paragraphs 2 (b), 6 and 8 shall be binding.
ARTICLE 9.11
Other Provisions
Any time period mentioned in this Chapter may be modified by mutual
agreement of the Parties involved.
CHAPTER 10 FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 10.1
Transparency
1. The Parties shall publish their laws, or otherwise make publicly available their
laws, regulations, and administrative rulings and judicial decisions of general
application as well as their respective international agreements that may affect the
operation of this Agreement. 
XLI
2. The Parties shall promptly respond to specific questions, and provide upon
request information to each other, on matters referred to in paragraph 1.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall require any Party to disclose confidential
information, which would impede law enforcement, otherwise be contrary to the
public interest or prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of any economic
operator.
4. In the case of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Article and
provisions relating to transparency in other Chapters, the latter shall prevail to the
extent of the inconsistency.
ARTICLE 10.2
Annexes and Appendices
The Annexes and Appendices to this Agreement form an integral part thereof.
ARTICLE 10.3
Amendments
1. Amendments to this Agreement other than those referred to in paragraph 7 of
Article 8.1 shall, after approval by the Joint Committee, be submitted to the Parties for
ratification, acceptance or approval, in accordance with each Party’s constitutional
requirements.
2. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, amendments shall enter into force on
the first day of the second month following the deposit of the last instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval.
3. The text of the amendments as well as the instruments of ratification,
acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
ARTICLE 10.4
Accession
1. Any State, Member of the European Free Trade Association, may accede to
this Agreement, provided that the Joint Committee decides to approve its accession,
on terms and conditions to be negotiated between the acceding State and the existing
Parties. The instrument of accession shall be deposited with the Depositary. 
XLII
2. In relation to an acceding State, this Agreement shall enter into force on the
first day of the second month following the deposit of its instrument of accession or
the approval of the terms of accession by the existing Parties, whichever is later.
ARTICLE 10.5
Withdrawal and Termination
1 Any Party may withdraw from this Agreement by means of a written
notification to the Depositary. The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the
date on which the notification is received by the Depositary.
2. If Korea withdraws, this Agreement shall expire on the date specified in
paragraph 1.
3. In case any EFTA State withdraws from the Convention establishing the
European Free Trade Association, this EFTA State shall withdraw from this
Agreement in accordance with paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 10.6
Entry into Force
1. This Agreement is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. The
instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the
Depositary.
2. This Agreement shall enter into force on 1 July 2006 in relation to those
Signatory States which by then have ratified this Agreement, provided they have
deposited their instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval with the Depositary
at least one month before the entry into force, and provided that Korea is among the
States that have deposited their instruments.
3. In case this Agreement does not enter into force on 1 July 2006, it shall enter
into force on the first day of the second month following the latter date on which
Korea and at least one EFTA State have deposited their instruments of ratification,
acceptance, or approval with the Depositary.
4. In relation to an EFTA State depositing its instrument of ratification,
acceptance or approval after this Agreement has entered into force, the Agreement
shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the deposit of its
instrument. 
XLIII
5. If its constitutional requirements permit, any EFTA State may apply this
Agreement provisionally. Provisional application of this Agreement under this
paragraph shall be notified to the Depositary.
ARTICLE 10.7
Depositary
The Government of Norway shall act as Depositary. 
XLIV
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have
signed this Agreement.
Done at Hong Kong, this 15th day of December 2005, in a single original in the
English language, which shall be deposited with the Government of Norway. The
Depositary shall transmit certified copies to all Signatory States.
For the Republic of Iceland For the Republic of Korea
.......................................................... .................................................
For the Principality of Liechtenstein
..........................................................
For the Kingdom of Norway
..........................................................
For the Swiss Confederation
..........................................................