CONVENTION FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A EUROPEAN
SPACE AGENCY
The States parties to this Convention,
Considering that the magnitude of the human, technical and financial resources
required for activities in the space field is such that these resources lie beyond the
means of any single European country,
Considering the Resolution adopted by the European Space Conference on
20 December 1972 and confirmed by the European Space Conference on 31 July
1973, which decided that a new organisation, called the "European Space Agency",
would be formed out of the European Space Research Organisation and the Euro
pean Organisation for the Development and Construction of Space Vehicle Launchers,
and that the aim would be to integrate the European national space programmes into
a European national space programme as far and as fast as reasonably possible,
Desiring to pursue and to strengthen European cooperation, for exclusively
peaceful purposes, in space research and technology and their space applications,
with a view to their being used for scientific purposes and for operational space ap
plications systems,
Desiring, in order to achieve these aims, to establish a single European space
organisation to increase the efficiency of the total of European space efforts by mak
ing better use of the resources at present devoted to space and to define a European
space programme for exclusively peaceful purposes,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AGENCY
1. A European organisation, called the "European Space Agency", hereinafter
referred to as "the Agency", is hereby established.
2. The members of the Agency, hereinafter referred to as "Member States",
shall be the States which are parties to this Convention in accordance with arti
cles XX and XXII.
3. All Member States shall participate in the mandatory activities referred to in
article V, 1 a, and shall contribute to the fixed common costs of the Agency, referred
to in annex II.
4. The Headquarters of the Agency shall be situated in the Paris area.
Article IL PURPOSE
The purpose of the Agency shall be to provide for and to promote, for exclu
sively peaceful purposes, cooperation among European States in space research and
technology and their space applications, with a view to their being used for scientific
purposes and for operational space applications systems:
a. By elaborating and implementing a long-term European space policy, by recom
mending space objectives to the Member States, and by concerting the policies of
the Member States with respect to other national and international organisations
and institutions;
b. By elaborating and implementing activities and programmes in the space field;
c. By coordinating the European space programme and national programmes, and
by integrating the latter progressively and as completely as possible into the Euro
pean space programme, in particular as regards the development of applications
satellites;
d. By elaborating and implementing the industrial policy appropriate to its pro
gramme and by recommending a coherent industrial policy to the Member States.
Article HI. INFORMATION AND DATA
1. Member States and the Agency shall facilitate the exchange of scientific and
technical information pertaining to the fields of space research and technology and
their space applications, provided that a Member State shall not be required to com
municate any information obtained outside the Agency if it considers that such com
munication would be inconsistent with the interests of its own security or its own
agreements with third parties, or the conditions under which such information has
been obtained.
2. In carrying out its activities under article V, the Agency shall ensure that any
scientific results shall be published or otherwise made widely available after prior use
by the scientists responsible for the experiments. The resulting reduced data shall be
the property of the Agency.
3. When placing contracts or entering into agreements, the Agency shall, with
regard to the resulting inventions and technical data, secure such rights as may be ap
propriate for the protection of its interests, of those of the Member States par
ticipating in the relevant programme, and of those of persons and bodies under their
jurisdiction. These rights shall include in particular the rights of access, of
disclosure, and of use. Such inventions and technical data shall be communicated to
the participating States.
4. Those inventions and technical data that are the property of the Agency
shall be disclosed to the Member States and may be used for their own purposes by
these Member States and by persons and bodies under their jurisdiction, free of
charge.
5. The detailed rules for the application of the foregoing provisions shall be
adopted by the Council, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States.
Article IV. EXCHANGE OF PERSONS
Member States shall facilitate the exchange of persons concerned with work
within the competence of the Agency, consistent with the application to any person
of their laws and regulations relating to entry into, stay in, or departure from, their
territories.
Article V. ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMMES
1. The activities of the Agency shall include mandatory activities, in which all
Member States participate, and optional activities, in which all Member States par
ticipate apart from those that formally declare themselves not interested in par
ticipating therein.
a. With respect to the mandatory activities, the Agency shall:
i. Ensure the execution of basic activities, such as education, documentation,
studies of future projects and technological research work;
ii. Ensure the elaboration and execution of a scientific programme including
satellites and other space systems;
iii. Collect relevant information and disseminate it to Member States, draw at
tention to gaps and duplication, and provide advice and assistance for the
harmonisation of international and national programmes;
iv. Maintain regular contact with the users of space techniques and keep itself in
formed of their requirements.
b. With respect to the optional activities, the Agency shall ensure, in accordance
with the provisions of annex III, the execution of programmes which may, in par
ticular, include:
i. The design, development, construction, launching, placing in orbit, and con
trol of satellites and other space systems;
ii. The design, development, construction, and operation of launch facilities
and space transport systems.
2. In the area of space applications the Agency may, should the occasion arise,
carry out operational activities under conditions to be defined by the Council by a
majority of all Member States. When so doing the Agency shall:
a. Place at the disposal of the operating agencies concerned such of its own facilities
as may be useful to them;
b. Ensure as required, on behalf of the operating agencies concerned, the launching,
placing in orbit and control of operational application satellites;
c. Carry out any other activity requested by users and approved by the Council.
The cost of such operational activities shall be borne by the users concerned.
3. With respect to the coordination and integration of programmes referred to
in article II, c, the Agency shall receive in good time from Member States informa
tion on projects relating to new space programmes, facilitate consultations among
the Member States, undertake any necessary evaluation and formulate appropriate
rules to be adopted by the Council by a unanimous vote of all Member States. The
objectives and procedures of the internationalisation of programmes are set out in
annex IV.
Article VI. FACILITIES AND SERVICES
1. For the execution of the programmes entrusted to it, the Agency:
a. Shall maintain the internal capability required for the preparation and supervi
sion of its tasks and, to this end, shall establish and operate such establishments
and facilities as are required for its activities;
b. May enter into special arrangements for the execution of certain parts of its pro
grammes by, or in cooperation with, national institutions of the Member States,
or for the management by the Agency itself of certain national facilities.
2. In implementing their programmes, the Member States and the Agency
shall endeavour to make the best use of their existing facilities and available services
as a first priority, and to rationalise them; accordingly they shall not set up new
facilities or services without having first examined the possibility of using the existing
means.
Article VII. INDUSTRIAL POLICY
1. The industrial policy which the Agency is to elaborate and apply by virtue of
article II, d shall be designed in particular to:
a. Meet the requirements of the European space programme and the coordinated
national space programmes in a cost-effective manner;
b. Improve the world-wide competitiveness of European industry by maintaining
and developing space technology and by encouraging the rationalisation and
development of an industrial structure appropriate to market requirements, mak
ing use in the first place of the existing industrial potential of all Member States;
c. Ensure that all Member States participate in an equitable manner, having regard
to their financial contribution, in implementing the European space programme
and in the associated development of space technology; in particular the Agency
shall, for the execution of its programmes, grant preference to the fullest extent
possible to industry in all Member States, which shall be given the maximum op
portunity to participate in the work of technological interest undertaken for the
Agency;
d. Exploit the advantages of free competitive bidding in all cases, except where this
would be incompatible with other defined objectives of industrial policy.
Other objectives may be defined by the Council by a unanimous decision of all
Member States.
The detailed arrangements for the attainment of these objectives shall be those
set out in annex V and in rules which shall be adopted by the Council by a two-thirds
majority of all Member States and reviewed periodically.
2. For the execution of its programmes, the Agency shall make the maximum
use of external contractors consistent with the maintenance of the internal capability
referred to in article VI, 1.
Article VIII. LAUNCHERS AND OTHER SPACE TRANSPORT SYSTEMS
1. When defining its missions, the Agency shall take into account the launchers
or other space transport systems developed within the framework of its programmes,
or by a Member State, or with a significant Agency contribution, and shall grant
preference to their utilisation for appropriate payloads if this does not present an
unreasonable disadvantage compared with other launchers or space transport means
available at the envisaged time, in respect of cost, reliability and mission suitability.
2. If activities or programmes under article V include the use of launchers or
other space transport systems, the participating States shall, when the programme in
question is submitted for approval or acceptance, inform the Council of the launcher
or space transport system envisaged. If during the execution of a programme the par
ticipating States wish to use a launcher or space transport system other than the one
originally adopted, the Council shall make a decision on this change in accordance
with the same rules as those applied in respect of the initial approval or acceptance of
the programme.
Article IX. USE OF FACILITIES, ASSISTANCE TO MEMBER STATES, AND
SUPPLY OF PRODUCTS
1. Provided that their use for its own activities and programmes is not thereby
prejudiced, the Agency shall make its facilities available, at the cost of the State con
cerned, to any Member State that asks to use them for its own programmes. The
Council shall determine, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States, the practical
arrangements under which the facilities will be made available.
2. If, outside the activities and programmes referred to in article V but within
the purpose of the Agency, one or more Member States wish to engage in a project,
the Council may decide by a two-thirds majority of all Member States to make
available the assistance of the Agency. The resulting cost to the Agency shall be met
by the Member State or States concerned.
3. a. Products developed under a programme of the Agency shall be supplied
to any Member State that has taken part in the funding of the programme in question
and asks for such products to be supplied for its own purposes.
The Council shall determine by a two-thirds majority of all Member States the
practical arrangements under which such products will be supplied and in particular
the measures to be taken by the Agency in regard to its contractors to enable the re
questing Member State to obtain those products.
b. This Member State may ask the Agency to state whether it considers that the
prices proposed by the contractors are fair and reasonable and whether, under
similar circumstances, it would consider them acceptable for the purposes of its own
requirements.
c. The fulfilment of the requests referred to in this paragraph shall not involve
the Agency in any additional costs, and all costs resulting from such requests shall be
borne by the requesting Member State.
Article X. ORGANS
The organs of the Agency shall be the Council, and the Director General assisted
by a staff.
Article XI. THE COUNCIL
1. The Council shall be composed of representatives of the Member States.
2. The Council shall meet as and when required, either at delegate level or at
ministerial level. The meetings shall be held at the Agency's Headquarters unless the
Council decides otherwise.
3. a. The Council shall elect for two years a Chairman and vice-chairmen,
who may be re-elected once for a further year. The Chairman shall direct the pro
ceedings of the Council and ensure the preparation of its decisions; he shall inform
the Member States of proposals for the execution of an optional programme; he shall
assist in coordinating the activities of the organs of the Agency. He shall maintain
liaison with the Member States, through their delegates to the Council, on general
policy matters affecting the Agency and shall endeavour to harmonise their views
thereon. In the interval between meetings, he shall advise the Director General and
shall obtain from him all necessary information.
b. The Chairman shall be assisted by a Bureau, the composition of which shall
be decided by the Council and which shall be convened by the Chairman. The Bureau
shall advise the Chairman in the preparation of Council meetings.
4. When the Council meets at ministerial level it shall elect a chairman for the
meeting. The next ministerial meeting shall be convened by him.
5. In addition to the functions set forth elsewhere in this Convention and in ac
cordance with its provisions, the Council shall:
a. As regards the activities and programme referred to in article V, 1, a, i and ii:
i. Approve the activities and programme by a majority of all Member States;
decisions to this effect may only be changed by new decisions adopted by a
two-thirds majority of all Member States;
ii. Determine, by a unanimous decision of all Member States, the level of
resources to be made available to the Agency for the coming five-year period;
iii. Determine, by a unanimous decision of all Member States, towards the end
of the third year of each five-year period and after a review of the situation,
the level of resources to be made available to the Agency for the new five-year
period starting at the end of this third year;
b. As regards the activities referred to in article V, I, a, iii and iv:
i. Define the policy to be followed by the Agency in pursuit of its purpose;
ii. Adopt, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States, recommendations ad
dressed to Member States;
c. As regards the optional programmes referred to in article V, 1, b:
i. Accept each programme by a majority of all Member States;
ii. Determine, as appropriate, in the course of their implementation, the order
of priority of programmes;
d. Adopt the annual work plans of the Agency;
e. As regards the budgets as defined in annex II:
i. Adopt the annual general budget of the Agency by a two-thirds majority of
all Member States;
ii. Adopt each programme budget by a two-thirds majority of the participating
States;
/. Adopt, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States, the Financial Regulations
and all other financial arrangements of the Agency;
g. Keep under review expenditure on the mandatory and optional activities referred
to in article V, 1 ;
h. Approve and publish the audited annual accounts of the Agency;
/. Adopt the Staff Regulations by a two-thirds majority of all Member States;
j. Adopt, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States, rules under which
authorisation will be given, bearing in mind the peaceful purposes of the Agency,
for the transfer outside the territories of the Member States of technology and
products developed under the activities of the Agency or with its help;
k. Decide on the admission of new Member States in accordance with article XXII;
l. Decide on the arrangements to be made in accordance with article XXIV in the
event of a Member State's denouncing this Convention or ceasing to be a member
under Article XVIII;
m. Take all other measures necessary for the fulfilment of the purpose of the Agency
within the framework of this Convention.
6. a. Each Member State shall have one vote in the Council. However, a
Member State shall not have the right to vote on matters concerning exclusively an
accepted programme in which it does not take part.
b. A Member State shall have no vote in the Council if the amount of its ar
rears of contributions to the Agency in respect of all activities and programmes
covered by article V in which it participates exceeds the assessed amount of its con
tributions for the current financial year. Moreover, if the amount of a Member
State's arrears of contributions to any one of the programmes under article V, 1, a, ii
or V, 1, b, in which it participates exceeds the assessed amount of its contributions to
that programme for the current financial year, then that Member State shall have no
vote in the Council on questions relating exclusively to that programme. In any such
case, the Member State may nevertheless be authorised to vote in the Council if a
two-thirds majority of all Member States considers that the non-payment of con
tributions is due to circumstances beyond its control.
c. The presence of delegates from a majority of all Member States shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting of the Council.
d. Except where this Convention provides otherwise, decisions of the Council
shall be taken by a simple majority of Member States represented and voting.
e. In determining the unanimity or majorities provided for in this Convention,
account shall not be taken of a Member State which has no vote.
7. The Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
8. a. The Council shall establish a Science Programme Committee, to which
it shall refer any matter relating to the mandatory scientific programme under arti
cle V, 1, a, ii. It shall authorise that Committee to take decisions regarding that pro
gramme, subject always to the Council's functions of determining the level of
resources and adopting the annual budget. The terms of reference of the Science Pro
gramme Committee shall be determined by the Council by a two-thirds majority of
all Member States and in accordance with this article.
b. The Council may establish such other subordinate bodies as may be
necessary for the purpose of the Agency. The establishment and terms of reference of
such bodies, and the cases in which they have powers of decision, shall be determined
by the Council by a two-thirds majority of all Member States.
c. When a subordinate body examines a question relating exclusively to one of
the optional programmes referred to in article V, 1, b, non-participating States shall
have no vote unless all participating States decide otherwise.
Article XII. DIRECTOR GENERAL AND STAFF
1. a. The Council shall, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States, ap
point a Director General for a defined period and may, by the same majority, ter
minate his appointment.
b. The Director General shall be the chief executive officer of the Agency and
its legal representative. He shall take all measures necessary for the management of
the Agency, the execution of its programmes, the implementation of its policy and
the fulfilment of its purpose, in accordance with the directives issued by the Council.
He shall have authority over the establishments of the Agency. He shall, in regard to
the financial administration of the Agency, act in accordance with the provisions of
annex II. He shall make an annual report to the Council, and this report shall be
published. He may also submit proposals concerning activities and programmes as
well as measures designed to ensure the fulfilment of the Agency's purpose. He at
tends meetings of the Agency without the right to vote.
c. The Council may postpone the appointment of the Director General for
such period as it considers necessary either upon the entry into force of this Conven
tion or in the event of a subsequent vacancy. In this event, it shall appoint a person to
act in his place, who shall have such powers and responsibilities as the Council may
determine.
2. The Director General shall be assisted by such scientific, technical, ad
ministrative and clerical staff as he may consider necessary, within the limits
authorised by the Council.
3. a. Senior management staff as defined by the Council, shall be appointed
and may be dismissed by the Council on the recommendation of the Director
General. Appointments and dismissals made by the Council shall require a twothirds
majority of all Member States.
b. Other staff members shall be appointed and may be dismissed by the Direc
tor General, acting on the authority of the Council.
c. All staff shall be recruited on the basis of their qualifications, taking into ac
count an adequate distribution of posts among nationals of the Member States. Ap
pointments and their termination shall be in accordance with the Staff Regulations.
d. Scientists who are not members of the staff and who carry out research in
the establishments of the Agency shall be subject to the authority of the Director
General and to any general rules adopted by the Council.
4. The responsibilities of the Director General and the staff in regard to the
Agency shall be exclusively international in character. In the discharge of their duties
they shall not seek or receive instructions from any government or from any author
ity external to the Agency. Each Member State shall respect the international
character of the responsibilities of the Director General and the staff, and shall not
seek to influence them in the discharge of their duties.
Article XIII. FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS
1. Each Member State shall contribute to the costs of the activities and pro
gramme referred to in article V, 1, a and, in accordance with annex II, to the com
mon costs of the Agency, in accordance with a scale adopted by the Council, by a
two-thirds majority of all Member States, either every three years at the time of the
review referred to in article XI, 5, a, iii, or whenever the Council, by a unanimous
vote of all Member States, decides to establish a new scale. The scale of contributions
shall be based on the average national income of each Member State for the three
latest years for which statistics are available. Nevertheless,
a. No Member State shall be required to pay contributions in excess of twenty-five
percent of the total amount of contributions assessed by the Council to meet these
costs;
b. The Council may, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States, decide in the
light of any special circumstances of a Member State to reduce its contribution for
a limited period. In particular, when the annual per capita income of a Member
State is less than an amount to be decided by the Council by the same majority,
this shall be considered as a special circumstance within the meaning of this provi
sion.
2. Each Member State shall contribute to the costs of each optional pro
gramme covered by article V, 1, b, unless it has formally declared itself not interested
in participating therein and is therefore not a participant. Unless all participating
States decide otherwise, the scale of contributions to a given programme shall be
based on the average national income of each participating State for the three latest
years for which statistics are available. This scale shall be revised either every three
years or whenever the Council decides to establish a new scale in accordance with
paragraph 1. However, no participating State shall, by the operation of this scale, be
required to pay contributions in excess of twenty-five percent of the total amount of
contributions to the programme concerned. Nevertheless, the percentage contribu
tion to be made by each participating State shall be equivalent to at least twenty-five
percent of its percentage contribution established under the provisions of para
graph 1, unless all the participating States decide otherwise when adopting the pro
gramme or during the execution of the programme.
3. The statistical systems to be used for establishing the scales of contribution
referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be the same, and shall be determined in the
Financial Regulations.
4. a. Any State that was not a party to the Convention for the establishment
of a European Space Research Organisation or to the Convention for the establish
ment of a European Organisation for the Development and Construction of Space
Vehicle Launchers and which becomes a party to this Convention shall make, in ad
dition to its contributions, a special payment related to the current value of the assets
of the Agency. The amount of this special payment shall be fixed by the Council by a
two-thirds majority of all Member States.
b. Payments made in accordance with the provisions of sub-paragraph a shall
be used to reduce the contributions of the other Member States unless the Council
decides otherwise by a two-thirds majority of all Member States.
5. Contributions due under this article shall be paid in accordance with an
nex II.
6. Subject to any directions given by the Council, the Director General may ac
cept gifts or legacies to the Agency provided that they are not subject to any condi
tions inconsistent with the purpose of the Agency.
Article XIV. COOPERATION
1. The Agency may, upon decisions of the Council taken by unanimous votes
of all Member States, cooperate with other international organisations and institu
tions and with Governments, organisations and institutions of non-member States,
and conclude agreements with them to this effect.
2. Such cooperation may take the form of participation by non-member States
or international organisations in one or more of the programmes under article V, I, a ii
and V, I, b. Subject to the decisions to be taken under paragraph 1, the detailed ar
rangements for such cooperation shall be defined in each case by the Council by a
two-thirds majority of the States participating in the programme in question. These
arrangements may provide that a non-member State shall have a vote in the Council
when the latter examines matters pertaining exclusively to the programme in which
that State participates.
3. Such cooperation may also take the form of according associate member
ship to non-member States which undertake to contribute at least to the studies of
future projects under article V, 1, a, i. The detailed arrangements for each such
associate membership shall be denned by the Council by a two-thirds majority of all
Member States.
Article XV. LEGAL STATUS, PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
1. The Agency shall have legal personality.
2. The Agency, its staff members and experts, and the representatives of its
Member States, shall enjoy the legal capacity, privileges and immunities provided for
in annex I.
3. Agreements concerning the Headquarters of the Agency and the establish
ments set up in accordance with article VI shall be concluded between the Agency
and the Member States on whose territories the Headquarters and establishments are
situated.
Article XVI. AMENDMENTS
1. The Council may recommend to Member States amendments to this Con
vention and to annex I thereto. Any Member State that wishes to propose an amend
ment shall notify the Director General thereof. The Director General shall inform the
Member States of any amendment so notified at least three months before it is
discussed by the Council.
2. Any amendment recommended by the Council shall enter into force thirty
days after the Government of France has received notification of acceptance from all
Member States. The Government of France shall notify all Member States of the date
of entry into force of any such amendment.
3. The Council may, by a unanimous vote of all Member States, amend any of
the other annexes to this Convention, provided that such amendments do not conflict
with the Convention. Any such amendment shall enter into force on a date to be
decided by the Council by a unanimous vote of all Member States. The Director
General shall inform all Member States of any such amendment and of the date on
which it will enter into force.
Article XVII. DISPUTES
1. Any dispute between two or more Member States, or between any of them
and the Agency, concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention or
its annexes, and likewise any dispute referred to in article XXVI of annex I, which is
not settled by or through the Council, shall, at the request of any party to the dispute,
be submitted to arbitration.
2. Unless the parties to the dispute decide otherwise, the arbitration procedure
shall be in accordance with this Article and with additional rules to be adopted by the
Council by a two-thirds majority of all Member States.
3. The Arbitration Tribunal shall consist of three members. Each party to the
dispute shall nominate one arbitrator; the first two arbitrators shall nominate the
third arbitrator, who shall be the chairman of the Arbitration Tribunal. The addi
tional rules referred to in paragraph 2 shall determine the procedure to be followed if
the nominations have not taken place within a specified time.
4. Member States or the Agency, not being parties to the dispute, may in
tervene in the proceedings with the consent of the Arbitration Tribunal if it considers
that they have a substantial interest in the decision of the case.
5. The Arbitration Tribunal shall determine its seat and establish its own rules
of procedure.
6. The award of the Arbitration Tribunal shall be made by a majority of its
members, who may not abstain from voting. This award shall be final and binding on
all parties to the dispute and no appeal shall lie against it. The parties shall comply
with the award without delay. In the event of a dispute as to its meaning or scope, the
Arbitration Tribunal shall interpret it at the request of any party to the dispute.
Article XVIII. NON-FULFILMENT OF OBLIGATIONS
Any Member State which fails to fulfil its obligations under this Convention
shall cease to be a member of the Agency on a decision of the Council taken by a twothirds
majority of all Member States. The provisions of article XXIV shall apply in
such a case.
Article XIX. CONTINUITY OF RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
On the date when this Convention enters into force, the Agency shall take over
all rights and obligations of the European Space Research Organisation and of the
European Organisation for the Development and Construction of Space Vehicle
Launchers.
Article XX. SIGNATURE AND RATIFICATION
1. This Convention shall be open until 31 December 1975 for signature by the
States which are members of the European Space Conference. The annexes to this
Convention shall form an integral part thereof.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification or acceptance. Instruments
of ratification or acceptance shall be deposited with the Government of France.
3. After the entry into force of the Convention and pending the deposit of its
instrument of ratification or acceptance, a signatory State may take part in the
meetings of the Agency, without the right to vote.
Article XXI. ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. This Convention shall enter into force when the following States, being
members of the European Space Research Organisation or the European Organisa
tion for the Development and Construction of Space Vehicle Launchers, have signed
it and have deposited with the Government of France their instruments of ratification
or acceptance: the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, the French
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Italian Republic, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, Spain, the Kingdom of Sweden, the Swiss Confederation and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. For any State ratifying, ac
cepting or acceding to this Convention after its entry into force, the Convention shall
become effective on the date of deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification,
acceptance or accession.
2. The Convention for the establishment of a European Space Research Or
ganisation and the Convention for the establishment of a European Organisation for
the Development and Construction of Space Vehicle Launchers shall terminate on
the date of the entry into force of this Convention.
Article XXII. ACCESSION
1. After the entry into force of this Convention, any State may accede thereto
following a decision of the Council taken by a unanimous vote of all Member States.
2. A State that wishes to accede to this Convention shall notify the Director
General, who shall inform the Member States of this request at least three months
before it is submitted to the Council for decision.
3. Instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Government of France.
Article XXIII. NOTIFICATIONS
The Government of France shall notify all signatory and acceding States of:
a. The date of deposit of each instrument of ratification, acceptance or accession;
b. The date of entry into force of this Convention and of amendments covered by ar
ticle XVI, 2;
c. The denunciation of the Convention by a Member State.
Article XXIV. DENUNCIATION
1. After this Convention has been in force for six years, any Member State
may denounce it by notifying the Government of France, which shall notify the other
Member States and the Director General. The denunciation shall take effect at the
end of the financial year following that during which it was notified to the Govern
ment of France. After the denunciation has taken effect, the State concerned shall re
main bound to honour its due share of the payment appropriations corresponding to
approved contract authority used both under the budgets to which it was con
tributing for the year in which the denunciation was notified to the Government of
France, and under previous budgets.
2. A Member State denouncing the Convention shall indemnify the Agency
for any loss of property on its territory, unless a special agreement can be concluded
with the Agency for the continued use of this property by the Agency or the continua
tion of certain activities of the Agency on the territory of the said State. Any such
special agreement shall determine in particular to what extent and on what condi
tions the provisions of this Convention shall continue to apply, after the denuncia
tion has taken effect, to the continued use of this property and the continuation of
these activities.
3. A Member State denouncing the Convention, and the Agency, shall jointly
determine any additional obligations to be borne by the said State.
4. The State concerned shall retain the rights it has acquired up to the date on
which the denunciation takes effect.
Article XXV. DISSOLUTION
1. The Agency shall be dissolved if the number of Member States becomes less
than five. It may be dissolved at any time by agreement between the Member States.
2. In the event of dissolution the Council shall appoint a liquidation authority,
which will negotiate with the States on whose territories the Headquarters and
establishments of the Agency are situated at the time. The legal personality of the
Agency shall subsist for the purposes of the liquidation.
3. Any surplus shall be distributed among those States that are members of the
Agency at the time of the dissolution, in proportion to the contributions actually
made by them from the dates of their becoming parties to this Convention. In the
event of a deficit, this shall be met by the same States in proportion to their contribu
tions as assessed for the financial year then current.
Article XXVI, REGISTRATION
Upon the entry into force of this Convention, the Government of France shall
register it with the Secretariat of the United Nations in accordance with Article 102 of
the Charter of the United Nations.



ANNEX I
PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
Article I. The Agency shall have legal personality. It shall in particular have the capacity
to contract, to acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property, and to be a party to
legal proceedings.
Article II. Without prejudice to articles XXII and XXIII, the buildings and premises of
the Agency shall be inviolable.
Article III. The archives of the Agency shall be inviolable.
Article IV. 1. The Agency shall have immunity from jurisdiction and execution,
except:
a. To the extent that it shall, by decision of the Council, have expressly waived such immunity
in a particular case; the Council has the duty to waive this immunity in all cases where
reliance upon it would impede the course of justice and it can be waived without prejudicing
the interests of the Agency;
b. In respect of a civil action by a third party for damage arising from an accident caused by a
motor vehicle belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Agency, or in respect of a motor
traffic offence involving such a vehicle;
c. In respect of an enforcement of an arbitration award made under either article XXV or arti
cle XXVI;
d. In the event of the attachment, pursuant to a decision by the judicial authorities, of the
salaries and emoluments owed by the Agency to a staff member.
2. The Agency's property and assets, wherever situated, shall be immune from any form
of requisition, confiscation, expropriation and sequestration. They shall also be immune from
any form of administrative or provisional judicial constraint, except insofar as may be tem
porarily necessary in connection with the prevention and investigation of accidents involving
motor vehicles belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Agency.
Article V. 1. Within the scope of its official activities, the Agency, its property and in
come shall be exempt from direct taxes.
2. When purchases or services of substantial value and strictly necessary for the exercise
of the official activities of the Agency are made or used by or on behalf of the Agency, and
when the price of such purchases or services includes taxes or duties, appropriate measures
shall, whenever possible, be taken by the Member States to grant exemption from such taxes or
duties or to provide for their reimbursement.
Article VI. Goods imported or exported by the Agency or on its behalf, and strictly
necessary for the exercise of its official activities, shall be exempt from all import and export
duties and taxes and from all import or export prohibitions and restrictions.
Article VIL 1. For the purpose of articles V and VI, the official activities of the Agency
shall include its administrative activities, including its operations in connection with the social
security scheme, and activities undertaken in the field of space research and technology and
their space applications in pursuance of the purpose of the Agency as defined in the Conven
tion.
2. The extent to which other applications of such research and technology and activities
carried out under articles V, 2 and IX of the Convention may be considered part of the
Agency's official activities shall be decided in each case by the Council after consultation with
the competent authorities of the Member States concerned.
3. The provisions of articles V and VI shall not apply to taxes and duties that are no more
than charges for public utility services.
Article VIII. No exemption shall be granted under articles V or VI in respect of goods
purchased or imported, or services provided, for the personal benefit of the staff members of
the Agency.
Article IX. 1. Goods acquired under article V or imported under article VI shall not
be sold or given away except in accordance with conditions laid down by the Member States
which have granted exemptions.
2. The transfer of goods and services between the Headquarters and the establishments
of the Agency, and between its various establishments, or, for the purpose of implementing a
programme of the Agency, between them and a national institution of a Member State, shall be
free of charges or restrictions of any kind; if necessary, the Member States shall take all ap
propriate measures to grant exemption from or reimbursement of such charges or to lift such
restrictions.
Article X. The circulation of publications and other information material sent by or to
the Agency shall not be restricted in any way.
Article XL The Agency may receive and hold any kind of funds, currency, cash or
securities; it may dispose of them freely for any purpose provided for in the Convention and
hold accounts in any currency to the extent required to meet its obligations.
Article XII. 1. For its official communications and the transfer of all its documents,
the Agency shall enjoy treatment not less favourable than that accorded by each Member State
to other international organisations.
2. No censorship shall be applied to official communications of the Agency by whatever
means of communication.
Article XIII. Member States shall take all appropriate measures to facilitate the entry
into, stay in, or departure from their territories of staff members of the Agency.
Article XIV. 1. Representatives of Member States shall, while exercising their func
tions and in the course of their journeys to and from the place of meeting, enjoy the following
privileges and immunities:
a. Immunity from arrest and detention, and from seizure of their personal luggage;
b. Immunity from jurisdiction, even after the termination of their mission, in respect of acts,
including words spoken and written, done by them in the exercise of their functions; this
immunity shall not apply, however, in the case of a motor traffic offence committed by a
representative of a Member State, nor in the case of damage caused by a motor vehicle
belonging to or driven by him;
c. Inviolability for all their official papers and documents;
d. The right to use codes and to receive documents or correspondence by special courier or
sealed bag;
e. Exemption for themselves and their spouses from all measures restricting entry and from
aliens' registration formalities;
/. The same facilities in the matter of currency and exchange control as are accorded to the
representatives of foreign governments on temporary official missions;
g. The same customs facilities as regards their personal luggage as are accorded to diplomatic
agents.
2. Privileges and immunities are accorded to representatives of Member States, not for
their personal advantage, but in order to ensure complete independence in the exercise of their
functions in connection with the Agency. Consequently, a Member State has the duty to waive
the immunity of a representative wherever retaining it would impede the course of justice and it
can be waived without prejudicing the purposes for which it was accorded.
Article XV. In addition to the privileges and immunities provided for in article XVI, the
Director General of the Agency and, when the office is vacant, the person appointed to act in
his place, shall enjoy the privileges and immunities to which diplomatic agents of comparable
rank are entitled.
Article XVI. The staff members of the Agency:
a. Shall have, even after they have left the service of the Agency, immunity from jurisdiction
in respect of acts, including words written and spoken, done by them in the exercise of their
functions; this immunity shall not apply, however, in the case of a motor traffic offence
committed by a staff member of the Agency, nor in the case of damage caused by a motor
vehicle belonging to or driven by him;
b. Shall be exempt from all obligations in respect of military service;
c. Shall enjoy inviolability for all their official papers and documents;
d. Shall enjoy the same facilities as regards exemption from all measures restricting immigra
tion and governing aliens' registration as are normally accorded to staff members of interna
tional organisations, and members of their families forming part of their households shall
enjoy the same facilities;
e. Shall enjoy the same privileges in respect of exchange regulations as are normally accorded
to staff members of international organisations;
/. Shall, in time of international crisis, enjoy the same facilities as to repatriation as
diplomatic agents, and the members of their families forming part of their households shall
enjoy the same facilities;
g. Shall have the right to import duty-free their furniture and personal effects at the time of
first taking up their post in the Member State concerned, and the right on the termination of
their functions in that Member State to export free of duty their furniture and personal
effects, subject, in both cases, to the conditions considered necessary by the Member State
on whose territory the right is exercised.
Article XVII. Experts other than the staff members referred to in article XVI, in the
exercise of their functions in connection with the Agency or in carrying out missions for the
Agency, shall enjoy the following privileges and immunities, to the extent that these are
necessary for the exercise of their functions, including during journeys made in the exercise of
their functions and in the course of such missions:
a. Immunity from jurisdiction in respect of acts, including words written and spoken, done by
them in the exercise of their functions, except in the case of a motor traffic offence com
mitted by an expert, or in the case of damage caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or
driven by him; experts shall continue to enjoy this immunity after they have ceased to be
employed by the Agency;
b. Inviolability for all their official papers and documents;
c. The same facilities as regards monetary and exchange regulations and as regards their per
sonal luggage as are accorded to the officials of foreign governments on temporary official
missions.
Article XVIII. 1. Subject to the conditions and following the procedure laid down by
the Council, the Director General and the staff members of the Agency shall be subject to a tax,
for the benefit of the Agency, on salaries and emoluments paid by the Agency. Such salaries
and emoluments shall be exempt from national income tax; but the Member States shall retain
the right to take these salaries and emoluments into account for the purpose of assessing the
amount of taxation to be applied to income from other sources.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to annuities and pensions paid by the
Agency to its former Directors General and staff members.
Article XIX. Articles XVI and XVIII shall apply to all categories of staff members to
which the Staff Regulations of the Agency apply. The Council shall decide the categories of
experts to which article XVII shall apply. The names, titles and addresses of the staff members
and experts referred to in the present article shall be communicated from time to time to the
Member States.
Article XX. In the event that it establishes its own social security scheme, the Agency,
its Director General and staff members shall be exempt from all compulsory contributions to
national social security bodies, subject to agreements concluded with the Member States in ac
cordance with article XXVIII.
Article XXI. 1. The privileges and immunities provided for in this annex are not
granted to the Director General, staff members and experts of the Agency for their personal ad
vantage. They are provided solely to ensure, in all circumstances, the unimpeded functioning
of the Agency and the complete independence of the persons to whom they are accorded.
2. The Director General has the duty to waive any relevant immunity in all cases
wherever retaining it would impede the course of justice and it can be waived without prejudic
ing the interests of the Agency. In the case of the Director General, the Council is competent to
waive such immunity.
Article XXII. 1. The Agency shall cooperate at all times with the competent
authorities of Member States in order to facilitate the proper administration of justice, to en
sure the observance of police regulations and regulations concerning the handling of explosives
and inflammable material, public health, labour inspection or other similar national legisla
tion, and to prevent any abuse of the privileges, immunities and facilities provided for in this
annex.
2. The procedure for the cooperation referred to in paragraph 1 may be laid down in the
complementary agreements referred to in article XXVIII.
Article XXIII. Each Member State shall retain the right to take all precautionary
measures in the interests of its security.
Article XXIV. No member State shall be obliged to accord the privileges and im
munities referred to in articles XIV, XV, XVI b, e and g and XVII c, to its own nationals or
persons who, at the moment of taking up their duties in that Member State, are permanent
residents thereof.
Article XXV. 1. When concluding written contracts, other than those concluded in
accordance with the Staff Regulations, the Agency shall provide for arbitration. The arbitra
tion clause or the special arbitration agreement concluded to this end shall specify the law ap
plicable and the country where the arbitrators sit. The arbitration procedure shall be that of
that country.
2. The enforcement of the arbitration award shall be governed by the rules in force in the
State on whose territory the award is to be executed,
Article XXVI. Any Member State may submit to the international Arbitration Tribunal
referred to in article XVII of the Convention any dispute:
a. Arising out of damage caused by the Agency;
b. Involving any other non-contractual responsibility of the Agency;
c. Involving the Director General, a staff member or an expert of the Agency and in which the
person concerned can claim immunity from jurisdiction under articles XV, XVI, a or XVII, a,
if this immunity is not waived in accordance with article XXI. In such disputes where the
claim for immunity from jurisdiction arises under articles XVI, a or XVII, a, the respon
sibility of the Agency shall in such arbitration be substituted for that of the persons referred
to in those articles.
Article XXVII. The Agency shall make suitable provision for the satisfactory settle
ment of disputes arising between the Agency and the Director General, staff members or
experts in respect of their conditions of service.
Article XXVIII. The Agency may, on a decision of the Council, conclude with one or
more Member States complementary agreements to give effect to the provisions of this annex as
regards such State or States, and other arrangements to ensure the efficient functioning of the
Agency and the safeguarding of its interests.
ANNEX II
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Article I. 1. The financial year of the Agency shall run from the first of January to the
thirty-first of December following.
2. The Director General shall, not later than the first of September of each year, forward
to the Member States:
a. A draft general budget;
b. Draft programme budgets.
3. The general budget shall comprise:
a. An expenditure part, showing the estimated expenditure relating to the activities referred to
in article V, 1, a i, iii and iv of the Convention, including the fixed common costs, as well as
to the non-fixed common costs and the support costs concerning the programmes referred
to in article V, 1, a, ii and V, 1, b of the Convention; the fixed and non-fixed common costs
and the support costs shall be defined in the Financial Regulations; the estimates shall be
broken down by type of activity and by general heading;
b. An income part, showing:
i. The contributions of all Member States towards the expenditure relating to the ac
tivities referred to in article V, 1, a, i, iii and iv of the Convention, including the fixed
common costs;
ii. The contributions of participating States to the non-fixed common costs and support
costs allocated, in accordance with the Financial Regulations, to the programmes re
ferred to in article V, I, a, ii and V, 1, b of the Convention;
iii. Other income.
4. Each programme budget shall comprise:
a. An expenditure part, showing:
i. The estimated direct expenditure relating to the programme and broken down by
general heading as defined in the Financial Regulations;
ii. The estimated non-fixed common costs and support costs allocated to the programme;
b. An income part, showing:
i. The contributions of participating States to the direct expenditure referred to in subparagraph
a, i;
ii. Other income;
iii. For information, the contributions of participating States to the non-fixed common
costs and the support costs referred to in sub-paragraph a, ii, as provided for in the
general budget.
5. The approval of the general budget and of each programme budget by the Council
shall take place before the beginning of each financial year.
6. The general budget and the programme budgets shall be prepared and executed in ac
cordance with the Financial Regulations.
Article II. 1 . If circumstances so require, the Council may ask the Director General to
present a revised budget to it.
2. No decision involving additional expenditure shall be deemed to have been approved
until the Council has approved the Director General's estimate of the additional expenditure in
volved.
Article III. 1. The Director General shall, if so requested by the Council, include in
the general budget or in the programme budget concerned the estimates of expenditure for
subsequent years.
2. In connection with the adoption of the annual budgets of the Agency the Council
shall re-examine the level of resources and make the necessary adjustments in the light of pricelevel
variations and any unforeseen changes during the execution of the programmes.
Article IV. 1. The expenditure approved for activities covered by article V of the Con
vention shall be met by contributions assessed in accordance with article XIII of the Conven
tion.
2. When a State accedes to the Convention in accordance with article XXII thereof, the
contributions of the other Member States shall be reassessed. A new scale, which shall take
effect on a date to be decided by the Council, shall be established on the basis of the national in
come statistics for the years used in calculating the existing scale. Where appropriate, reim
bursements shall be made to ensure that the contributions paid by all Member States for the
current year are in accordance with the decision of the Council.
3. a. The arrangements by which contributions are to be made, which shall ensure the
proper financing of the Agency, shall be determined in the Financial Regulations.
b. The Director General shall notify Member States of the amount of their contributions
and of the dates on which payments shall be made.
Article V. 1. The budgets of the Agency shall be expressed in accounting units. The
accounting unit is denned by 0.88867088 gramme of fine gold; the Council may, by a
unanimous decision of all Member States, adopt another definition of the accounting unit.
2. Each Member State shall pay its contributions in its own currency.
Article VI. 1. The Director General shall keep an accurate account of all income and
expenditure. At the end of each financial year the Director General shall, in accordance with
the Financial Regulations, draw up separate annual accounts for each programme covered by
article V of the Convention.
2. Budgetary accounts, the budget and the financial management, as well as any other
measure having financial implications, shall be examined by an Audit Commission. The Coun
cil shall designate, by a two-thirds majority of all Member States, the Member States which, in
rotation on an equitable basis, shall be invited to nominate, preferably from among their own
senior officials, auditors to serve on this Commission, and shall nominate by the same major
ity, from among the auditors, a Chairman of the Commission for a period not exceeding three
years.
3. The purpose of the audit, which shall be based on records and, if necessary, done on
the spot, shall be to verify that expenditure has conformed with the budget estimates and that
the records are lawful and correct. The Commission shall also report on the economic manage
ment of the Agency's financial resources. At the end of each financial year, the Commission
shall draw up a report, which shall be adopted by the majority of its members and thereupon
transmitted to the Council.
4. The Audit Commission shall discharge such other functions as are set out in the
Financial Regulations.
5. The Director General shall furnish the auditors with such information and help as
they may require to carry out their duties.
ANNEX III
OPTIONAL PROGRAMMES COVERED BY ARTICLE V, 1, b OF THE CONVENTION
Article I. 1. If a proposal for the carrying out of an optional programme covered by
article V, 1, b of the Convention is made, the Chairman of the Council shall communicate it to
all Member States for examination.
2. Once the Council has, in accordance with article XI, 5, c, i of the Convention, ac
cepted the carrying out of an optional programme within the framework of the Agency, any
Member State that does not intend to take part in the programme shall, within three months,
formally declare that it is not interested in participating therein; the participating States shall
draw up a Declaration which, subject to article III, 1, shall set out their undertaking in respect
of:
a. The phases of the programme;
b. The conditions under which it is to be carried out, including the timing, the indicative finan
cial envelope and sub-envelopes relating to phases of the programme, and any other provi
sions for its management and execution;
c. The scale of contributions determined in accordance with article XIII, 2 of the Convention;
d. The duration and amount of the first binding financial commitment.
3. The Declaration shall be transmitted to the Council for information, together with
draft implementing rules submitted to it for approval.
4. If a participating State is unable to accept the provisions set out in the Declaration and
implementing rules within the time limit laid down in the Declaration, it shall cease to be a par
ticipating State. Other Member States may subsequently become participating States by ac
cepting these provisions in accordance with conditions to be determined with the participating
States.
Article II. 1. The programme shall be executed in accordance with the provisions of
the Convention and, unless otherwise stipulated in this annex or in the implementing rules,
with the rules and procedures in force in the Agency. Decisions of the Council shall be taken in
accordance with this annex and the implementing rules. Failing any specific provisions in this
annex or in the implementing rules, the voting rules laid down in the Convention or the rules of
procedure of the Council shall apply.
2. Decisions on the start of a new phase shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of all par
ticipating States, provided that this majority represents at least two-thirds of the contributions
to the programme. If the decision to start a new phase cannot be taken, the participating States
that wish, nevertheless, to continue with the programme shall consult among themselves and
determine arrangements for such continuation. They shall report accordingly to the Council,
which shall take any measures that may be required.
Article III. 1. If the programme includes a project definition phase, the participating
States shall, at the end of the phase, reassess the cost of the programme. If the reassessment
shows that there is a cost overrun greater than 20% of the indicative financial envelope referred
to in article I, any participating State may withdraw from the programme. The participating
States that wish, nevertheless, to continue with the programme shall consult among themselves
and determine the arrangements for such continuation. They shall report accordingly to the
Council, which shall take any measures that may be required.
2. During each phase, as defined in the Declaration, the Council shall, by a two-thirds
majority of all participating States, adopt annual budgets within the relevant financial envelope
or sub-envelopes.
3. The Council shall lay down a procedure enabling the financial envelope or subenvelopes
to be revised in the event of price-level variations.
4. When the financial envelope or a financial sub-envelope has to be revised for reasons
other than those referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3, the participating States shall apply the
following procedure:
a. No participating State shall be entitled to withdraw from the programme unless the cumula
tive cost overrun is greater than 20% of the initial financial envelope, or of the revised
envelope defined in accordance with the procedure laid down in paragraph 1.
b. If the cumulative cost overrun is greater than 20% of the relevant financial envelope, any
participating State may withdraw from the programme. Those States that wish, never
theless, to continue with the programme shall consult among themselves, determine the ar
rangements for such continuation and report accordingly to the Council, which shall take
any measures that may be required.
Article IV. The Agency, acting on behalf of the participating States, shall be the owner
of the satellites, space systems and other items produced under the programme as well as of the
facilities and equipment acquired for its execution. Any transfer of ownership shall be decided
on by the Council.
Article V. 1. Denunciation of the Convention by a Member State shall entail the
withdrawal of that Member State from all the programmes in which it participates. Arti
cle XXIV of the Convention shall apply to the rights and obligations arising out of these pro
grammes.
2. Discontinuations under article II, 2 and withdrawals under article III, I and III, 4, b
shall take effect on the date on which the Council receives the information referred to in those
articles.
3. A participating State that decides not to continue with a programme under article II, 2,
or withdraws from a programme under article III, 1 and III, 4, b, shall retain the rights ac
quired by the participating States up to the effective date of its withdrawal. Thereafter, no fur
ther right or obligation shall arise from the remaining part of the programme in which it no
longer participates. It shall remain bound to finance its share of the payment appropriations
corresponding to contract authority approved under the budget for the current or previous
financial years and relating to the programme phase whose execution is in progress. However,
the participating States may unanimously agree, in the Declaration, that a State which decides
not to continue with, or withdraws from, a programme shall be bound to finance its total share
of the initial envelope or the sub-envelopes of the programme.
Article VI. 1. The participating States may decide to discontinue a programme by a
two-thirds majority of all participating States representing at least two-thirds of the contribu
tions to the programme.
2. The Agency shall notify the participating States of the completion of the programme
in accordance with the implementing rules; these implementing rules shall cease to be in force
upon receipt of such notification.
ANNEX IV
INTERNATIONALISATION OF NATIONAL PROGRAMMES
Article I. The principal objective of the internationalisation of national programmes
shall be that each Member State shall make available for participation by other Member States,
within the framework of the Agency, any new civil space project which it intends to undertake,
either alone or in collaboration with another Member State. With this end in view:
a. Each Member State shall notify to the Director General of the Agency any such project
before the beginning of its phase B (project definition phase);
b. The timing and content of proposals for participation in a project should make it possible
for other Member States to undertake a significant share of the work involved; an early in
dication shall be given to the Agency of any reasons which make this impracticable and of
any conditions which the initiating Member State may wish to place on the allocation of
work to other Member States;
c. The initiating Member State shall explain the arrangements it proposes for the technical
management of the project and indicate the reasons for them;
d. The initiating Member State shall use its best endeavours to accommodate all reasonable
responses, subject to agreement being reached, within the time scale demanded by project
decisions, on the level of the cost and the way in which the cost and work are shared; it shall
subsequently submit a formal proposal under annex III where the project is to be executed
in accordance with the terms of that annex;
e. The execution of a project within the framework of the Agency shall not be excluded merely
because that project has failed to attract the participation of other Member States to the
extent originally proposed by the initiating Member State.
Article II. Member States shall use their best endeavours to ensure that the bilateral and
multilateral space projects which they undertake with non-member States do not prejudice the
scientific, economic or industrial objectives of the Agency. In particular, they shall:
a. Inform the Agency of such projects, in so far as they judge that this would not prejudice the
projects;
b. Discuss with the other Member States projects so communicated, with the object of estab
lishing the scope for wider participation. If wider participation proves possible, the pro
cedures laid down in article I, b to e shall apply.
ANNEX V
INDUSTRIAL POLICY
Article I. 1. In implementing the industrial policy referred to in article VII of the Con
vention, the Director General shall act in conformity with the provisions of this annex and with
the directives of the Council.
2. The Council shall keep under review the industrial potential and industrial structure in
relation to the Agency's activities, and in particular:
a. The general structure of industry, and industrial groupings;
b. The degree of specialisation desirable in industry and methods of achieving it;
c. The coordination of relevant national industrial policies;
d. Interaction with any relevant industrial policies of other international bodies;
e. The relationship between industrial production capacity and potential markets;
/. The organisation of contacts with industry,
in order to be able to monitor and, where appropriate, adapt the Agency's industrial policy.
Article II. 1. In the placing of all contracts, the Agency shall give preference to in
dustry and organisations of the Member States. However, within each optional programme
covered by article V, 1, b of the Convention, particular preference shall be given to industry
and organisations in the participating States.
2. The Council shall determine whether and to what extent the Agency may derogate
from the above preference clause.
3. The question whether an enterprise should be considered to belong to one of the
Member States shall be settled in the light of the following criteria: location of the enterprise's
registered office, decision-making centres and research centres, and territory on which the work
is to be carried out. In doubtful cases the Council shall decide whether an enterprise shall be
considered to belong to one of the Member States, or not.
Article HI. 1. The Director General shall, at an early stage in the contract action and
before invitations to tender are sent out, submit for the approval of the Council his proposal on
the procurement policy to be followed, for any contract which either:
a. Has an estimated value above limits which shall be defined in the rules concerning industrial
policy and which will depend on the nature of the work; or
b. Is, in the opinion of the Director General, not adequately covered by the rules concerning
industrial policy or by additional guidelines established by the Council, or might give rise to
a conflict with those rules or guidelines.
2. The additional guidelines referred to in paragraph 1, b shall be established from time
to time by the Council if it considers them helpful for the purpose of distinguishing those areas
where prior submission under paragraph 1 is necessary.
3. The Agency's contracts shall be awarded directly by the Director General without fur
ther reference to the Council except in the following cases:
a. When the evaluation of the offers received suggests a recommendation for the choice of a
contractor which would be contrary either to the prior instructions issued by the Council
under the terms of paragraph 1, or to any general guidelines on industrial policy adopted as
a result of the Council's studies under article 1,2; the Director General shall then submit the
case to the Council for decision, explaining why he considers a deviation to be necessary
and indicating also whether another decision by the Council would constitute, technically,
operationally or otherwise, an advisable alternative;
b. Where the Council has decided for specific reasons to undertake a review before a contract
is awarded.
4. The Director General shall report to the Council, at regular intervals to be specified,
on the contracts awarded during the previous period, and on the contract actions planned for
the subsequent period, in order that the Council may monitor the implementation of the
Agency's industrial policy.
Article IV. The geographical distribution of all the Agency's contracts shall be governed
by the following general rules:
1. A Member State's overall return coefficient shall be the ratio between its percentage
share of the total value of all contracts awarded among all Member States and its total percen
tage contributions. However, in the calculation of this overall return coefficient, no account
shall be taken of contracts placed in, or contributions made by, Member States in a programme
undertaken:
a. Under article VIII of the Convention for the establishment of a European Space Research
Organisation, provided that the relevant Arrangement contains provisions to this effect or
that all participating States subsequently unanimously so agree;
b. Under article V, 1, b of the present Convention provided that all original participating
States unanimously so agree.
2. For the purpose of calculating return coefficients, weighting factors shall be applied to
the value of contracts on the basis of their technological interest. These weighting factors shall
be defined by the Council. Within a single contract having a significant value, more than one
weighting factor may be applied.
3. Ideally the distribution of contracts placed by the Agency should result in all countries
having an overall return coefficient of 1.
4. The return coefficients shall be computed quarterly and shown cumulatively for the
purpose of the formal reviews referred to in paragraph 5.
5. Formal reviews of the situation of geographical distribution of contracts shall take
place every three years.
6. The distribution of contracts between formal reviews of the situation should be such
that, at the time of each formal review, the cumulative overall return coefficient of each
Member State does not substantially deviate from the ideal value. For the first three-year
period, the lower limit for the cumulative return coefficient is fixed at 0.8. At the time of each
formal review, the Council may revise the value of this lower limit for the subsequent threeyear
period, provided that it shall never be lower than 0.8.
7. Separate assessments shall be made, and reported to the Council, of the return coeffi
cients for various categories of contract to be defined by it, in particular advanced research and
development contracts and contracts for project-related technology. The Director General
shall discuss these assessments with the Council, at regular intervals to be specified, with the
aim of identifying the action needed to redress any imbalances.
Article V. 1. If, at one of the formal reviews to be held at the end of each three-year
period, the overall return coefficient of any Member State is found to be below the lower limit
defined in article IV, 6, the Director General shall submit to the Council proposals designed to
redress the situation within one year. These proposals shall keep within the Agency's rules
governing the placing of contracts.
2. If, after this period of one year, the imbalance still persists, the Director General shall
submit to the Council proposals in which the need to remedy the situation takes precedence
over the Agency's rules governing the placing of contracts.
Article VI. Any decision taken on industrial policy grounds which has the effect of
excluding a particular firm or organisation of a Member State from competing for the Agency's
contracts in a particular field shall require the agreement of that Member State.
