CONVENTION MODIFYING THE CONVENTION OF
OCTOBER 28TH, 1922, BETWEEN FINLAND AND THE UNION OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS REGARDING THE FLOATING
OF TIMBER DOWN WATERCOURSES FLOWING FROM FINNISH
TERRITORY INTO THE TERRITORY OF THE UNION OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS AND VICE VERSA. SIGNED AT
MOSCOW, OCTOBER 15TH, 1933.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND and THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, considering that the Convention of October 28th,
1922, regarding the floating of timber down watercourses flowing from Finnish territory into the
territory of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and vice versa calls for certain amendments
and amplifications, have decided to conclude the present Convention, embodying these amendments
and amplifications, and have appointed for this purpose as their Plenipotentiaries
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND :
MM. E. J. KOSKENMAA and G. W. JANSSON
THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
MM. L. E. BEREZOFF, M. L. GRINSTEIN and N. P. KOLTCHANOVSKY;
Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed as
follows:

I.
Considering that it is to their common interest to simplify and expedite floating operations,
the two Contracting States agree to amend the following Articles of the Convention of October 28th,
1922, and also to include in the Convention a new Article 3A, these Articles to read as follows:

Article 2.
In the case of watercourses which, having their sources in the territory of one of the Contracting
States, only cross the State frontier once, the floaters of the one Contracting State shall have the
right to float timber into the territory of the other Contracting State along the shortest common
floating route, and in accordance with the rules laid down in the laws and regulations in force
in that State.
If the interests of the floaters of the one Contracting State require any operations to be carried
out on the logging routes referred to in the present Article and situated in the territory of the other
Contracting State, such operations may only be executed subject to observance of the laws and regulations in force in that territory. Requests for such work to be carried out shall be submitted
by the organisations or persons concerned referred to in Article 3 of the present Convention to
their Government Delegates, who will transmit these applications to the Delegates of the other
Contracting State. The decisions adopted on such applications shall be notified to the applicants
through the same Delegates. The Contracting States undertake to give favourable consideration
to such applications.

Article 3.
In the case of watercourses which, having their sources in the territory of one of the Contracting
States, cross the State frontier at several points or form the frontier between the Contracting States,
the floating of timber as from the point where the watercourses for the first time either cross the
State frontier or become a frontier watercourse up to the point where the said system finally enters
the territory of the other Contracting State, shall be effected in accordance with the rules in the
present Article, and also in Article 3A. On the other sections of such watercourses the rules laid
down in Article 2 of the present Convention shall be applied:
1. The general supervision of timber-floating over the various watercourses, the
determination of the conditions governing such floating, the reconciliation of the interests
of floaters with the interests of owners of areas of bank and waterway, and also the
settlement of all questions relating to floating, shall devolve on the Delegates for timberfloating
questions, one of whom shall be appointed by each Contracting State for a given
waterways system.
Particulars of the surnames and Christian names of these Delegates and also of their
permanent places of residence shall be exchanged through the diplomatic channel.
Each Delegate shall have the right, if he considers it necessary, to appoint a deputy
holding the same rights as the Delegate and acting under his responsibility, and also
one or more assistants who shall be responsible for settling routine questions of timberfloating.
Delegates shall notify one another of the surnames and Christian names of
such persons and also of their permanent places of residence.
Delegates and their assistants shall have the right to correspond direct with one
another on all questions relating to timber-floating, and also, when on duty, to cross
the State frontier on the strength of the service documents issued to them and visiby the
frontier authorities of the Contracting States for specific periods.

2. The decisions of Delegates shall be taken unanimously.
Should differences of opinion arise between Delegates on questions requiring urgent
settlement, they must immediately report the fact to their Governments, who shall take
steps to settle the matter in dispute as promptly as possible through the diplomatic
channel.
3. The maintenance in proper condition of logging channels, the execution of work
for the improvement of such channels, the erection of permanent plant for timber-floating
purposes, and also all steps for regulating timber-floating, shall be carried out in accordance
with decisions taken jointly by Delegates. These decisions shall be adopted in the form
of Minutes.
These Minutes shall, in particular, specify how logging channels should be constructed
and how they should be maintained ; how timber should be floated (whether by separate
logs or in floats); whether, on a particular waterways system, rafting should be alowed
only in mixed floats, or whether it is considered possible also to raft logs in individual
consignments; how obstacles to the flow of water should be obviated and removed, etc.
Minutes certifying the necessity for carrying out operations involving financial
outlay for the Contracting States, or likely to produce a dangerous rise in the water level,
to impair the channel or to spoil fishing or fish-breeding, must be approved by the central
organisations of the Contracting States dealing with timber-floating questions.
4. In the discharge of the duties devolving upon them, Delegates and their assistants
shall have the right to carry out the necessary inspections on the spot. If an impending
inspection may lead to a decision likely to affect the interests of the owners of areas of
the bank or waterway, the Delegate or his assistant must give notice of the proposed
inspection to the persons concerned residing in the territory of his State, fourteen
days at least before the inspection. These persons shall have the right to attend
inspections and defend their interests.
5. If, in order to regulate, widen or improve the logging channel, it is necessary
to acquire the right to utilise for timber-floating purposes an area of land or water owned
by a third party, the question of the transfer of such area shall, if no amicable agreement
on the subject is arrived at with its owner, be settled in accordance with the procedure
laid down for the expropriation of property, in the interests of public utility, in the State
in which the area in question is situated.
Note : The sections of the Timber-Floating Regulations drawn up in accordance with
the provisions of the Convention of October 28th, 1922, that do not conflict with the present
Convention shall remain in force unless Delegates agree to the complete abrogation of a particular
Regulation.

Article 3A.
The floating of timber over the watercourses referred to in Article 3 of the present Convention
shall be carried out in accordance with the following rules :
1. Every timber owner shall annually, before January 1st, submit to his Government
Delegate in duplicate preliminary particulars of the quantity of timber he proposes to
prepare and transport over a particular waterways system during the ensuing logging
season.
2. Every owner of timber to be floated shall, by March Ist, submit for the approval
of his Government Delegate a full-size facsimile in duplicate of his mark. The design
of the mark must be approved by both Delegates before use. It is absolutely essential
for a timber owner to brand all timber rafted by him with his mark. This rule shall not
apply to small lots of timber rafted by local owners or lessees of land over short distances
and for their own domestic requirements.
If, notwithstanding the foregoing rule, timber not branded with an approved mark
is brought on to watercourses, the Delegates may agree to sell such timber by public
auction if the owner of such timber is not traced within a period of three months.
3. Every owner of timber must appoint on the territory of his State a representative
to whom interested parties can refer in matters relating to the loss or damage caused to
such parties by timber-floating. These representatives shall be appointed: in Finland,
in every commune contiguous with a particular waterways system; and in the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, in the district (raion) concerned. All communications between
nationals of one Contracting State and the representatives of timber owners of the other
Contracting State shall be passed through the Delegates or their assistants Notice of the
appointment of a representative and of his place of residence must be given by every
timber owner before April 15th to the Delegate of his Government, who shall inform the
Delegate of the other Contracting State.
Each Delegate shall notify the nationals of his State of the surnames and Christian
names of the above-mentioned representatives, their addresses and also the designs of
marks approved for timber.

4. Every owner of timber to be floated must submit to his Government Delegate
before April 15th final and detailed particulars of the quantity and quality of the timber
he proposes to float in the current year over a particular waterways system, and also of
the points where floating will begin and end.
5. Delegates shall communicate to one another the particulars referred to in
paragraphs 1 to 4 of the present Article within 14 days after the expiry of the periods
referred to in the said paragraphs.
If a timber owner does not submit these particulars, or submits them late, he may,
at the discretion of the Delegates, be mulcted in a fine not exceeding 50 % of the rafting
dues payable by that owner.
If no rafting dues are levied on a particular waterways system, the said money fine
shall be computed by the Delegates at a rate not exceeding 50 % of the rafting dues
which are current on the nearest waterways system and which would be payable on the
timber of the said proprietor if he floated it down that waterways system.
The proceeds of such fines, together with those of the sale of the timber without
approved brand-marks referred to in paragraph 2 of the present Article, shall be applied
to defraying the cost of constructing and maintaining the logging channel.
6. Delegates must jointly discuss the plan and conditions of the next timber-floating
season.
Delegates may on their own initiative or at the request of one of the timber proprietors
convene a meeting of all proprietors interested in timber-floating over a given waterways
system for joint discussion of questions concerning loading of logs on the said waterways
system, of the order of rafting, of safeguarding the interests of individual timber-floaters
when mixed floats are rafted, of timber-floating during intervals, etc.
If timber owners fail to agree, the points at issue shall be decided by the Delegates.
If the latter cannot come to an agreement, timber shall be rafted for the joint account of
all the proprietors. The Delegates shall lay down the conditions and the order of such
rafting and delegate its execution either to their assistants or to persons specially appointed
for the purpose.
7. Every timber proprietor may raft timber for his own account, except in the case
referred to in the above paragraph.
Rafting must be carried out with the greatest possible despatch and in such a manner
as to safeguard in the best possible way the interests of the owners of all the timber rafted
timber may be rafted at any season of the year when natural conditions permit.
When timber is rafted in floats, the latter must in those sections of the watercourses
skirted by the State frontier and where the channels are sufficiently wide and deep, and
where in general it is possible to do so without difficulty and extra expense, keep within
the boundary of the State from which the timber came. In these sections of the waterways
rafts may stop near the shores of the other Contracting State and crews land on the bank
only in cases of force majeure (rafts driven into the bank by the wind, break up of rafts,
rafts stranded on a shoal, etc.). In such cases, raftsmen must stay where they land and do
their best to send the rafts on their way as soon as possible. Representatives of the Frontier
Guard of the Contracting States must in such cases give raftsmen the necessary assistance.
If several timber floaters raft timber simultaneously over one and the same waterways
system, each must take care to see that his timber is so rafted as not to cause avoidable
obstruction or inconvenience to the other. In particular, the unloading of rafted timber
at the terminal points of rafting situated near the State frontier must be carried out
without delay and in the shortest possible time. If negligence is shown in this respect
and duly proved by the Delegates, the guilty party shall be bound to make good the loss
and damage sustained as a result of delay in rafting.
8. If the Delegates agree that rafting must be carried out by the labourers of the
Contracting Party through whose territory part of the rafting is being effected, such
labourers must be supplied by the Delegate or his assistant for the whole period of
rafting through such territory.
9. During timber-floating, raftsmen shall be permitted to place booms and other
temporary rafting erections at such points where this is necessary for carrying out rafting
or preventing damage. These booms and erections must not hinder the flow of water
or the passage of fish towards their spawning-places and fisheries and must also not
materially obstruct traffic on watercourses.
Cross-booms may be erected when logs are floated separately, but on condition that
they are not placed near villages or points where they might cause a considerable rise
in the water-level.
Bridges, landing-stages, bathing-places and other erections on watercourses must be
protected so far as necessary during the rafting season by devices safeguarding them
against damage.
10. Timber, the rafting of which is completed within one year from the date of
felling, may be floated with the bark on. Other timber must have the bark removed,
unless for special reasons the timber floater has been released from this obligation. The
bark must be removed in such a place and in such a manner that it does not fall into the
watercourses.
11. Subject to observance of the provisions of Article 7 of the present Convention,
labourers engaged in timber-floating shall be entitled to land and remain on the bank of
the other Contracting State :
(i) In order to carry out the operations referred to in the present Convention
(paragraphs 6, 9, 12-15 of the present Article) ;
(2) For timber-floating purposes, more particularly for the erection of timberfloating
installations, controlling the movement of logs, protecting timber from
breakage and jamming, clearing the banks and logging-channels of timber, timberfloating
refuse, etc. ; and also
(3) Where necessary, for executing the decisions of the Delegates.
Nevertheless, landing on the bank and the crossing of yards, gardens, parks and store
premises shall only be permitted where it is impossible to avoid this by means of rafting
devices or other methods.
When within the zoo-metre zone, referred to in Article 7 of the present Convention,
on the bank of the other Contracting State, the labourers must, as far as possible, utilise
the roads and paths in that zone.
12. As soon as they have noticed it or after they have been informed thereof, timber
floaters must immediately remove the timber that has collected on rapids, that has been
cast up by the stream on the shore and also timber that is submerged or on the point of
sinking, so far as this would result in obstructing the watercourses or inconveniencing
traffic or fishing. Should no such consequences result, the timber must be removed before
the end of the same year.
Pieces of timber submerged or on the point of sinking must be piled on the nearest
bank at points where they will cause no damage or inconvenience.
13. Timber floaters must be careful to see that ferries are able to cross watercourses
and must also assist other forms of transport on watercourses, if the rafting devices or the
timber rafted hinder traffic.
To ensure traffic movement on waterways, timber floaters must, where necessary,
arrange suitable openings in their booms.
14. Timber floaters shall be authorised, while rafting is proceeding, to take down any
fencing or parts thereof adjacent to watercourses which obstruct rafting operations. In
doing so, care must be taken not to do them any damage. After the rafts have passed,
the replacement of the fencing and parts thereof in their previous position shall be
effected or arranged by the timber floaters.
15. All waste from rafting operations (splinters, bark, branches, twigs, etc.), and also
logs left on the bank, must be secured against the possibility of their being carried into
watercourses, and when floating operations are completed they, and also all other refuse,
must be cleared away and removed from the banks beyond the highest level of the spring
floods.
When rafting operations are completed, the logging channels and their banks must
be cleared of the stray timber left by rafting.
16. The Delegates of the Contracting States shall inform one another of the completion
of all timber-floating operations after the shore zones have been cleared.
17. The cost of maintaining and improving logging channels shall be defrayed by the
Contracting States in the manner agreed upon between the Delegates of the two Parties of
a given waterways system. These costs shall be refunded by the owners of the timber
floated down in the form of a special rafting fee, fixed for each waterways system in the
manner laid down in Article 3, paragraph 3, of the present Convention.
The amounts due by the owners of floated timber shall be paid by the latter, before
timber-floating starts, to the Delegate of their State. On the completion of floating,
Delegates shall settle accounts between themselves in proportion to the expenses which
each of the Contracting States has borne for a given waterways system. These settlements
must be completed not later than December Ist of the current year.
The owners of the timber floated must also pay for the various services rendered to
them with their consent during rafting (supply of materials, labour, etc.). Payment of
these expenses must be made within io days of the corresponding service being rendered.
Delegates shall have the right to fix other time-limits for the payment of expenses, in the
event of the provisions of paragraph 8 of the present Article being applied.
18. Timber floaters shall participate in overhead expenses in proportion to the
number of kilometres traversed and the quantity of timber rafted by them in the rafting
season in question.
The Delegates shall fix the quantity of timber regarded as the rafting unit for the
assessment of the amount due in respect of the above expenses.
19. The damage caused by landing on banks, by floating operations or circumstances
connected therewith must be refunded to the injured party by the owner of the timber
direct if in his own State, and through the Delegate of his own Government or his assistant
if in the other Contracting State.
If no agreement is arrived at between the Parties concerned regarding the amount
of compensation and the method of payment, these damages shall be assessed by a Valuation
Commission consisting of three reputable persons. Each Delegate shall appoint one member
of the Commission and the members thus appointed shall join ly select two Chairmen:
one for assessing the damage done on the territory of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the other for assessing the damage done on the territory of Finland.
Should disagreement arise on the question of the appointment of Chairmen, the latter
shall be nominated by the Delegates by joint agreement. If the Delegates are
also unable to come to an agreement, each Government shall appoint a Chairman to
assess the damage done on its territory. The decisions of the Valuation Commission
shall be final and binding on the parties concerned. Each Commission shall start work
immediately timber-floating ceases at the place where damage has been done.
The members of the above Commission may cross the State frontier in the discharge
of their duties on the strength of appropriate certificates issued by the frontier authorities
of their State, in the manner laid down for the crossing of the frontier by Delegates.
20. In the case of all settlements of account effected in virtue of the provisions of
the present Convention, the corresponding amounts shall be reckoned in U. S. A. gold
dollars and be paid in the currency agreed upon by the Delegates.
21. Disputes connected with timber-floating which cannot be settled by agreement
between the Delegates and which are not covered by other provisions in the present
Convention, shall be referred for settlement through the diplomatic channel.
Article 7.
The officials and labourers engaged on timber-floating operations who are compelled, owing
to the nature of their work, to stay in the territory of the other Contracting State shall, in the event
of a special agreement regarding passports being concluded between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and Finland, enjoy the facilities laid down in that agreement.
Pending the conclusion of such an agreement, the following rules shall apply
i. A list certified by the frontier authorities, giving the names of timber-floating
officials and labourers who have to cross the State frontier, shall be submitted to the
nearest authorised local frontier passport control authorities of the other Contracting
State in good time before the frontier is crossed. The certificates issued by the frontier
authorities of both States shall also be accepted as passports in addition to the ordinary
passports. All changes in the list of officials and labourers shall similarly be notified
weekly.
2. Timber-floating officials and labourers may not go farther than I00 metres from
the line of bank existing at the time of timber-floating. Frontier-crossing-points shall
in each particular case be fixed by common agreement between the Delegates or their
assistants.
Note. - The present rules shall also apply to labourers engaged in making the logging channel.
II.
The present Convention shall form an integral part of the Convention of October 28th, 1922,
and shall come into force immediately after it is ratified by both Contracting States. The instruments
of ratification shall be exchanged at Helsinki as soon as possible.
III.
The present Convention is done in duplicate in the Russian and Finnish languages, both texts
being equally authentic.

In faith whereof the Plenipotentiaries of the two Contracting States have signed the present
Convention and have thereto affixed their seals.
Done at Moscow, October 15th, 1933.


FINAL PROTOCOL.
In connection with the provisions of the Convention signed to-day modifying the Convention
of October 28th, 1922, regarding the floating of timber down watercourses flowing from Finnish
territory into the territory of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and vice versa, the Plenipotentiaries
of the Contracting States have agreed as follows :
Ad Article i of the Convention o[ October 28th, 1922.
The right to float timber as far as the sea also includes the right to the use, at the point where
the river enters the sea, of a suitable plot of ground for sorting and piling timber floated down
separately. If at such a point there is no plot of land allocated for the joint use of timber floaters,
the timber floater of the other Contracting State shall have the right to lease such a plot, and for
this purpose the Delegate of the State in which the mouth of the river is situated shall give the
necessary assistance.
Ad Article 3, Point I.
i. Each Delegate shall appoint as his deputy and assistants either officials responsible for
timber-floating questions or members of the State Frontier Guard, or representatives of collective
farms or timber merchants or private individuals.
2. The crossing of the State frontier by Delegates and their assistants shall be effected as far
as possible at the points where the frontier guards are posted and after due notice to the latter.
The term of validity of visas for the crossing of the State frontier shall be three months, unless the
Delegates jointly agree to other periods.
Ad Article 3, Point 3.
x. On rivers which flow along the State frontier, the logging channel may, at the discretion
of the Delegate of each Contracting State, be cleared of stones and other objects that have fallen
into it, if these operations do not have the effect of altering the watercourses; notice for the purpose
must be given at least five days in advance to the Delegate of the other Contracting State or his
assistant.
2. The Contracting States interpret paragraph 3 of the aforesaid point to mean that the point
does not in the nature of things refer to minor routine expenditure defrayed out of the amounts
received by Delegates from timber floaters.
Ad Article 3, Point 4.
Delegates shall be bound to give the owners of areas of bank and waterway and also tenants
of the same at least 14 days' notice of an inspection, but only in the case of inspections undertaken
in order to arrange for new logging channels, to assess the damage done to the owners or tenants
of plots, or to acquire, for timber-floating purposes, from the said persons property belonging to
them or to restrict the use of such property.
As regards other inspections, the prescribed period of notice, if any, may be shortened in
emergencies.
Ad Article 3A, Point 19.
The owners and tenants of areas of bank or waterway shall be entitled to compensation for
loss or damage due to the construction of a logging channel or to the actual floating of timber
itself, but may not claim payment for the fact that timber is floated through their property.
In adopting the foregoing provisions, the Plenipotentiaries of the Contracting States agree
that neither the present Convention nor the Convention of October 28th, 1922, may be interpreted
as modifying in any way the general procedure for settling frontier incidents and disputes strictly
so called as laid down in the Agreements at present in force between Finland and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
The present Final Protocol is drawn up in duplicate in the Russian and Finnish languages,
both texts being equally authentic.
In faith whereof the Plenipotentiaries of the Contracting States have signed the present Final
Protocol and have thereto affixed their seals.
Done at Moscow, October I5th, 1933.

