CONVENTION CONCERNING FISHING IN THE BIDASSOA RIVER
AND THE BAY OF FIGUIER

The Government of the French Republic and the Spanish Government, in
accordance with the proposals made by the Sub-Commission to the "problems of the
Bidassoa River" and approved by the International Commission for the Pyrenees,
meeting at Paris in December 1958, have decided to sign this Convention, which
incorporates provisions of the Declaration of 30 March 1879 delimiting the jurisdic
tion of France and Spain in the Bidassoa River and the Bay of Higuer; the Conven
tion of 18 February 1886, as amended on 19 January 1888, 4 October 1894, 6 April
1908, 2 June 1924 and 24 September 1952, and additional instrument of 31 May
1957; and the Recommendations of the International Commission for the Pyrenees
(meeting in June 1957 at Madrid).

Title I. DELIMITATION OF WATERS
Article 1
Area covered by the Convention
This Convention shall apply to the main course of the Bidassoa River and its
estuary, from Chapitelaco-Arria (or Chapiteco-Erreca) to the line joining Cabo
Higuer (Punta Erdico) in Spain and Pointe du Tombeau in France.
Article 2
Main divisions
The area specified in article 1 above is divided into two parts:
the first part comprises the main course of the Bidassoa River from Chapitelaco-
Arria (or Chapiteco-Erreca) to the hypothetical line joining the inside edges of
the seaward heads of the French and Spanish breakwaters in the estuary;
the second part extends from this hypothetical line to the line joining Cabo
Higuer (Punta Erdico) and Pointe du Tombeau in France. This part is known as
the Bay of Higuer.
These two parts are defined in article 3 below.
Article 3
Secondary divisions
a) First part. The main course of the Bidassoa River, as defined in article 2
above, is itself divided into three zones:
- the first zone lies between Chapitelaco-Arria or Chapiteco-Erreca and Alunda;
- the second zone extends from Alunda to the downstream side of the Hendaye-
Irun railway bridge;
- the third zone extends from the downstream side of the Hendaye-Irun railway
bridge to the hypothetical line joining the inside edges of the seaward heads of
the French and Spanish breakwaters in the estuary.
b) Second part. The Bay of Higuer is divided jurisdictionally into three zones
(Declaration of 30 March 1879 and annexed plan):
- the first zone comprises the waters coming under the exclusive jurisdiction of
Spain;
- the second zone comprises the waters coming under the exclusive jurisdiction of
France;
- the third zone comprises the waters common to the two countries.

Article 4
Outer boundaries
The second part referred to in the foregoing article is bounded by a transverse
line ABCD (Punta Erdico-Punta Tumbas) north of which the Convention no longer
applies.
North of that line, the meridian passing through the mid-point M of the line AB
divides the territorial waters of the two countries.
Article 5
The transverse line ABCD, which is 3,055 metres long and marks the boundary
of the Bay, is divided into three equal parts, AB, BC and CD.
Article 6
Spanish waters
A line running from points F' and F" (pyramids standing on land in Spain near
Punta Socorro) extends parallel with the coast of Spain until it meets at point I an
other line RB.
This line RB is formed by the alignment of two pyramids standing on land in
Spain near the harbour of refuge and point B situated on the line ABCD, at a dis
tance of 1,018 metres from Cabo Higuer, which is equal to one third of the length of
that line.
The waters bounded by the lines F' I B and the coast of Spain come under the
exclusive jurisdiction of Spain.
Article 7
French waters
A line passing through the pyramids G and G' intersects the line ABCD at a
point C at a distance of 1,018 metres from Pointe du Tombeau which is equal to one
third of the length of that line. The waters of the Bay of Higuer lying between this
line GC and the coast of France come under the exclusive jurisdiction of France.
Article 8
Common waters
The waters lying between the line BC and the French and Spanish waters
specified in articles 6 and 7 above form the zone of common waters.
The vessels of both countries shall have common anchoraging rights in this
Article 9
Maintenance of beacons
The competent services of each country shall be responsible, on a continuing
basis, in their own territory for the installation, maintenance and repair of the marks
and beacons required to indicate the boundaries provided for in the foregoing articles.
Title II. FISHING RIGHTS
Article 10
A uthorized persons
(1) The right to fish in the area covered by the Convention shall belong exclu
sively and without distinction to the inhabitants of Irun and Fuenterrabia in Spain,
and to the inhabitants of Biriatou, Urrugne and Hendaye in France.
(2) The aforesaid inhabitants shall without having to provide proof of inclu
sion in the maritime register of their respective country, continue to exercise identical
rights to fish and to gather all types of marine fertilizer and shall not be subject to any
provisions or restrictions other than those arising from this Convention.
(3) Riparians shall have exclusive fishing rights in their beaconed channels.
Fishing permits
(4) The right to fish with net or line shall be recognized by a permit issued to
applicants by the commanding officers of the naval stations. Such commanding
officers shall be responsible for the preparation of and the procedure for issuing and
renewing the permits.
Exemption from import duty
(5) In accordance with existing usage, all products of fishing may be imported
into each of the two countries free of duty and charges.
Only riparians shall be subject to such exemption in their country of residence in
respect of the products of their own fishing.
Craft marks
(6) Riparians of the two countries may use any kind of craft for fishing. How
ever, craft used for either net or line fishing must bear the following distinctive marks
painted on the craft itself:
(a) a band extending from end to end and on both sides, yellow for the Spanish
crafts and blue or white for French crafts;
(b) the name of the commune to which the craft belongs;
(c) the registration number of the craft.
The two latter marks shall be placed on both sides of the bow.
All such marks shall be at least 10 centimetres high.
Article 11
Hauling of nets onto land
Riparians of the two countries may haul in and dry their nets on either the
French shore or the Spanish shore, at any point they choose between Alunda and the
hypothetical line joining the inside edges of the seaward heads of the French and
Spanish breakwaters in the estuary, but in no circumstances on private property
without permission from the owner.
Beyond the hypothetical line joining the inside edges of the seaward heads of the
French and Spanish breakwaters in the estuary, French nationals shall be prohibited
from fishing and hauling in or drying their fishing gear on the Spanish shore, and the
same prohibition shall apply to Spanish nationals on the French shore (the term
"shore" being understood to mean that part of the coast extending to the point of
lowest tide).
The only exception permitted is the exception deriving from article 18, para
graph 5, below, namely that fishermen of the two nations shall be entitled on the days
provided for in that article, to haul in their nets between the north-west corner of
Hendaye Casino and the north-west side of the easternmost of the Jumeaux rocks.
Article 12
Various types of fishing and closed season
(1) Fishing for eel, lamprey, plaice and mullet shall be permitted at any time.
(2) Fishing shall be prohibited:
for salmon and sea trout (or Reo trout): from 31 July to 15 February;
for trout: from 20 October to 15 February;
for shad: from 31 March to 1 June;
for tuna: at any time unless an exception is made by agreement between the com
manding officers of the naval stations;
for fish not specifically mentioned from 20 March to 20 May;
for lobster and crawfish: from 1 August to 1 March;
for prawn (excluding shrimp): from 1 March to 1 June.
As an exception, however, during the closed season fishing for prawn shall be permit
ted if it is used as fishing bait and is caught with a "pandereta" (uncovered net
basket).
Article 13
Size offish
It shall be unlawful to catch fish whose length, measured from the tip of the
snout to the end of the tail fin, is less than:
salmon: 45 centimetres;
Reo trout or sea trout: 45 centimetres;
common trout: 20 centimetres;
shad: 30 centimetres;
turbot: 30 centimetres;
eel and any other fish which never grow to a length of 20 centimetres may be
caught at any time regardless of their length.
Fishermen shall be required to release any fish which have not reached the prescribed
length.
Article 14
Roe and eggs
Fish roe, whether natural (fresh or tinned, or mixed into a composite bait) or
artificial roe and crustacean eggs, may not be used as bait or lures.
Article 15
Shellfish
(1) For all species of shellfish, fishing shall be prohibited from 1 May to
1 October and, for hygienic reasons, at any other time stipulated by the authorities
mentioned in article 24.
(2) Shellfishing shall be permanently prohibited, however, in the following
areas:
(a) the maritime coastal area bounded on the north by the line between Cabo Higuer
and Pointe du Tombeau and on the West by a line connecting the Hendaye-Playe
sanatorium with a point on the first line 700 metres from Pointe du Tombeau;
(b) the Bidassoa River, downstream from the Hendaye-Irun railway bridge to the
line joining the inside edges of the seaward heads of the French and Spanish
breakwaters in the estuary.
Individual waivers may be granted in exceptional cases by any of the commanding
officers of each naval station, when those authorities are certain that the shellfish har
vested are intended for cultivation, for consumption after cooking or for bait.
(3) The harvesting of oysters less than 5 centimetres in diameter at their widest
point and mussels less than 4 centimetres long shall also be prohibited.
(4) Oyster fishing may be temporarily prohibited, for at least one year, if this
measure is advisable in the interests of stock conservation. All other shellfish may be
fished, regardless of size.
(5) Fishermen shall be required to release oysters and mussels that are not of
the prescribed size at the place where they were harvested.
Article 16
Sand, marine fertilizer and seaweed
(1) In accordance with existing usage, all riparians without distinction shall
continue to gather at all points along the course of the Bidassoa River washed by high
tides, any seaweed, except that adhering to ditches on cultivated land, which belongs
exclusively to the owners of such land.
(2) They shall continue to gather conchiferous sand and other types of marine
fertilizers all along the aforesaid points that are uncovered at low tide, but they may
not extract them at a distance closer than 10 metres from the ditches, breakwaters
and embankments, or 8 metres from any of the oyster and mussel beds, the various
shellfish beds or the fish-ponds referred to in any of the following articles.
(3) The harvesting of seaweed shall normally be prohibited along the French
and Spanish breakwaters in the estuary.
(4) These provisions extend in particular to the entire perimeter of the le des
Faisans (Isla de los Faisanes) or le de la Conf rence (Isla de la Conferencia), situated
in th centre of the river in international waters.
The commanding officers of the naval stations responsible for the guarding and
surveillance of the Island during the six-month period in which each nation enjoys
such rights in accordance with the treaties in force shall be responsible for reporting
violations during the periods in which the Island is under their jurisdiction.
Article 17
Line fishing
(1) Float line fishing shall, as an exception, continue to be unrestricted for all
as in the past, except during spawning season. Each fisherman may use no more than
three lines at a time, with no more than two hooks on each line.
(2) Casting shall be permitted. Such fishing shall always be done from the
shore without the use of a boat, except below Behovia Bridge, where it may be done
from a motorless boat. Casting may not be done by fishermen who have already set
up floated lines.
Article 18
Use of nets: Salmonidae
(1) Fishing with any kind of net for salmon, sea trout (or Reo trout) and shad
shall be prohibited, to permit the restocking of these species in the river.
The use of nets may be authorized in accordance with the procedure provided
for in article 24 whenever the circumstances so warrant and then only in the maritime
zone specified at the time.
In such cases the net to be used shall be the simple net currently in use, with centre
meshes at least 52 mm square and side meshes at least 60 mm square and a maximum
length of 160 metres.
Prawn
(2) Nets for catching prawn or shrimp shall have a maximum mouth width of
three brasses. They may not be used above the Behovia Bridge.
"Bolinche" nets
(3) The use of sardine nets known as "bolinches" shall be authorized in the Bay
of Higuer from sunrise to sunset during the sardine season, when sardines have been
sighted in the Bay.
Flat nets
(4) The use of flat nets known as "carrelets" with a mesh no finer than 14 mm
shall be authorized exclusively for smelt fishing in the main course of the Bidassoa
River above the line joining the inside edges of the seaward heads of the breakwaters
in the estuary.
Mesh size
(5) For catching fish other than salmon, sea trout (or Reo trout), shad, sar
dines and anchovies, nets having a mesh of at least 20 mm, a prescribed maximum
length of 160 metres and hauling ends of no more than 60 metres, may be used only
in the part of the Bay of Higuer specified in article 11, paragraph 3.
The use of such nets shall be authorized on Mondays and Thursdays in the case
of the inhabitants of Spanish riparian municipalities and on Wednesdays and Satur
days in the case of the inhabitants of French riparian communes.
(6) The mesh of the authorized nets shall have the dimensions specified for
each species under wet conditions.
Article 19
Traps
The lobster or crawfish pots or traps customarily used in each country shall be
authorized for use in the Bay of Higuer.
Article 20
Prohibited fishing gear and practices
The following shall be expressly prohibited:
(1) Fishing with set lines or ground lines.
Rod and line
(2) Fishing throughout the entire international zone by the "whip" method (a
type of fishing done by means of a rod and a line fitted with large simple branched
hooks, set above the sinker, with hooking by shoulder action or by casting). To facili
tate enforcement and surveillance, the following measures shall therefore be applied:
Hooks
(a) It shall be unlawful to use simple hooks with a gap of more than 9 mm per
pendicular from point to shank, and double, treble or quadruple hooks with a dis
tance of more than 10 mm between points.
(b) The double, treble or quadruple hooks authorized on floated lines must be
mounted below the sinker and regularly baited. Only ground lines bearing simple
hooks may have the casting sinker set beyond the hooks.
Nets
(3) The use of any type of net to close off any parts of the river covered at high
tide and the use of any device intended to divert the natural course of the waters, pre
vent the passage of fish or interfere with the restocking of the river.
(4) Enclosing in any circumstances more than two thirds of the width of the
waters of the river in a single cast of the net.
(5) Extending the length of the nets referred to in article 18, by any device
whatsoever, such as fastening nets end to end, using boats as links or fishing in
groups, etc. This restriction shall apply to the course of the Bidassoa River as well as
to the Bay of Higuer.
(6) Fishing with nets in the bar of the Bidassoa River and in the area between
the bar and Roca Punta Point.
(7) Using in the Bidassoa River and the Bay of Higuer any nets and fishing gear
or fishing methods other than those mentioned in articles 17 and 18, particularly
trawl nets known as "chaluts" in French and "redes de arrastre" in Spanish, or tram
mel nets or fish traps (berteaux; botrinos).
(8) Using the aforesaid nets or pots (if they do not bear the seal or the mark
approved by the respective authorities) and using them for types of fishing other than
those for which their use is permitted.
(9) Selling fish and shellfish which are not the dimensions specified in arti
cles 13 and 15 or which have been fished during closed seasons.
Harmful substances
(10) Dumping into the river or the Bay of Higuer any drugs, explosives or bait
which cpuld intoxicate or destroy fish. In particular, factories discharging waste
water at any point whatsoever along either the Spanish or the international course of
the Bidassoa River must install a filtering system to render such wastes harmless for
the various species of fish.
Chasing fish by either beating the water or frightening them in any way.
Luring them by means of flood lights trained on nets or fishing gear. A portable
light, however, shall be authorized for elver fishing.
Night fishing
(11) Fishing of any kind at night, that is, from 45 minutes after sunset until
45 minutes before sunrise, throughout the entire main course of the Bidassoa River.
Elver
This prohibition, however, shall be waived exclusively in the case of elver fishing
done at night, but specialized fishermen must obtain a special permit bearing an iden
tifying photograph and issued by the commanding officers of the respective naval
stations.
(12) Hooking or lifting nets or other fishing gear belonging to another person,
for any reason whatsoever.
Article 21
Ponds and beds
(a) Subject to the reservations in article 15 above, riparians may fish, in any
part of the main course of the Bidassoa River covered by high tide, for any species of
shellfish, but they may not set up any permanent or temporary fishing installations,
any oyster, mussel or other shellfish forms or beds without the authorization of the
municipality within whose jurisdiction they would be constructed or without comply
ing with any conditions that are prescribed.
Authorization
An authorization given may be revoked and may never be considered a conces
sion. If it is withdrawn for failure to comply with the conditions set, the installation
shall always be demolished at the expense of the offender.
Such forms and beds shall in no circumstances obstruct navigation or be used
for fishing and must be at least 100 metres apart.
(b) In order to restock the waters of the Bidassoa River, French and Spanish
fishermen may, but only on the basis of mutual agreement and at joint expense, set
up fish ponds on either bank of the river which may serve only for the propagation of
fish and shall in no circumstances obstruct navigation.
Article 22
Salmon fishing
(1) All salmon fishermen shall be required to inform their respective naval sta
tions, at the request of the commanding officers, of the number of salmon caught, their
weight and the place where they were caught, as well as the method of fishing used.
Competence of mayors
(2) (a) With a view to the possible authorization of net fishing for salmon,
alluded to in article 18, paragraph 1, the mayors or their delegates shall draw up a list
of the names of fishermen in each commune who own the types of net provided for in
that article. Once the list of names has been established, it shall be sent to all persons
responsible for monitoring and implementing these regulations, as designated in arti
cle 23 below. An unlimited number of nets may be laid out provided that they meet
the mesh requirements.
(b) Where net fishing for salmon is authorized in accordance with the provi
sions of article 18, paragraph 1, the two riparian nations shall alternately exercise the
exclusive right to such fishing for a 24-hour period, from midnight to midnight,
reckoned by the church clock at Irun, each nation thus enjoying exclusive fishing
rights on successive days.
(c) Two weeks before 1 February, the mayors of the riparian communes or
their delegates shall meet to draw lots to determine which nation shall have first turn.
Each nation shall subsequently regulate the exercise of its right in the following man
ner, as it deems appropriate. One week later, the mayors or their delegates, in both
France and Spain, shall meet separately by national group to plan the 24 hours of
fishing allotted to each nation.
(d) The delegates shall decide freely whether they wish the fishing to be done by
each commune in turn or by all the communes together on the same day or according
to some other arrangement they deem appropriate.
(e) Once the matter has been decided, the delegates shall be required to com
municate the results of their deliberations to the respective commanding officers and
any failure to comply with fishing arrangements thus agreed upon shall constitute a
violation.
(/) If the mayors fail to communicate the results of their deliberations in due
time, each commanding officer of the Bidassoa naval stations, acting on behalf of the
Chairman of his country's delegation to the International Commission for the
Pyrenees, shall take the initiative in determining the arrangement for the exercise of
fishing rights by nationals. Such determination shall be made at the beginning of
February.
Title HI. POLICING AND MONITORING OF FISHING
Article 23
Authorities and officers responsible for enforcement
(A) To ensure the maintenance of order and the implementation of the provi
sions of this Convention, monitoring shall be performed and violations reported in
the manner prescribed in article 26 below, by the following persons:
Naval stations
(1) The commanding officers of the naval stations of each State or their dele
gates or the officers in command of craft attached to station vessels.
Fishing wardens
(2) Four fishing wardens, including two appointed by the municipalities of
Urrugne, Hendaye and Biriatou, and two by the municipalities of Irun and Fuenterrabi'a.
These wardens, whose salaries shall be paid by the municipalities which
appointed them, shall be sworn in and provided with a shoulder belt with a badge
indicating their status. They shall be under the direct supervision of the commanding
officer of their respective naval station and must follow his instructions in all matters
concerning the policing of fishing. They shall submit reports to the commanding
officer of their naval station.
Shore policing
(B) The Bay of Higuer and the international course of the Bidassoa River shall
be policed and monitored exclusively by Spanish officers on the Spanish shore and by
French officers on the French shore.
Article 24
Powers of the commanding officers of naval stations
The commanding officers of the naval stations of each State in the Bidassoa
River may, by mutual agreement and subject to the reservation mentioned below,
order any measure not provided for in this Convention which they see fit to take in
the Bidassoa River and the Bay of Higuer.
Each commanding officer shall report on any such measure without delay to the
Chairman of his country's delegation to the International Commission for the
Pyrenees. The measure shall not take effect until it has been approved by the two
chairmen. The International Commission for the Pyrenees shall take a decision on
the measure in question at its next meeting.
Article 25
Customs and municipal police officers
Officers of the customs services and municipal police forces shall be empowered
to draw up reports of violations under the same conditions as the fishing wardens
referred to in article 23 above.
Article 26
Establishment of violations
Violations of this Convention shall be substantiated either by witnesses or by
means of reports drawn up and signed by the authorities designated in articles 23
and 25.
The commanding officers of the French and Spanish naval stations in the
Bidassoa River shall be authorized to confiscate prohibited nets and fishing gear as
well as any fish caught unlawfully. They may also order the immediate confiscation
of nets, even if they are not prohibited, belonging to offenders of their nationality
when the nature of the violation makes such a measure necessary.
Fishing wardens shall be entitled to call directly upon the police force to deal
with violations of this Convention and to confiscate prohibited fishing gear and any
fish and shellfish caught unlawfully.
Police officers
Violations relating to the sale of fish, shellfish and fish fry caught during closed
seasons or measuring less than the prescribed dimensions may also be established by
any officers of the Criminal Police in France and any members of the Civil Guard in
Spain, who may report to the commanding officer of the naval station concerned,
and the latter shall decide on the action to be taken.
Article 27
Official negligence
Fishing wardens who are found by the commanding officer of the naval station
under whose direct supervision they come to have been negligent in the performance
of their duties shall be immediately dismissed. If such wardens have accepted prom
ises or bribes for shirking their duties, they shall be prosecuted in the manner pre
scribed hi such cases by the law of their country.
Title IV. PUNISHMENT OF VIOLATIONS
Article 28
Reciprocal powers of officers
The officials responsible for implementing these regulations, as specified in arti
cle 23, may establish violations by any riparians regardless of their nationality, but
offenders may be tried only by the competent court of their own country.
Article 29
The offences referred to in the second paragraph of article 11 of this Convention
shall, however, come within the jurisdiction of the courts of the State in whose terri
tory they have been committed.
Article 30
Action to be taken on reports
All reports submitted to the commanding officer of the naval station who has
jurisdiction over the offender shall be acted upon in the manner provided for in the
following paragraph and in article 32.
Settlement procedures
In the case of all violations of the provisions of this Convention, the command
ing officer of the French naval station shall be empowered to declare offenders eligible
for settlement procedures, and the commanding officer of the Spanish naval station
shall apply the provisions in force in his country.
Article 31
Authenticity of reports
Reports drawn up by the officers referred to in article 23 shall be considered
authentic until proved false.
Article 32
Competent courts
Unless subject to the settlement procedure referred to in article 30, cases of vio
lations of this Convention shall be adjudicated in France, under the jurisdiction of
the competent Court of Bayonne. In Spain, offenders may appeal decisions of the
commanding officer of the naval station to the competent court of San Sebastian.
The authority which prepared the report shall be notified of the decision taken
or judgement rendered.
Article 33
Civil action
Without prejudice to the rights of the Attorney-General's office (Ministere
public), proceedings resulting from damage or loss sustained by fishermen as a result
of actions by other fishermen shall be instituted by the mayors or at the instance of
the plaintiff.
In such cases the courts shall, where appropriate; order and determine the
amount of damages to be paid to the party entitled to them, in addition to the penalty
imposed for the violation.
Article 34
Time-limit for proceedings
No public prosecution proceedings or civil proceedings arising from a violation
of the provisions of this Convention may be initiated after 60 days have elapsed from
the date on which the violation was committed.
Title V. PENALTIES
Article 35
Penalties
To ensure that all riparians effectively enjoy identical rights, the penalties must
be identical for nationals of both countries who violate the regulations governing the
joint use of the Bidassoa River, in accordance with the treaties in force.
In the two countries, the competent courts shall thus, in ruling on violations of
this Convention committed by fishermen under their jurisdiction, impose the follow
ing penalties:
(1) confiscation of the products of fishing;
(2) confiscation and destruction of prohibited nets or other fishing gear;
(3) fines ranging from 2,000 francs (240 pesetas) to 12,000 francs (1.440 pesetas) or
imprisonment for not less than six days or more than one month;
(4) in ail cases provided for in this Convention, the competent courts of the two
countries shall, if there seem to be attentuating circumstances, have the authority
to reduce the term of imprisonment to even less than six days and the fine to even
less than 2,000 francs (240 pesetas). They may also impose either one of these
penalties, provided that in no circumstances may the fine be less than 250 francs
(30 pesetas) or the term of imprisonment for less than 24 hours.
In the event of fluctuations in the exchange rate between the two currencies, the
rate of the fines provided for hi the foregoing subparagraphs may be revised at the re
quest of either of the High Contracting Parties and the new rate may be established
by a simple exchange of letters between the High Contracting Parties.
Article 36
Recidivism
In all cases of recidivism, the offender shall be sentenced to double the amount
of the fine or term of imprisonment already imposed on him, but such double penalty
may never exceed the maximum prescribed in article 35, subparagraph 3. A case of
recidivism shall be deemed to exist if, during the previous 12 months, the offender
has already been convicted of any offence against the provisions of this Convention.
If, during the previous 12 months, the offender has been convicted twice of an
offence against the regulations, the fine or term of imprisonment may be increased to
double the amount of the maximum stipulated in the foregoing article.
Article 37
Special provisions for salmon
Any riparian who fishes for salmon when it is not his turn to fish, under the provi
sions of article 22, paragraph 2, without the permission of the party whose turn it is,
shall incur the fine or term of imprisonment specified in article 35, subparagraph 3.
He shall also return any fish taken unlawfully or its value to the fisherman whose
turn he took. If he repeats the offence he may be sentenced to a fine or term of
imprisonment and also be liable to the possible confiscation of his nets.
Article 38
Disposal of confiscated fish
Any fish confiscated on account of a violation of the provisions of this Conven
tion shall be immediately distributed to the poor of the riparian commune in which
confiscation took place.
Article 39
Disposal of funds collected
Funds collected in the form of fines or as a result of settlements decreed in pursu
ance of this Convention shall be deposited in both countries in the municipal treasury,
and half the amount shall be awarded to the fishing warden, municipal police officer
or customs officer who established the violation.
Article 40
Civil responsibility
Parents, husbands and employers may be declared liable for the fines imposed
for violations committed by their minor children, wives or servants.
Article 4J
Offensive behaviour towards officers
Any riparian who behaves offensively towards an official of the kind referred to
in articles 23 and 25 who is acting in the course of duty, or any Criminal Police or
Civil Guard officer taking proceedings of the kind provided for in the last paragraph
of article 26 or who resists such an official with force or assault and battery shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in such cases under the law of his country.
Article 42
Miscellaneous provisions
This Convention shall be ratified. It shall enter into force on the first day of
January following the date of exchange of the instruments of ratification.
Upon the entry into force of the Convention, the Franco-Spanish Declaration of
30 March of 1879 and the Convention of 18 February 1886, as amended, shall cease
to have effect.
Article 43
Consultation of communes
No substantial amendment to this Convention shall be made without prior con
sultation of the riparian communes by the commanding officers of the naval stations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized for this purpose by
their respective Governments, have signed this Convention.
DONE at Madrid on 14 July 1959.
For the Government of the French Republic:
[Guy de la Tonnelle]
For the Spanish Government:
[Fernando Castiella]
