AGREEMENT AMONG THE
HELLENIC REPUBLIC, THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
AND THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC
CONCERNING THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE TURKEY-GREECE-ITALY GAS TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR
WHEREAS, the Government of the Hellenic Republic, the Government of the
Republic of Turkey and the Government of the Italian Republic, (hereinafter
referred to individually as the "Party" and collectively as the "Parties") hereby
acknowledge that:
The existing cooperation among the Parties in the energy sector will be further
strengthened by the development of the Turkey-Greece-Italy gas transportation corridor
(hereinafter referred to as the ITGI project);
Pursuant to the "Agreement between the Hellenic Republic and the Republic of Turkey
Concerning the Realization of the Turkey-Greece Gas Interconnector and the Supply of
Natural Gas From the Republic of Turkey to the Hellenic Republic" dated 23rd of February
2003, the construction of the Interconnector Turkey-Greece (hereinafter
referred to as the ITG project) has almost been completed and the commissioning of the
pipeline is expected within 2007. The part of the ITG project within the Greek territory has been
developed by the Greek Transmission System Operator DESFA S.A. (hereinafter DESFA),
while the part of the ITG project within the Turkish territory has
been developed by the Turkish state owned company BOTAS Petroleum Pipeline
Corporation (hereinafter BOTAS);
Pursuant to the "Agreement between the Hellenic Republic and the Italian Republic for
the Development of the Interconnector Italy-Greece Project" (hereinafter referred to as the
IGI project), dated 4th of November 2005, the Greek company DEPA S.A. (hereianfter DEPA)
and the Italian company EDISON SpA (hereinafter EDISON), are currently developing the IGI project
that will connect the Greek and the Italian gas networks;
The IGI project will comprise the onshore section within the Greek territory to be
developed by DESFA and the offshore section between the Greek and Italian shores
(hereinafter "Poseidon Pipeline") to be developed by EDISON and DEPA, via a Special Purpose
Vehicle to be incorporated under the name of Poseidon Pipeline Company (hereinafter
"Poseidon Co."), also acting as shippers of the exempted quantities of the
Poseidon pipeline;
The ITG and the IGI projects, as well as the necessary upgrades in the Turkish gas
transmission network, will enable the transportation of natural gas coming from the
Caspian, Central Asia, Middle East and Northeast Africa regions to the markets of the
Parties;
BOTAS, DESFA and Poseidon Co. will act as Transmission System Operators
(hereinafter jointly the "TSOs") respectively for the Turkish Gas Transmission Network, the Greek
National Natural Gas System and the Poseidon pipeline;
A Protocol of Intent was signed by the Italian Minister of Economic Development and the
Greek Minister of Development in Athens on January 31st 2007, in order to grant an
exemption from Third Party Access Obligations to Poseidon Co. for 25 years and for a capacity
of 8 bcm/year; and
The realization of the ITGI project will:
- enable further development of the Gas Transmission Networks of the Parties;
- enhance not only diversification of energy requirements but also security of
supply of the Parties and of other European markets;
- increase the liquidity of the gas markets of the Parties;
- facilitate natural gas trade between producing and consuming countries;
- strengthen the relations between Turkey and the European Union.
This corridor is cited as a project of European interest.
THEREFORE, the Parties agree on the following:
Article 1
Objective of this Agreement
This Agreement intends to promote the development of the ITGI project,
comprising its different sections (i.e. Turkish, Greek, and the Poseidon pipeline).
Article 2
Terms of the Agreement
2.1 The Parties acknowledge that the viability of the ITGI project will require the
effective coordination among the relevant Parties involved in the project and the
harmonization of the investment time schedule for all the segments of the ITGI project.
2.2 The Parties acknowledge that the Republic of Turkey shall undertake all necessary
actions, efforts and legal and administrative measures, as the need may arise, within the framework
of its authority and national legislation, for the realization and operation by BOTAS
of the part of the ITGI project located within the Turkish territory up to the Turkey-Greece
border.
2.3 The Parties acknowledge that the Hellenic Republic shall undertake all necessary actions,
efforts and legal and administrative easures, as the need may arise, within the frakework of its
authority and national legislation, for the realization and operation by DESFA of the part of the ITGI
project located within the Greek territory from the Turkey-Greece border up to Ionian/Adriatic Sea.
2.4 The Parties acknowledge that the Hellenic Republic and the Italian Republic, shall undertake
all necessary actions, efforts and legal and administrative measures, as the need may
arise, within the framework of their authority and the national legislation for
the realization and operation by Poseidon Co. of the Poseidon pipeline up
to the connection to the Italian transmission network.
2.5 The Parties acknowledge that the Government of the Italian Republic shall
undertake all necessary actions, efforts and legal and administrative measures, as
the need may arise, within the framework of its authority and the national legislation for
the extension and improvement of the Italian transportation system as
required for the ITGI project.
2.6 The Parties acknowledge that the viability of the ITGI project will depend on the
availability of long term gas transportation contracts through the Turkish section, the Greek
section and the Poseidon pipeline between the respective TSOs and
shippers of natural gas. In addition, these transportation contracts shall foresee the transportation
tariffs to be determined based on cost reflective principles with appropriate levels of return of incurred
investment.
2.7 The Parties agree to facilitate and support the timely execution of such
transportation contracts and to ensure performance of any deriving obligations
of TSOs.
2.8 The Parties shall undertake all appropriate measures to facilitate the transit via
the Turkish section, the Greek section and the Poseidon pipeline of other entities' gas, including
entities from the Parties, to Europe. Therefore, the Parties acknowledge
that the maximum technical capacity of the existing ITG project (i.e. 11.6 bcm/year)
shall be dedicated and shall service the transit for the Poseidon pipeline, as well as
the requirements of the Greek gas market. To the same purpose, the Italian Government commits
to grant the necessary authorizations to any entity from the same conditions and
requirements applicable to European entities according to national legislation.
2.9 The parties agree that, according to the existing Turkish internal energy policy,
natural gas sale agreements between BOTAS (or other Turkish entities nominated
by the Turkish Government) and shippers will take place for a certain percentage of
the gas transited by each shipper with the price at delivery point in Turkey and
delivery points in the final destination markets in Italy and/or Greece in order
to enhance the gas supply security and gas market liquidity by achieving cost
reflective prices in Turkish gas market.
With regard to the ITGI Project, the Parties agree that the natural gas sale
agreements between BOTAS (or other Turkish entities nominated by the Turkish Government)
and the shippers of the exempted capacity of the Poseidon Pipeline will be concluded for additional
volumes of 15% of the gas amount transited by each shipper with the price conditions described above. The
above provisions shall not prejudice the parameters and economic feasibility of the ITGI project.
Technical, commercial and administrative terms and conditions of the gas supply agreements
between the shippers of the exempted capacity of the Poseidon Pipeline
and the producer(s) as covering the gas sale agreements between the shippers and
BOTAS shall be communicated to the Turkish Government.
Details of these gas sale agreements will be settled during the negotiations between
BOTAS and shippers of the exempted capacity of the Poseidon Pipeline.
2.10 The Parties commit to grant to respective TSOs, in accordance with the relevant
national legislation, the necessary authorizations in order to realize and operate
their own part of the ITGI project.
2.11 The Parties shall make every effort to ensure the uninterrupted flow of the natural
gas under transportation contracts and to take emergency measures in respect of
flow providing adequate and prompt information of the measures taken to the other
Parties.
Article 3
Coordination Committee
1. The Parties agree to set up a Coordination Committee. The Coordination Committee shall
consist of representatives of:
- The Ministry of Development of the Hellenic Republic, the Ministry of Energy
and Natural Resources of the Republic of Turkey and the Ministry of Economic
Development of the Italian Republic; and
- The relevant TSOs.
Each Party shall have the right to invite the respective energy regulators
to support the activities of the Coordination Committee.
The Coordination Committee shall monitor the development and facilitate the
coordination of activities within each country with the purpose of providing the
necessary support for the ITGI project during its development.
3.2 The Committee will meet under semi-annual presidency of the Parties and present
reports on the progress of the ITGI project on a regular basis to the Parties.
Article 4
Amendments
Any changes or addenda to this Agreement will be made through separate trilateral
protocols signed by the Parties, each of which shall constitute an integral part of this
Agreement and shall enter into force in accordance with the provisions of Article 6.1 of
this Agreement.
Article 5
Dispute settlements
5.1 The Parties agree to resolve in an amicable way any possible dispute concerning
the interpretation and application of this Agreement.
5.2 If a dispute has not been settled in the way described in Article 5.1, then any of the
Parties may bring the matter to the attention of the relevant Ministers of all Parties, by
delivering written notice, and look for a political resolution.
Article 6
Entry into Force, Duration and Termination of the Agreement
6.1 This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the last notification by which the
Parties inform one another through diplomatic channels, that the respective national
requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.
6.2 This Agreement shall remain in force for a period of 25 (twentyfive) years from the
date of its entry into force, and will be automatically renewed for periods of 5 (five)
years, unless any of the Parties notifies in writing the others of its intention to
terminate this Agreement, 6 (six) months prior to the expiration of its initial or any subsequent
period of duration.
Article 7
Final Disposition
For correspondence purposes, with reference to the application of this Agreement,
the Parties shall use the English language.
In witness whereof, the undersigned, duly authorized thereto by their respective
Governments, have signed this Agreement.
Signed in Rome on 26 July 2007, in three original copies in the English language.

