amendment to the annex to the high seas fisheries of the north pacific oceansource: united states treaties and other international agreements, vol. 11, part ii, pp. 1503 (tias 4493).secretariat:roy i. jacksonexecutive directordr. hiroshi kasaharaassistant directoroffices:6640 n.w. marine drivevancouver 8, b.c.phone castle 4-0722cable address:"northcom"international north pacific fisheries commissionestablished by convention between canada, japan and the united states for the conservation of the fisheries resources of the north pacific oceanmay 9, 1960the honorable christian herter,secretary of state,washington 25, d.c.dear sir,under date of november 12, 1959, i had the honour to transmit to the governments of the united states, canada and japan a recommendation made by the international north pacific fisheries commission to the effect that alaskan herring be removed from the annex to the international convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean.subsequently, the commission received replies from the three contracting parties to the effect that the recommendation was acceptable to their governments. however, the acceptance from your government contained the view that the action recommended by the commission would not become effective until all of the contracting parties had accepted appropriate language for the amendment of the annex to the convention. your government assumed that the commission would wish to recommend such language.the commission, in accordance with the provisions of article vii of the convention, therefore recommends that paragraph 1 section (b) of the annex to the convention be amended (by replacement of the present wording) to read as follows:"(b) herring (clupea pallasii). the convention area off the coast of canada and off the coast of the united states of america south of the entrance to the strait of juan de fuca in which commercial fishing for herring of north american origin is being or can be prosecuted."attached to this letter and marked by my signature and the date of this letter, is the japanese-language version of the above recommendation, equally authentic.in order that the procedure envisaged by article vii of the convention may be completed at the earliest possible moment, the commission would appreciate a prompt response to its recommendation. with assurances of our highest esteem,yours sincerely,international north pacific fisheries commissionroy i jacksonroy i. jackson,executive director.date: may 9, 1960international north pacific fisheries commission.secretariat:roy i. jacksonexecutive directordr. hiroshi kasaharaassistant directoroffices:6640 n.w. marine drivevancouver 8, b.c.phone castle 4-0722cable address: "northcom"international north pacific fisheries commissionestablished by convention between canada, japan and the united states for the conservation of the fisheries resources of the north pacific oceanmay 24, 1960.the honorable christian herter,secretary of state,washington 25, d.c.dear sir,on behalf of the international north pacific fisheries commission, i wish to acknowledge receipt of a letter from the acting secretary of state accepting the commission's recommendation for amendment of paragraph 1(b) of the annex to the convention for the high seas fisheries of the north pacific ocean. the acceptance by the united states was received by the commission on may 24,1960.since acceptances have previously been received by the commission from japan on may 10 and canada on may 14, the annex to the convention is amended, as recommended by the commission, as of may 24,1960.yours sincerely,international north pacific fisheries commissionroy i jacksonroy i. jackson,executive director.
