Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects


The States Parties to this Convention,

Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes,

Recalling the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,

Taking into consideration that, notwithstanding the precautionary measures to be taken by States and
international intergovernmental organizations involved in the launching of space objects, damage may on
occasion be caused by such objects,

Recognizing the need to elaborate effective international rules and procedures concerning liability for
damage caused by space objects and to ensure, in particular, the prompt payment under the terms of this
Convention of a full and equitable measure of compensation to victims of such damage,

Believing that the establishment of such rules and procedures will contribute to the strengthening of
international cooperation in the field of the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,

Have agreed on the following:


Article I

For the purposes of this Convention:
(a) The term "damage" means loss of life, personal injury or other impairment of health; or loss of
or damage to property of States or of persons, natural or juridical, or property of international
intergovernmental organizations;
(b) The term "launching" includes attempted launching;
(c) The term "launching State" means:
(i) A State which launches or procures the launching of a space object;
(ii) A State from whose territory or facility a space object is launched;
(d) The term "space object" includes component parts of a space object as well as its launch vehicle
and parts thereof.


Article II

A launching State shall be absolutely liable to pay compensation for damage caused by its space object
on the surface of the Earth or to aircraft flight.


Article III

In the event of damage being caused elsewhere than on the surface of the Earth to a space object of one
launching State or to persons or property on board such a space object by a space object of another launching
State, the latter shall be liable only if the damage is due to its fault or the fault of persons for whom it is
responsible.


Article IV

1. In the event of damage being caused elsewhere than on the surface of the Earth to a space object
of one launching State or to persons or property on board such a space object by a space object of another
launching State, and of damage thereby being caused to a third State or to its natural or juridical persons, the
first two States shall be jointly and severally liable to the third State, to the extent indicated by the following:
(a) If the damage has been caused to the third State on the surface of the Earth or to aircraft in flight,
their liability to the third State shall be absolute;
(b) If the damage has been caused to a space object of the third State or to persons or property on
board that space object elsewhere than on the surface of the Earth, their liability to the third State shall be
based on the fault of either of the first two States or on the fault of persons for whom either is responsible.
2. In all cases of joint and several liability referred to in paragraph 1 of this article, the burden of
compensation for the damage shall be apportioned between the first two States in accordance with the extent
to which they were at fault; if the extent of the fault of each of these States cannot be established, the burden
of compensation shall be apportioned equally between them. Such apportionment shall be without prejudice
to the right of the third State to seek the entire compensation due under this Convention from any or all of
the launching States which are jointly and severally liable.


Article V

1. Whenever two or more States jointly launch a space object, they shall be jointly and severally liable
for any damage caused.
2. A launching State which has paid compensation for damage shall have the right to present a claim
for indemnification to other participants in the joint launching. The participants in a joint launching may
conclude agreements regarding the apportioning among themselves of the financial obligation in respect of
which they are jointly and severally liable. Such agreements shall be without prejudice to the right of a State
sustaining damage to seek the entire compensation due under this Convention from any or all of the launching
States which are jointly and severally liable.
3. A State from whose territory or facility a space object is launched shall be regarded as a participant
in a joint launching.


Article VI

1. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of this article, exoneration from absolute liability shall
be granted to the extent that a launching State establishes that the damage has resulted either wholly or
partially from gross negligence or from an act or omission done with intent to cause damage on the part of
a claimant State or of natural or juridical persons it represents.
2. No exoneration whatever shall be granted in cases where the damage has resulted from activities
conducted by a launching State which are not in conformity with international law including, in particular,
the Charter of the United Nations and the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies.


Article VII

The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to damage caused by a space object of a launching
State to:
(a) Nationals of that launching State;
(b) Foreign nationals during such time as they are participating in the operation of that space object
from the time of its launching or at any stage thereafter until its descent, or during such time as they are in
the immediate vicinity of a planned launching or recovery area as the result of an invitation by that launching
State.


Article VIII

1. A State which suffers damage, or whose natural or juridical persons suffer damage, may present
to a launching State a claim for compensation for such damage.
2. If the State of nationality has not presented a claim, another State may, in respect of damage
sustained in its territory by any natural or juridical person, present a claim to a launching State.
3. If neither the State of nationality nor the State in whose territory the damage was sustained has
presented a claim or notified its intention of presenting a claim, another State may, in respect of damage
sustained by its permanent residents, present a claim to a launching State.


Article IX

A claim for compensation for damage shall be presented to a launching State through diplomatic
channels. If a State does not maintain diplomatic relations with the launching State concerned, it may request
another State to present its claim to that launching State or otherwise represent its interests under this
Convention. It may also present its claim through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, provided the
claimant State and the launching State are both Members of the United Nations.


Article X

1. A claim for compensation for damage may be presented to a launching State not later than one year
following the date of the occurrence of the damage or the identification of the launching State which is liable.
2. If, however, a State does not know of the occurrence of the damage or has not been able to identify
the launching State which is liable, it may present a claim within one year following the date on which it
learned of the aforementioned facts; however, this period shall in no event exceed one year following the date
on which the State could reasonably be expected to have learned of the facts through the exercise of due
diligence.
3. The time limits specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article shall apply even if the full extent of
the damage may not be known. In this event, however, the claimant State shall be entitled to revise the claim
and submit additional documentation after the expiration of such time limits until one year after the full extent
of the damage is known.


Article XI

1. Presentation of a claim to a launching State for compensation for damage under this Convention
shall not require the prior exhaustion of any local remedies which may be available to a claimant State or to
natural or juridical persons it represents.
2. Nothing in this Convention shall prevent a State, or natural or juridical persons it might represent,
from pursuing a claim in the courts or administrative tribunals or agencies of a launching State. A State shall
not, however, be entitled to present a claim under this Convention in respect of the same damage for which
a claim is being pursued in the courts or administrative tribunals or agencies of a launching State or under
another international agreement which is binding on the States concerned.


Article XII

The compensation which the launching State shall be liable to pay for damage under this Convention
shall be determined in accordance with international law and the principles of justice and equity, in order to
provide such reparation in respect of the damage as will restore the person, natural or juridical, State or
international organization on whose behalf the claim is presented to the condition which would have existed
if the damage had not occurred.


Article XIII

Unless the claimant State and the State from which compensation is due under this Convention agree
on another form of compensation, the compensation shall be paid in the currency of the claimant State or, if
that State so requests, in the currency of the State from which compensation is due.


Article XIV

If no settlement of a claim is arrived at through diplomatic negotiations as provided for in article IX,
within one year from the date on which the claimant State notifies the launching State that it has submitted
the documentation of its claim, the parties concerned shall establish a Claims Commission at the request of
either party.


Article XV

1. The Claims Commission shall be composed of three members: one appointed by the claimant
State, one appointed by the launching State and the third member, the Chairman, to be chosen by both parties
jointly. Each party shall make its appointment within two months of the request for the establishment of the
Claims Commission.
2. If no agreement is reached on the choice of the Chairman within four months of the request for the
establishment of the Commission, either party may request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to
appoint the Chairman within a further period of two months.


Article XVI

1. If one of the parties does not make its appointment within the stipulated period, the Chairman
shall, at the request of the other party, constitute a single-member Claims Commission.
2. Any vacancy which may arise in the Commission for whatever reason shall be filled by the same
procedure adopted for the original appointment.
3. The Commission shall determine its own procedure.
4. The Commission shall determine the place or places where it shall sit and all other administrative
matters.
5. Except in the case of decisions and awards by a single-member Commission, all decisions and
awards of the Commission shall be by majority vote.


Article XVII

No increase in the membership of the Claims Commission shall take place by reason of two or more
claimant States or launching States being joined in any one proceeding before the Commission. The claimant
States so joined shall collectively appoint one member of the Commission in the same manner and subject
to the same conditions as would be the case for a single claimant State. When two or more launching States
are so joined, they shall collectively appoint one member of the Commission in the same way. If the claimant
States or the launching States do not make the appointment within the stipulated period, the Chairman shall
constitute a single-member Commission.


Article XVIII

The Claims Commission shall decide the merits of the claim for compensation and determine the amount
of compensation payable, if any.


Article XIX

1. The Claims Commission shall act in accordance with the provisions of article XII.
2. The decision of the Commission shall be final and binding if the parties have so agreed; otherwise
the Commission shall render a final and recommendatory award, which the parties shall consider in good
faith. The Commission shall state the reasons for its decision or award.
3. The Commission shall give its decision or award as promptly as possible and no later than one year
from the date of its establishment, unless an extension of this period is found necessary by the Commission.
4. The Commission shall make its decision or award public. It shall deliver a certified copy of its
decision or award to each of the parties and to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.


Article XX

The expenses in regard to the Claims Commission shall be borne equally by the parties, unless
otherwise decided by the Commission.
