AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENTS OF
INDIA AND NEPAL FOR THE CONSTRUCTION
OF MINOR IRRIGATION WORKS AND
WATER SUPPLY PROJECTS
Kathmandu, 14 July 1954

The Government of India and the Government of the Kingdom
of Nepal (hereinafter referred to as the Government of Nepal)
Being desirous to co-operate with each other in promoting the
economic development of Nepal and the Government of India being
willing to assist the Government of Nepal both by way of financial
assistance (be it a loan or a grant) and by making available supplies
of goods and equipment and also the services of skilled personnel in
the execution of agreed projects of economic development in Nepal.
Have agreed as follows:

Article I
The Government oflndia will make a grant of Rs. 50 lakhs (Indian
rupees) spread over a period of four years beginning from 1954-55 for
minor irrigation projects and minor water supply project, including
drinking water facilities in Nepal.

Article II
The grant will be utilised
(a) for meeting the cost of labour and materials and on the acquisition
of any land required for a project,
(b) for the purchase of stores, equipment, machinery, vehicles and
other articles required for a project or a group of projects,
(c) for meeting the expenditure on salaries, allowances and travelling
expenses for any staff engaged by the Government of Nepal
specifically for these projects, and
(d) for meeting the cost of any personnel obtained from India to advise
or assist in the execution of these projects and similar engineering
projects.
Article Ill
The expenditure on item (d) of Article II of this Agreement and
on any stores, equipment, machinery, vehicles and other articles
obtained from outside Nepal will be paid for by the Government of
India and the rupee expenditure thereon will be debited to the present
grant of Rs. 50 lakhs by book adjustment. To meet the other items of
expenditure incurred in Nepal, agreed sum or sums will be advanced
from time to time in the first instance to the Government of Nepal
towards the cost of execution of individual project or .projects, and
further disbursements will be made on the basis of actual progress or
expenditure as certified by the Government of Nepal.

Article N
This Agreement shall come into force upon its execution by duly
authorised representatives of the Government of India and of the
Government of Nepal.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly appointed
representatives of the Government of India and the Government of
Nepal respectively, have on behalf of their Governments, signed this
Agreement at Kathmandu this 14th day of July 1954 in the English
language in two copies.

Sd/- B.K. GoKHALE,
14.7.54
For the Government of India.
In the presence of:
Sd/- A.S. MEHTA,
14.7.54.

Sd/- B.K. MISRA,
14.7.54
For the Government of Nepal.
In the presence of:
Sd/- R.P. MANANDHAR,
14.7.54.
