protocol to the international convention for the regulation of whalingsource: the contracting governments to the international convention for the regulation of whaling signed at washington under date of 2nd december, 1946 which convention is hereinafter referred to as the 1946 whaling convention, desiring to extend the application of that convention to helicopters and other aircraft and to include provisions on methods of inspection among those schedule provisions which may be amended by the commission, agree as follows: ARTICLE isubparagraph 3 of the article ii of the 1946 whaling convention shall be amended to read as follows:"3. 'whale catcher' means a helicopter, or other aircraft, or a ship, used for the purpose of hunting, taking, killing, towing, holding on to, or scouting for whales." ARTICLE iiparagraph 1 of article v of the 1946 whaling convention shall be amended by deleting the word "and" preceding clause (h), substituting a semicolon for the period at the end of the paragraph, and adding the following language: "and (i) methods of inspection" ARTICLE iii1. this protocol shall be open for signature and ratification or for adherence on behalf of any contracting government to the 1946 whaling convention.2. this protocol shall enter into force on the date upon which instruments of ratification have been deposited with, or written notifications of adherence have been received by, the government of the united states of america on behalf of all the contracting governments to the 1946 whaling convention.3. the government of the united states of america shall inform all governments signatory or adhering to the 1946 whaling convention of all ratifications deposited and adherences received.4. this protocol shall bear the date on which it is opened for signature and shall remain open for signature for a period of fourteen days thereafter, following which period it shall be open for adherence.in witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized, have signed this protocol.done in washington this nineteenth day of november, 1956, in the english language, the original of which shall be deposited in the archives of the government of the united states of america. the government of the united states of america shall transmit certified copies thereof to all governments signatory or adhering to the 1946 whaling convention. signatories:for agentina: oscar ivanissevich, jose manuel moneta, guillermo brown, pedro h. bruno videlafor australia: francis f. andersonfor brazil: paulo froes da cruzfor canada: h.h. wrong, h.a. scottfor chile: augustin r. edwardsfor denmark: peter friedrich erichsenfor france: francis lacostefor the netherlands: guy richardson powlesfor new zealand: birger bergersenfor peru: carlos rotaldefor the union of soviet socialist republics: alexander s. bogdanov, eugine i. nikishinfor the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland: a.t.a. dobson, j. thomsonfor the united states of america: remington kellogg, ira n. gabrielson, william e.s. floryfor the union of south africa: h.t. andrews
