CONVENTION ON THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL MARITIME
CONSULTATIVE ORGANIZATION. DONE AT
GENEVA, ON 6 MARCH 1948
The States parties to the present Convention hereby establish the Intergovernmental
Maritime Consultative Organization (hereinafter referred to as
"the Organization").
PART I
PURPOSES OF THE ORGANIZATION
Article 1
The purposes of the Organization are :
(a) to provide machinery for co-operation among Governments in the field of
governmental regulation and practices relating to technical matters of all
kinds affecting shipping engaged in international trade, and to encourage
the general adoption of the highest practicable standards in matters concerning
maritime safety and efficiency of navigation;
(b) to encourage the removal of discriminatory action and unnecessary restrictions
by Governments affecting shipping engaged in international trade so as
to promote the availability of shipping services to the commerce of the world
without discrimination; assistance and encouragement given by a Government
for the development of its national shipping and for purposes of
security does not in itself constitute discrimination, provided that such
assistance and encouragement is not based on measures designed to restrict
the freedom of shipping of all flags to take part in international trade;
(c) to provide for the consideration by the Organization of matters concerning
unfair restrictive practices by shipping concerns in accordance with Part II;
(d) to provide for the consideration by the Organization of any matters concerning
shipping that may be referred to it by any organ or Specialized
Agency of the United Nations;
(e) to provide for the exchange of information among Governments on matters
under consideration by the Organization.
PART II
FUNCTIONS
Article 2
The functions of the Organization shall be consultative and advisory.
Article 3
In order to achieve the purposes set out in Part I, the functions of the Organization
shall be :
(a) subject to the provisions of Article 4, to consider and make recommendations
upon matters arising under Article 1 (a), (b) and (c) that may be remitted
to it by Members, by any organ or Specialized Agency of the United Nations
or by any other intergovernmental organization or upon matters referred
to it under Article I (d);
(b) to provide for the drafting of conventions, agreements, or other suitable
instruments, and to recommend these to Governments and to intergovernmental
organizations, and to convene such conferences as may be necessary;
(c) to provide machinery for consultation among Members and the exchange of
information among Governments.
Article 4
In those matters which appear to the Organization capable of settlement
through the normal processes of international shipping business the Organization
shall so recommend. When, in the opinion of the Organization, any matter
concerning unfair restrictive practices by shipping concerns is incapable of
settlement through the normal processes of international shipping business, or
has in fact so proved, and provided it shall first have been the subject of direct
negotiations between the Members concerned, the Organization shall, at the
request of one of those Members, consider the matter.
PART III
MEMBERSHIP
Article 5
Membership in the Organization shall be open to all States, subject to the
provisions of Part III.
Article 6
Members of the United Nations may become Members of the Organization
by becoming parties to the Convention in accordance with the provisions of
Article 57.
Article 7
States not Members of the United Nations which have been invited to
send representatives to the United Nations Maritime Conference convened in
Geneva on the 19th February 1948, may become Members by becoming parties
to the Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article 57.
Article 8
Any State not entitled to become a Member under Article 6 or 7 may apply
through the Secretary-General of the Organization to become a Member and
shall be admitted as a Member upon its becoming a party to the Convention in
accordance with the provisions of Article 57 provided that, upon the recommendation
of the Council, its application has been approved by two-thirds of the
Members other than Associate Members.
Article 9
Any territory or group of territories to which the Convention has been made
applicable under Article 58, by the Member having responsibility for its international
relations or by the United Nations, may become an Associate Member of
the Organization by notification in writing given by such Member or by the
United Nations, as the case may be, to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
Article 10
An Associate Member shall have the rights and obligations of a Member
under the Convention except that it shall not have the right to vote in the Assembly
or be eligible for membership on the Council or on the Maritime Safety
Committee and subject to this the word "Member" in the Convention shall be
deemed to include Associate Member unless the context otherwise requires.
Article 11
No State or territory may become or remain a Member of the Organization
contrary to a resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
PART IV
ORGANS
Article 12
The Organization shall consist of an Assembly, a Council, a Maritime
Safety Committee, and such subsidiary organs as the Organization may at any
time consider necessary; and a Secretariat.
PART V
THE ASSEMBLY
Article 13
The Assembly shall consist of all the Members.
Article 14
Regular sessions of the Assembly shall take place once every two years.
Extraordinary sessions shall be convened after a notice of sixty days whenever
one-third of the Members givre notice to the Secretary-General that they desire
a session to be arranged, or at any time if deemed necessary by the Council,
after a notice of sixty days.
Article 15
A majority of the Members other than Associate Members shall constitute
a quorum for the meetings of the Assembly.
Article 16
The functions of the Assembly shall be:
(a) to elect at each rcgular session from among its Members, other than Associate
Members, its President and two Vice Presidents who shall hold
office until the next regular session;
(b) to determine its own rules of procedure except as otherwise provided in
the Convention;
(c) to establish any temporary or, upon recommendation of the Council, permanent
subsidiary bodies it may consider to be necessary;
(d) to elect the Members to be represented on the Council, as provided in Article
17, and on the Maritime Safety Committee as provided in Article 28;
(e) to receive and consider the reports of the Council, and to decide upon any
question referred to it by the Council;
(f) to vote the budget and determine the financial arrangements of the Organization,
in accordance with Part IX;
(g) to review the expenditures and approve the accounts of the Organization;
(h) to perform the functions of the Organization, provided that in matters
relating to Article 3 (a) and (b), the Assembly shall refer such matters to
the Council for formulation by it of any recommendations or instruments
thereon; provided further that any recommendations or instruments submitted
to the Assembly by the Council and not accepted by the Assembly
shall be referred back to the Council for further consideration with such
observations as the Assembly may make;
(i) to recommend to Members for adoption regulations concerning maritime
safety, or amendments to such regulations, which have been referred to it
by the Maritime Safety Committee through the Council;
(j) to refer to the Council for consideration or decision any matters within the
scope of the Organization, except that the function of making recommendations
under paragraph (i) of this Article shall not be delegated.
PART VI
THE COUNCIL
Article 17
The Council shall consist of sixteen Members and shall be composed as
follows :
(a) six shall be governments of the nations with the largest interest in providing
international shipping services;
(b) six shall be governments of other nations with the largest interest in international
seaborne trade;
(c) two shall be elected by the Assembly from among the governments of
nations having a substantial interest in providing international shipping
services, and
(d) two shall be elected by the Assembly from among the governments of
nations having substantial interest in international seaborne trade.
In accordance with the principles set forth in this Article the first Council
shall be constituted as provided in Appendix I to the present Convention.
Article 18
Except as provided in Appendix I to the present Convention, the Council
shall determine for the purpose of Article 17 (a), the Members, governments of
nations with the largest interest in providing international shipping services,
and shall also determine, for the purpose of Article 17 (c), the Members, governments
of nations having a substantial interest in providing such services.
Such determinations shall be made by a majority vote of the Council including the
concurring votes of a majority of the Members represented on the Council under
Article 17 (a) and (c). The Council shall further determine for the purpose of
Article 17 (b), the Member's, governments of nations with the largest interest in
international seaborne trade. Each Council shall make these determinations
at a reasonable time before each regular session of the Assembly.
Article 19
Members represented on the Council in accordance with Article 17 shall
hold office until the end of the next regular session of the Assembly. Members
shall be eligible for re-election.
Article 20
(a) The Council shall elect its Chairman and adopt its own rules of
procedure except as otherwise provided in the Convention.
(b) Twelve members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
(c) The Council shall meet upon one month's notice as often as may be
necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties upon the summons of its
Chairman or upon request by not less than four of its members. It shall meet
at such places as may be convenient.
Article 21
The Council shall invite any Member to participate, without vote, in its
deliberations on any matter of particular concern to that Member.
Article 22
(a) The Council shall receive the recommendations and reports of the
Maritime Safety Committee and shall transmit them to the Assembly and, when
the Assembly is not in session, to the Members for information, together with
the comments and recommendations of the Council.
(b) Matters within the scope of Article 29 shall be considered by the Council
only after obtaining the views of the Maritime Safety Committee thereon.
Article 23
The Council, with the approval of the Assembly, shall appoint the Secretary-
General. The Council shall also make provision for the appointment of such
other personnel as may be necessary, and determine the terms and conditions
of service of the Secretary-General and other personnel, which terms and
conditions shall conform as far as possible with those of the United Nations and
its Specialized Agencies.
Article 24
The Council shall make a report to the Assembly at each regular session
on the work of the Organization since the previous regular session of the Assembly.
Article 25
The Council shall submit to the Assembly the budget estimates and the
financial statements of the Organization, together with its comments and recommendations.
Article 26
The Council may enter into agreements or arrangements covering the
relationship of the Organization with other organizations, as provided for in
Part XI. Such agreements or arrangements shall be subject to approval by
the Assembly.
Article 27
Between sessions of the Assembly, the Council shall perform all the functions
of the Organization, except the function of making recommendations
under Article 16 (i).
PART VII
MARITIME SAFETY COMMITTEE
Article 28
(a) The Maritime Safety Committee shall consist of fourteen Members
elected by the Assembly from the Members, governments of those nations
having an important interest in maritime safety, of which not less than eight
shall be the largest ship-owning nations, and the remainder shall be elected
so as to ensure adequate representation of Members, governments of other
nations with an important interest in maritime safety, such as nations interested
in the supply of large numbers of crews or in the carriage of large numbers of
berthed and unberthed passengers, and of major geographical areas.
(b) Members shall be elected for a term of four years and shall be eligible
for re-election.
Article 29
(a) The Maritime Safety Committee shall have the duty of considering any
matter within the scope of the Organization and concerned with aids to navigation,
construction and equipment of vessels, manning from a safety standpoint,
rules for the prevention of collisions, handling of dangerous cargoes, maritime
safety procedures and requirements, hydrographic information, log-books and
navigational records, marine casualty investigation, salvage and rescue, and any
other matters directly affecting maritime safety.
(b) The Maritime Safety Committee shall provide machinery for performing
any duties assigned to it by the Convention, or by the Assembly, or any duty
within the scope of this Article which may be assigned to it by any other intergovernmental
instrument.
(c) Having regard to the provisions of Part XII, the Maritime Safety Committee
shall have the duty of maintaining such close relationship with other
intergovernmental bodies concerned with transport and communications as may
further the object of the Organization in promoting maritime safety and facilitate
the co-ordination of activities in the fields of shipping, aviation, telecommunications
and meteorology with respect to safety and rescue.
Article 30
The Maritime Safety Committee, through the Council, shall:
(a) submit the Assembly at its regular sessions proposals made by Members
for safety regulations or for amendments to existing safety regulations,
together with its comments or recommendations thereon;
(b) report to the Assembly on the work of the Maritime Safety Committee since
the previous regular session of the Assembly.
Article 31
The Maritime Safety Committee shall meet once a year and at other times
upon request of any five of its members. It shall elect its officers once a year
and shall adopt its own rules of procedure. A majority of its members shall
constitute a quorum.
Article 32
The Maritime Safety Committee shall invite any Member to participate,
without vote, in its deliberations on any matter of particular concern to that
Member.
PART VIII
THE SECRETARIAT
Article 33
The Secretariat shall comprise the Secretary-General, a Secretary of the
Maritime Safety Committee and such staff as the Organization may require.
The Secretary General shall be the chief administrative officer of the Organization,
and shall, subject to the provisions of Article 23, appoint the abovementioned
personnel.
Article 34
The Secretariat shall maintain all such records as may be necessary for the
efficient discharge of the functions of the Organization and shall prepare, collect
and circulate the papers, documents, agenda, minutes and information that
may be required for the work of the Assembly, the Council, the Maritime Safety
Committee, and such subsidiary organs as the Organization may establish.
Article 35
The Secretary General shall prepare and submit to the Council the financial
statements for each year and the budget estimates on a biennial basis, with
the estimates for each year shown separately.
Article 36
The Secretary-General shall keep Members informed with respect to the
activities of the Organization. Each Member may appoint one or more representatives
for the purpose of communication with the Secretary-General.
Article 37
In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff shall
external to the Organization. They shall refrain from any action which might
reflect on their position as international officials. Each Member on its part
undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities
of the Secretary-General and the staff and not to seek to influence them in
the discharge of their responsibilities.
Article 38
The Secretary-General shall perform such other tasks as may be assigned
to him by the Convention, the Assembly, the Council and the Maritime Safety
Committee.
PART IX
FINANCES
Article 39
Each Member shall bear the salary, travel and other expenses of its own
delegation to the Assembly and of its representatives on the Council, the
Maritime Safety Committee, other committees and subsidiary bodies.
Article 40
The Council shall consider the financial statements and budget estimates
prepared by the Secretary-General and submit them to the Assembly with its
comments and recommendations.
Article 41
(a) Subject to any agreement between the Organization and the United
Nations, the Assembly shall review and approve the budget estimates.
(b) The Assembly shall apportion the expenses among the Members in
accordance with a scale to be fixed by it after consideration of the proposals of
the Council thereon.
Article 42
Any Member which fails to discharge its financial obligation to the Organization
within one year from the date on which it is due, shall have no vote
in the Assembly, the Council, or the Maritime Safety Committee unless the
Assembly, at its discretion, waives this provision.
PART X
VOTING
Article 43
The following provisions shall apply to voting in the Assembly, the Council
and the Maritime Safety Committee:
(a) Each Member shall have one vote.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in the Convention or in any international
agreement which confers functions on the Assembly, the Council, or the
Maritime Safety Committee, decisions of these organs shall be by a majority
vote of the Members present and voting and, for decisions where a
two-thirds majority vote is required, by a two-thirds majority vote of those
present.
(c) For the purpose of the Convention, the phrase "Members present and
  voting" means "Members present and casting an affirmative or negative
  vote". Members which abstain from voting shall be considered as not
voting.
PART XI
HEADQUARTERS OF THE ORGANIZATION
Article 44
(a) The headquarters of the Organization shall be established in London.
(b) The Assembly may by a two-thirds majority vote change the site of the
headquarters if necessary.
(c) The Assembly may hold sessions in any place other than the headquarters
if the Council deems it necessary.
PART XII
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED NATIONS AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
Article 45
The Organization shall be brought into relationship with the United
Nations in accordance with Article 57 of the Charter of the United Nations as
the Specialized Agency in the field of shipping. This relationship shall be
effected through an agreement with the United Nations under Article 63 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which agreement shall be concluded as provided
in Article 26.
Article 46
The Organization shall co-operate with any Specialized Agency of the
United Nations in matters which may be the common concern of the Organization
and of such Specialized Agency, and shall consider such matters and act
with respect to them in accord with such Specialized Agency.
Article 47
The Organization may, on matters within its scope, cooperate with other
inter-governmental organizations which are not Specialized Agencies of the
United Nations, but whose interests and activities are related to the purposes
of the Organization.
Article 48
The Organization may, on matters within its scope, make suitable arrangements
for consultation and co-operation with non-governmental international
organizations.
Article 49
Subject to approval by a two-thirds majority vote of the Assembly, the
Organization may take over from any other international organizations, governmental
or non-governmental, such functions, resources and obligations
within the scope of the Organization as may be transferred to the Organization
by international agreements or by mutually acceptable arrangements entered
into between competent authorities of the respective organizations. Similarly,
the Organization may take over any administrative functions which are within
its scope and which have been entrusted to a government under the terms of
any international instrument.
PART XIII
LEGAL CAPACITY, PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
Article 50
The legal capacity, privileges and immunities to be accorded to, or in connection
with, the Organization, shall be derived from and governed by the
General Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations on the 21st
November, 1947, subject to such modifications as may be set forth in the
final (or revised) text of the Annex approved by the Organization in accordance
with Sections 36 and 38 of the said General Convention.
Article 51
Pending its accession to the said General Convention in respect of the
Organization, each Member undertakes to apply the provisions of Appendix II
to the present Convention.
PART XIV
AMENDMENTS
Article 52
Tests of proposed amendments to the Convention shall be communicated
by the Secretary-General to Members at least six months in advance of their
consideration by the Assembly. Amendments shall be adopted by a twothirds
majority vote of the Assembly, including the concurring votes of a majority
of the Members represented on the Council. Twelve months after its
acceptance by two-thirds of the Members of the Organization, other than
Associate Members, each amendment shall come into force for all Members
except those which, before it comes into force, make a declaration that they
do not accept the amendment. The Assembly may by a two-thirds majority
vote determine at the time of its adoption that an amendment is of such a nature
that any Member which has made such a declaration and which does not accept
the amendment within a period of twelve months after the amendment comes
into force shall, upon the expiration of this period, cease to be a party to the
Convention.
Article 53
Any amendment adopted under Article 52 shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who will immediately forward a cpy
of the amendment to all Members.
Article 54
A declaration or acceptance under Article 52 shall be made by the communication
of an instrument to the Secretary-General for deposit with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. The Secretary-General will notify
Members of the receipt of any such instrument and of the date when the amendment
enters into force.
PART XV
INTERPRETATION
Article 55
Any question or dispute concerning the interpretation or application of
the Convention shall be referred for settlement to the Assembly, or shall be
settled in such other manner as the parties to the dispute agree. Nothing in
this Article shall preclude the Council or the Maritime Safety Committee from
settling any such question or dispute that may arise during the exercise of their
functions.
Article 56
Any legal question which cannot be settled as provided in Article 55 shall
be referred by the Organization to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion in accordance with Article 96 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
PART XVI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Article 57
Signature and Acceptance
Subject to the provisions of Part III the present Convention shall remain
open for signature or acceptance and States may become parties to the Convention
by :
(a) Signature without reservation as to acceptance;
(b) Signature subject to acceptance followed by acceptance;
or
(c) Acceptance.
Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument with the Secretary-
General of the United Nations.
Article 58
Territories
(a) Members may make a declaration at any time that their participation
in the Convention includes all or a group or a single one of the territories for
whose international relations they are responsible.
(b) The Convention does not apply to territories for whose international
relations Members are responsible unless a declaration to that effect has been
made on their behalf under the provisions of paragraph (a) of this Article.
(c) A declaration made under paragraph (a) of this Article shall be communicated
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and a copy of it will
be forwarded by him to all States invited to the United Nations Maritime Conference
and to such other States as may have become Members.
(d) In cases where under a trusteeship agreement the United Nations is the
administering authority, the United Nations may accept the Convention on
behalf of one, several, or all of the trust territories in accordance with the procedure
set forth in Article 57.
Article 59
Withdrawal
(a) Any Member may withdraw from the Organization by written notification
given to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who will immediately
inform the other Members and the Secretary-General of the Organization of
such notification. Notification of withdrawal may be given at any time after the
expiration of twelve months from the date on which the Convention has come
into force. The withdrawal shall take effect upon the expiration of twelve
months from the date on which such written notification is received by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
(b) The application'of the Convention to a territory or group of territories
under Article 58 may at any time be terminated by written notification given
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations by the Member responsible for
its international relations or, in the case of a trust territory of which the United
Nations is the administering authority, by the United Nations. The Secretary-
General of the United Nations will immediately inform all Members and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of such notification. The notification
shall take effect upon the expiration of twelve months from the date on which
it is received by the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
PART XVII
ENTRY INTO FORCE
Article 60
The present Convention shall enter into force on the date when 21 States
of which 7 shall each have a total tonnage of not less than 1,000,000 gross tons
of shipping, have become parties to tie Convention in accordance with Article 57.
Article 61
The Secretary-General of the United Nations will inform all States invited
to the United Nations Maritime Conference and such other States as may have
become Members, of the date when each State becomes party to the Convention,
and also of the date on which the Convention enters into force.
Article 62
The present Convention, of which the English, French and Spanish texts
are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who will transmit certified copies thereof to each of the States
invited to the United Nations Maritime Conference and to such other States
as may have become Members.
Article 63
The United Nations is authorized to effect registration of the Convention
as soon as it comes into force.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned being duly authorized by their
respective Governments for that purpose have signed the present Convention.
DONE at Geneva this sixth day of March 1948.
