International Convention Relating to the Limitation of the Liability of Owners of Sea-Going Ships 


The High Contracting Parties, 

HAVING RECOGNISED the desirability of determining by agreement 
certain uniform rules relating to the limitation of the 
liability of owners of seagoing ships; 

HAVE DECIDED to conclude a Convention for this purpose, and 
thereto have agreed as follows; 


Article 1 

1. The owner of a sea-going ship may limit his liability in 
accordance with Article 3 of this Convention in respect of 
claims arising from any of the following occurrences, unless the 
occurrence giving rise to the claim resulted from the actual 
fault or privity of the owner 
(a) loss of life of, or personal injury to, any person being 
carried in the ship, and loss of, or damage to, any property on 
board the ship; 
(b) loss of life of, or personal injury to, any other person, 
whether on land or on water, loss of or damage to any other 
property or infringement of any rights caused by the act, 
neglect or default of any person on board the ship for whose 
act, neglect or default the owner is responsible or any person 
not on board the ship for whose act, neglect or default the 
owner is responsible: Provided however that in regard to the 
act, neglect or default of this last class of person, the owner 
shall only be entitled to limit his liability when the act, 
neglect or default is one which occurs in the navigation or the 
management of the ship or in the loading, carriage or discharge 
of its cargo or in the embarkation, carriage or disembarkation 
of its passengers; 
(c) any obligation or liability imposed by any law relating to 
the removal of wreck and arising from or in connection with the 
raising, removal or destruction of any ship which is sunk, 
stranded or abandoned (including anything which may be on board 
such ship) and any obligation or liability arising out of damage 
caused to harbour works, basins and navigable waterways 

2. In the present Convention the expression "personal claims" 
means claims resulting from loss of life and personal injury; 
the expression "property claims" means all other claims set out 
in paragraph (1) of this Article. 

3. An owner shall be entitled to limit his liability in the 
cases set out in paragraph (1) of this Article even in cases 
where his liability arises, without proof of negligence on the 
part of the owner or of persons for whose conduct he is 
responsible, by reason of his ownership, possession, custody or 
control of the ship. 

4. Nothing in this Article shall apply: 
(a) to claims for salvage or to claims for contribution in 
general average; 
(b) to claims by the Master, by members of the crew, by any 
servants of the owner on board the ship or by servants of the 
owner whose duties are connected with the ship, including the 
claims of their heirs, personal representatives or dependents, 
if under the law governing the contract of service between the 
owner and such servants the owner is not entitled to limit his 
liability in respect of such claims or if he is by such law only 
permitted to limit his liability to an amount greater than that 
provided for in Article 3 of this Convention. 

5. If the owner of a ship is entitled to make a claim against a 
claimant arising out of the same occurrence, their respective 
claims shall be set off against each other and the provisions of 
this Convention shall only apply to the balance, if any. 

6. The question upon whom lies the burden of proving whether or 
not the occurrence giving rise to the claim resulted from the 
actual fault or privity of the owner shall be determined by the 
lex fori. 

7. The act of invoking limitation of liability shall not 
constitute an admission of liability. 


Article 2 

1. The limit of liability prescribed by Article 3 of this 
Convention shall apply to the aggregate of personal claims and 
property claims which arise on any distinct occasion without 
regard to any claims which have arisen or may arise on any other 
distinct occasion. 

2. When the aggregate of the claims which arise on any distinct 
occasion exceeds the limits of liability provided for by Article 
3 the total sum representing such limits of liability may be 
constituted as one distinct limitation fund. 

3. The fund thus constituted shall be available only for the 
payment of claims in respect of which limitation of liability 
can be invoked. 

4. After the fund has been constituted, no claimant against the 
fund shall be entitled to exercise any right against any other 
assets of the shipowner in respect of his claim against the 
fund, if the limitation fund is actually available for the 
benefit of the claimant. 


Article 3 

1. The amounts to which the owner of a ship may limit his 
liability under Article 1 shall be: 
(a) where the occurrence has only given rise to property claims 
an aggregate amount of 1,000 francs for each ton of the ship's 
tonnage; 
(b) where the occurrence has only given rise to personal claims 
an aggregate amount of 3,100 francs for each ton of the ship's 
tonnage; 
(c) where the occurrence has given rise both to personal claims 
and property claims an aggregate amount of 3,100 francs for each 
ton of the ship's tonnage, of which a first portion amounting to 
2,100 francs for each ton of the ship's tonnage shall be 
exclusively appropriated to the payment of personal claims and 
of which a second portion amounting to 1,000 francs for each ton 
of the ship's tonnage shall be appropriated to the payment of 
property claims: Provided however that in cases where the first 
portion is insufficient to pay the personal claims in full, the 
unpaid balance of such claims shall rank rateably with the 
property claims for payment against the second portion of the 
fund. 

2. In each portion of the limitation fund the distribution among 
the claimants shall be made in proportion to the amounts of 
their established claims. 

3. If before the fund is distributed the owner has paid in whole 
or in part any of the claims set out in Article 1 paragraph (1), 
he shall pro tanto be placed in the same position in relation to 
the fund as the claimant whose claim he has paid, but only to 
the extent that the claimant whose claim he has paid would have 
had a right of recovery against him under the national law of 
the State where the fund has been constituted. 

4. Where the ship owner establishes that he may at a later date 
be compelled to pay in whole or in part any of the claims set 
out in Article 1 paragraph (1) the Court or other competent 
authority of the State where the fund has been constituted may 
order that a sufficient sum shall be provisionally set aside to 
enable the ship owner at such later date to enforce his claim 
against the fund in the manner set out in the preceding 
paragraph. 

5. For the purpose of ascertaining the limit of an owner's 
liability in accordance with the provisions of this Article the 
tonnage of a ship of less than 300 tons shall be deemed to be 
300 tons. 

6. The franc mentioned in this Article shall be deemed to refer 
to a unit consisting of sixty five and a half milligrams of gold 
of millesimal fineness nine hundred. The amounts mentioned in 
paragraph (1) of this Article shall be converted into the 
national currency of the State in which limitation is sought on 
the basis of the value of that currency by reference to the unit 
defined above at the date on which the ship owner shall have 
constituted the limitation fund, made the payment or given a 
guarantee which under the law of that State is equivalent to 
such payment. 

7. For the purpose of this convention tonnage shall be 
calculated as follows: 
in the case of steamships or other mechanically propelled ships 
there shall be taken the net tonnage with the addition of the 
amount deducted from the gross tonnage on account of engine room 
space for the purpose of ascertaining the net tonnage; 
in the case of all other ships there shall be taken the net 
tonnage. 


Article 4 

Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2) 
of this Convention, the rules relating to the constitution and 
distribution of the limitation fund, if any, and all rules of 
procedure shall be governed by the national law of the State in 
which the fund is constituted. 


Article 5 

1. Whenever a ship owner is entitled to limit his liability 
under this Convention, and the ship or another ship or other 
property in the same ownership has been arrested within the 
jurisdiction of a Contracting State or bail or other security 
has been given to avoid arrest, the Court or other competent 
authority of such State may order the release of the ship or 
other property or of the security given if it is established 
that the ship owner has already given satisfactory bail or 
security in a sum equal to the full limit of his liability under 
this Convention and that the bail or other security so given is 
actually available for the benefit of the claimant in accordance 
with his rights. 

2. Where, in circumstances mentioned in paragraph (1) of this 
Article. bail or other security has already been given: 
(a) at the port where the accident giving rise to the claim 
occurred; 
(b) at the first port of call after the accident if the accident 
did not occur in a port; 
(c) at the port of disembarkation or discharge if the claim is a 
personal claim or relates to damage to cargo; 
the Court or other competent authority shall order the release 
of the ship or the bail or other security given, subject to the 
conditions set forth in paragraph (1) of this Article. 

3. The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article 
shall apply likewise if the bail or other security already given 
is in a sum less than the full limit of liability under this 
Convention: Provided that satisfactory bail or other security is 
given for the balance. 

4. When the ship owner has given bail or other security in a sum 
equal to the full limit of his liability under this Convention 
such bail or other security shall he available for the payment 
of all claims arising on a distinct occasion and in respect of 
which the ship owner may limit his liability. 

5. Questions of procedure relating to actions brought under the 
provisions of this Convention and also the time limit within 
which such actions shall be brought or prosecuted shall be 
decided in accordance with the national law of the Contracting 
State in which the action takes place. 


Article 6 

1. In this Convention the liability of the ship owner includes 
the liability of the ship herself. 

2. Subject to paragraph (3) of this Article, the provisions of 
this Convention shall apply to the charterer, manager and 
operator of the ship, and to the master, members of the crew and 
other servants of the owner, charterer, manager or operator 
acting in the course of their employment, in the same way as 
they apply to an owner himself: Provided that the total limits 
of liability of the owner and all such other persons in respect 
of personal claims and property claims arising on a distinct 
occasion shall not exceed the amounts determined in accordance 
with Article 3 of this Convention. 

3. When actions are brought against the master or against 
members of the crew such persons may limit their liability even 
if the occurrence which gives rise to the claims resulted from 
the actual fault or privity of one or more of such persons. If, 
however, the master or member of the crew is at the same time 
the owner, co-owner, charterer, manager or operator of the ship 
the provisions of this paragraph shall only apply where the act, 
neglect or default in question is an act, neglect or default 
committed by the person in question in his capacity as master or 
as member of the crew of the ship. 


Article 7 

This Convention shall apply whenever the owner of a ship, or any 
other person having by virtue of the provisions of Article 6 
hereof the same rights as an owner of a ship, limits or seeks to 
limit his liability before the Court of a Contracting State or 
seeks to procure the release of a ship or other property 
arrested or the bail or other security given within the 
jurisdiction of any such State. 
Nevertheless, each Contracting State shall have the right to 
exclude, wholly or partially, from the benefits of this 
Convention any non-Contracting State, or any person who, at the 
time when he seeks to limit his liability or to secure the 
release of a ship or other property arrested or the bail or 
other security in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 
hereof, is not ordinarily resident in a Contracting State, or 
does not have his principal place of business in a Contracting 
State, or any ship in respect of which limitation of liability 
or release is sought which does not at the time specified above 
fly the flag of a Contracting State. 


Article 8 

Each Contracting State reserves the right to decide what other 
classes of ship shall be treated in the same manner as sea-going 
ships for the purposes of this Convention. 


Article 9 

This Convention shall be open for signature by the States 
represented at the tenth session of the Diplomatic Conference on 
Maritime Law. 


Article 10 

This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of 
ratification shall be deposited with the Belgian Government 
which shall notify through diplomatic channels all signatory and 
acceding States of their deposit. 


Article 11 

1. This Convention shall come into force six months after the 
date of deposit of at least ten instruments of ratification, of 
which at least five shall have been deposited by States that 
have each a tonnage equal or superior to one million gross tons 
of tonnage. 

2. For each signatory State which ratifies the Convention after 
the date of deposit of the instrument of ratification 
determining the coming into force such as is stipulated in 
paragraph (1) of this Article, this Convention shall come into 
force six months after the deposit of their instrument of 
ratification. 


Article 12 

Any State not represented at the tenth session of the Diplomatic 
Conference on Maritime Law may accede to this Convention. 
The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Belgian 
Government which shall inform through diplomatic channels all 
signatory and acceding States of the deposit of any such 
instruments. 
The Convention shall come into force in respect of the acceding 
State six months after the date of the deposit of the instrument 
of accession of that State, but not before the date of entry 
into force of the Convention as established by Article 11 (1). 


Article 13 

Each High Contracting Party shall have the right to denounce 
this Convention at any time after the coming into force thereof 
in respect of such High Contracting Party. Nevertheless, this 
denunciation shall only take effect one year after the date on 
which notification thereof has been received by the Belgian 
Government which shall inform through diplomatic channels all 
signatory and acceding States of such notification. 


Article 14 

1. Any High Contracting Party may at the time of its 
ratification of or accession to this Convention or at any time 
thereafter declare by written notification to the Belgian 
Government that the Convention shall extend to any of the 
territories for whose international relations it is responsible. 
The Convention shall six months after the date of the receipt of 
such notification by the Belgian Government extend to the 
territories named therein, but not before the date of the coming 
into force of this Convention in respect of such High 
Contracting Party; 

2. Any High Contracting Party which has made a declaration under 
paragraph (1) of this Article extending the Convention to any 
territory for whose international relations it is responsible 
may at any time thereafter declare by notification given to the 
Belgian Government that the Convention shall cease to extend to 
such territory. This denunciation shall take effect one year 
after the date on which notification thereof has been received 
by the Belgian Government; 

3. The Belgian Government shall inform through diplomatic 
channels all signatory and acceding States of any notification 
received by it under this Article. 


Article 15 

Any High Contracting Party may three years after the coming into 
force of this Convention in respect of such High Contracting 
Party or at any time thereafter request that a Conference be 
convened in order to consider amendments to this Convention. 

Any High Contracting Party proposing to avail itself of this 
right shall notify the Belgian Government which shall convene 
the Conference within six months thereafter. 


Article 16 

In respect of the relations between States which ratify this 
Convention or accede to it, this Convention shall replace and 
abrogate the International Convention for the unification of 
certain rules concerning the limitation of the liability of the 
owners of sea-going ships, signed at Brussels, on the 25th of 
August 1924. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Plenipotentiaries, duly authorized, have 
signed this Convention. 

DONE at Brussels, this tenth day of October 1957, in the French 
and English languages, the two texts being equally authentic, in 
a single copy, which shall remain deposited in the archives of 
the Belgian Government, which shall issue certified copies. 


Protocol of Signature 

1. Any State, at the time of signing, ratifying or acceding to 
this Convention may make any of the reservations set forth in 
paragraph (2). No other reservations to this Convention shall be 
admissible. 

2. The following are the only reservations admissible: 

(a) Reservation of the right to exclude the application of 
Article 1 paragraph (1) (c). 

(b) Reservation of the right to regulate by specific provisions 
of national law the system of limitation of liability to be 
applied to ships of less than 300 tons. 

(c) Reservation of the right to give effect to this Convention 
either by giving it the force of law or by including in national 
legislation, in a form appropriate to that legislation, the 
provisions of this Convention.
