Preferential Trade Agreement
between
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan
and
The Islamic Republic of Iran
PREAMBLE
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran (“IRAN”) and the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“Pakistan”), hereinafter referred to, collectively as the
“Contracting parties” and individually as “Contracting Party”,
conscious of their longstanding friendship and common cultural heritage;
expecting that this Agreement will create a new climate for economic and regional
cooperation between them;
recognizing that strengthening of their closer economic partnership will bring economic
and social benefits and improve the living standards of their peoples:
bearing in mind that the expansion of mutual trade and economic relations will foster
further interconnectedness between the Contracting Parties thus promoting regional peace
and stability;
desiring cultural cooperation and developing exchange of information;
conscious that such mutual trade arrangements will contribute to the promotion of closer
links with other economies in the region;
believing that this contractual framework could promote gradually and could also extend
to new areas of mutual interests;
having regard to the need to support Iran’s efforts for accession to the World Trade
Organization;
considering that the expansion of their domestic markets, through commercial
cooperation, is an important prerequisite for accelerating economic development of the
Contracting Parties;
bearing in mind the desire to promote mutually beneficial bilateral trade;
And
recognizing that progressive elimination of obstacles to trade through this preferential
trade agreement (hereinafter referred to as “ the Agreement”) will contribute to the 
expansion of bilateral trade leading to Free Trade Arrangements between the Contracting
Parties,
Agree as follows:
ARTICLE 1: OBJECTIVES
1- The objectives of the Contracting Parties in concluding this Agreement are:
♦ To strengthen the economic and political relationship between the
Contracting parties;
♦ To increase the volume of trade in goods between the Contracting
Parties;
♦ To promote a more predictable and secure environment for the
sustainable growth of trade between the Contracting Parties;
♦ To reinforce and gradually promote this Preferential Trading
Arrangement;
♦ To expand mutual trade through exploring newer areas of cooperation;
♦ To facilitate diversification of traded products between the Contracting
Parties;
♦ To encourage further competition amongst their enterprises;
♦ To contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade, to the
harmonious development and expansion of bilateral as well as world
trade.
2- Provisions of this Agreement shall be interpreted in view of the objectives expressed in
paragraph 1 of this article as well as the decisions of the Joint Committee, which in turn
shall observe applicable rules of international law.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Agreement:
1. “Tariffs” means customs duties included in the national schedules of the
Contracting Parties.
2. “Para-tariffs” means border charges and fees other than tariffs on foreign trade
transactions of a tariff-like effect, which are levied solely on imports but not those
indirect taxes and charges which are levied in the same manner on like domestic
products. Import charges corresponding to specific services rendered, are not
considered as para-tariff measures.
3. “Non-tariff barriers” means any measure, regulation, or practice, other than tariffs
and Para-tariffs, the effect of which is to restrict imports or to significantly distort
trade between the Contracting Parties.
4. “Products” means all products including manufactures and commodities in their
raw, semi-processed and processed forms. 
5. “Preferential treatment” means any concession or privilege granted under this
Agreement by a Contracting Party through the reduction of tariffs on the
movement of goods.
6. “The Committee” means the Joint Trade Committee referred to in Article 15.
7. “Serious Injury” means significant damage to domestic producers of like or
similar products resulting from a substantial increase of preferential imports in
situations which cause substantial losses in terms of earnings, production or
employment unsustainable in the short term. The examination of the impact on
the domestic industry concerned shall also include an evaluation of other relevant
economic factors and indices having a bearing on the state of the domestic
industry of that product.
8. “Threat of Serious Injury” means a situation in which a substantial increase of
preferential imports is of a nature so as to cause Serious Injury to domestic
industry and that such injury, although not yet existing, is clearly imminent. A
determination of threat of Serious Injury shall be based on facts and not on mere
allegation, conjecture, or remote or hypothetical possibility.
9. “Critical Circumstances” means the emergence of an exceptional situation, where
massive preferential imports are causing or threatening to cause “Serious Injury”
difficult to repair and which calls for immediate action.
10. “Dumping” means the introduction of a product into the commerce of the other
Contracting party at less than its normal value which is the comparable price in
the ordinary course of trade for the like product destined for consumption in the
exporting country, or, in the absence of such domestic prices, is either the highest
comparable price for the like product for export to any third country in the
ordinary course of trade, or the cost production of the products in the country of
origin plus a reasonable addition for selling cost and profit.
ARTICLE 3: SCOPE AND COVERAGE
This Agreement applies to trade between the Contracting Parties relating to the products
specified in Annexes A and B, with due regard to the arrangements provided for in those
Annexes.
ARTICLE 4: TARIFFS, PARA-TARIFFS AND NON-TARIFF BARRIERS
1. The Contracting parties hereby establish a Preferential Trade Agreement through
this Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of Annexes A and B, which
shall form an integral part of this Agreement.
2. The Contracting parties further agree to eliminate from the date this Agreement
enters into force, all non-tariff barriers and any other equivalent measures on the
movement of goods, other than those imposed in accordance with Article 8 of this
Agreement.
3. Having exchanged their respective lists of para-tariffs, the Contracting parties also
agree not to make any increase in the existing para-tariffs, or introduce new or
additional para-tariffs without mutual consent. 
4. In the implementation of this Agreement the Contracting Parties shall pay due
regard to the principle of reciprocity.
5. The Contracting Parties also commit themselves not to increase their respective
rates of preferential tariffs without mutual consent.
6. The Contracting Parties shall consider further liberalization of their bilateral trade
through future consultations.
ARTICLE 5: MOST FAVOURED NATIONS TREATMENT
The Contracting parties shall accord unconditionally treatment, which is no less
favourable than that accorded to any other Non-Contracting party with regard to all the
rules regulations, procedures and formalities applicable to trade. However, unless there is
specific mutual agreement between the Contracting Parties, they shall not be eligible to
benefit from tariff rate quotas or tariff concessions granted by each Contracting Party to
some other country within the framework of a specific free trade agreement, preferential
trade agreement or regional trade agreement”
ARTICLE 6: NATIONAL TREATMENT
The contracting parties shall ensure that domestic laws, regulations and all other
measures and formalities applicable to imports from the other Contracting Party shall not
be applied in a manner so as to afford protection to domestic production. Subject to other
provisions of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall accord treatment to products
originating from their territory of the other Contracting party, no less favourable than that
accorded to the like domestic products.
ARTICLE 7: TRANSPARENCY
The Contracting Parties commit themselves to ensure transparency with regard to their
relevant regulations and practices through publication. They shall also notify each other
of new measures, which pertain to or affect the operation of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8: EXCEPTIONS
Subject to the condition that such measures are not applied in a manner to constitute
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the
Contracting Parties, nothing in this agreement shall preclude prohibitions or restrictions
on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, religious
values, national security, the protection of human, animal and plant life and health, the
protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archeological value, the
protection of exhaustible natural resources and genetic reserves, regulations concerning
gold or silver. Nothing in this agreement shall also be understood to require either 
Contracting Party to furnish any information the disclosure of which it deems contrary to
its essential security interests.
ARTICE 9: RULES OF ORIGIN
1. Products covered by the provisions of this Agreement shall be eligible for
preferential treatment provided they satisfy the Rules of Origin as set out in
Annex C to this Agreement, which shall form an integral part of this Agreement.
2. For the development of specific sectors of the industry of either Contracting party
lower value addition norms for the products manufactured or produced by those
sectors may be considered through mutual negotiations.
ARTICLE 10: SAFEGUARD MEASURES
1. If any product is imported into the territory of a Contracting Party in such a
manner or in such quantities as to cause or threaten to cause Serious Injury in the
territory of that Contracting party, such Contracting Party may with prior
consultations with the other Contracting Party, except in critical circumstances,
suspend provisionally the preferential treatment accorded to that product under
the Agreement.
2. When either Contracting Party in terms of paragraph 1 of this Article has taken
action, it shall simultaneously notify the other Contracting Party and the Joint
Trade Committee established in terms of Article 16. The Committee shall enter
into consultations with the Contracting Parties and endeavour to reach a mutually
acceptable agreement to remedy the situation. If such consultations fail to resolve
the issue, the matter will be resolved in accordance with the provisions laid down
in Articles 15, 17 and 18 and the Contracting Party affected shall have the right to
withdraw the equivalent preferential treatment.
ARTICLE 11: ANTIDUMPING MEASURES
If either Contracting Party determines that dumping is taking place in trade with the other
Contracting Party, it may levy an anti-dumping duty on the importation of the products
dumped if it determines that the effect of the dumping is such as to cause or threaten to
cause material injury to an established domestic industry, or is such as to retard
materially the establishment of a domestic industry.
ARTICLE 12: BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
1. Either Contracting party, when faced with serious balance of payments difficulties
or under threat thereof, may take restrictive measures with regard to the transfer
of payments for its current account transactions in the framework of this
Agreement, subject to conditions and procedures set out in this Article.
2. Either Contracting Party intending to resort to such measures, shall enter into
consultations with the other Contracting Party with a view to designing a mutually 
acceptable mechanism to address the situation. In the event of it not being
practical to enter into prior consultation, they shall promptly do so following the
adoption of such measures. While in consultation, the Contracting Parties shall
give exhaustive considerations to all other possible alternative solutions to deal
with the situation concerned.
3. If the Contracting Parties fail to come to a mutually satisfactory agreement within
three months of the beginning of such consultations, the Contracting Party
affected by serious balance of payments difficulties, may adopt or maintain the
measure concerned provided that it will:
a. Avoid unnecessary damage to the commercial, economic or financial interests
of the other Contracting Party;
b. Not be more burdensome than necessary to deal with the balance of payments
difficulties or threat thereof;
c. Be temporary and be phased out progressively as the balance of payments
situation mitigates.
4. In case the balance of negotiated concessions is substantially affected
by the measures of a Contracting party, falling under the provisions of this article,
the other Contracting Party shall have the right to deviate from its obligations
under this Agreement with respect to substantially equivalent trade, until such
time those restrictive measures are relaxed.
ARTICLE 13: RE-EXPORT & SHORTAGE CLAUSE
1. In the event that a Contracting Party adopts or maintains a
prohibition or restriction on the importation from or exportation to a noncontracting party of a good, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to
prevent that Contracting party from:
a. Limiting or prohibiting the importation form the territory of the other
Contracting Party of such good of that non-contracting party; or
b. Requiring as a condition of export of such good to the territory of the other
Contracting Party, that the good not be re-exported to the non-contracting
party, directly or indirectly, without being consumed in territory of the other
Contracting Party.
2. In addition, none of the provisions of this Agreement shall
preclude the maintenance or adoption by either Contracting Party of any trade
restrictive measures necessary to remove or forestall a serious shortage, or threat
thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Contracting Party.
ARTICLE 14: STANDARDS, TECHNICAL REGULATIONS AND
SPS MEASURES 
The Contracting Parties shall ensure that technical regulations and standards are not
prepared, adopted or applied so as to create obstacles to mutual trade or to protect
domestic production.
Accordingly, the Contracting Parties shall
a. Ensure that any sanitary or Phytosanitary measure is applied only to the extent
necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health, is based on scientific
principles and is not maintained without sufficient evidence, taking into account
the availability of relevant scientific information and regional conditions; and
b. Ensure that standards and technical regulations are not prepared, adopted or
applied with a view to or with the effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to
mutual trade. For this purpose, technical regulations shall not be more traderestrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate objective, taking into account the
risks, non-fulfillment would create. Such legitimate objectives include those
measures described in Article 8. In assessing such risks, relevant elements of
consideration include available scientific and technical information, related
processing technology or intended end-uses of products.
ARTICLE 15: JOINT TRADE COMMITTEE
1. A Joint Trade Committee shall be established consisting of officials of the
Contracting Parties. The Committee, headed by the Vice Minister/Federal
Secretary of Commerce from the two sides, shall meet initially within six months
of the entry into force of the Agreement and thereafter at least once a year to
review the progress made in the implementation of this Agreement.
2. The Committee shall set out its rules of procedures within six months of the entry
into force of the Agreement.
3. The Committee may also set up any other Sub-Committee and/or Working Group
for specific purposes, as it may consider necessary.
4. The Committee shall accord adequate opportunities for consultation on
representations made by either Contracting Party with respect to any matter
affecting the implementation of the Agreement.
ARTICLE 16: CONSULTATIONS
1. Each Contracting Party shall accord sympathetic consideration to and shall afford
adequate opportunity for consultations regarding such representations as may be
made by the other Contracting Party with respect to any matter affecting the
operation of this Agreement.
2. The Joint Trade Committee shall meet at the request of either Contracting Party to
consider any matter for which it has not been possible to find a satisfactory
solution through consultations under paragraph 1 above. 
ARTICLE 17: DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
1. Any dispute arising from the interpretation and or application of the Agreement shall
first be settled amicably through bilateral consultations.
2. In case the dispute is not settled amicably within 90 days from the beginning of the
consultations, either Contracting Party may, in accordance with their laws and
regulations, refer it to an arbitration panel, consisting of one representative from each
Contracting party and one or there international personalities other than nationals of
the Contracting parties, and to be chosen by agreement between the said arbitrators.
3. The arbitration tribunal shall determine its rules of procedure.
4. The Contracting parties shall give the arbitration tribunal all assistance to examine
and resolve the case.
5. The Contracting Parties shall be bound to take measures involved in carrying out the
decisions of the arbitration panel. If either Contracting Party fails to implement the
decisions, the other Contracting party shall have the right to withdraw the equivalent
preferential treatment.”
ARTICLE 18: TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT
Either Contracting Party may terminate this Agreement by means of a written notification
through diplomatic channels to the other Contracting Party, which shall take effect six
months after the date of such notification.
ARTICLE 19: AMENDMENTS
The Contracting Parties may amend and develop the provisions of this Agreement
through mutual consent, taking into account the experience gained in its application.
Therefore, either Contracting Party may put forward suggestions for the purpose of
promoting further liberalization of bilateral trade.
ARTICLE 20: ANNEXES TO BE FINALIZED
Annex A containing the Tariff Preferences to be granted by the Government of Iran and
Annex B containing the Tariff Preferences to be granted by the Government of Pakistan
and Annex C containing the Rules of Origin under the Agreement shall be finalized
within a period of 90 days from the signing of this Agreement.
All the Annexes shall become effective and shall constitute an integral part of the
Agreement when the two Contracting parties have confirmed them through the exchange
of diplomatic notes.
ARTICLE 21: ENTRY INTO FORCE
The Agreement shall enter into force on the 30th day after the Contracting Parties have
notified each other through diplomatic channels that their respective constitutional 
requirements and procedures have been completed in respect of this Agreement,
including the Annexes under Article 20.
In witness thereof, the undersigned, duly authorized thereto by their respective
Governments, have signed this Agreement.
Done in one preamble and 21 Articles on this 4th Day of March, 2004 corresponding to
the Iranian Calendar 14th Esfand 1382 in texts in two originals in Persian and English, all
the two texts being equally authentic.
In case of divergence interpretation of the English text shall prevail.
Sd/= Sd/=
 The Government of the
 Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Kamal Afsar
Secretary Commerce
The Government of the
 Islamic Republic of Iran
Mojtaba Khosrowtaj
Vice Minister of Commerce 