AGREEMENT BETWEEN NORWAY AND ICELAND ON FISHERY AND
CONTINENTAL SHELF QUESTIONS
The Governments of Norway and of Iceland.
Recognizing the need to take effective measures for the conservation, rational exploitation
and reproduction of the living resources of the sea, and furthermore for the rational
exploitation of the natural resources on and in the continental shelf,
Recognizing that under international law it is the two countries, as coastal States,
which bear the main responsibility for the effective conservation and rational exploitation
of these natural resources,
Recognizing the importance of coordinated, close and friendly cooperation between
the two countries in order to secure these aims and recognizing likewise the necessity of
coordinated cooperation with other affected countries in order to secure these aims,
Recognizing Iceland's strong economic dependence on the fisheries, cf. Article 71 in
the text of the Conference on the Law of the Sea,
Considering that Iceland has established an economic zone of 200 nautical miles and
that Norway will in the near future establish a Fishery zone round Jan Mayen,
Recognizing the special circumstances of importance for the drawing up of a dividing
line between the two countries in the sea areas concerned for fishery and continental shelf
purposes,
Expressing their apprehension with regard to the danger of overfishing which in particular
threatens the capelin stock.
Taking account of the work which is being done by the Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea, work which has not yet been completed,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The Parties shall cooperate on practical questions in the fisheries sector, attaching particular
importance to measures directed towards conservation, rational exploitation and
sound reproduction of the fish stocks which migrate in the sea areas between Iceland and
Jan Mayen.
The Parties shall exchange information regarding catch statistics and national fishery
measures, coordinate scientific research and pool their experience in respect of developments
in the fisheries.
Article 2
A Fisheries Commission shall be established. Each of the two Parties shall appoint one
representative and one deputy representative to this Commission. The representatives may
be assisted by advisers and experts.
The Commission shall meet at least once each year, alternately in each of the two countries.
In addition, the Commission shall meet as often as proves necessary.
In addition to the Commission, a Working Group shall be set up composed of marine
research scientists from the two countries. The Group shall assist the Commission with scientific
advice in connection with its work.
Article 3
The Commission shall consult on such questions as arise in connection with the implementation
of the regulatory measures for fishing. It shall submit proposals and recommendations
to the two Governments concerning the fishing of migrating stocks in the area,
including recommendations in respect of the total allowable catch for such stocks and the
distribution of this total allowable catch, and shall also discuss and coordinate other conservation
measures. Unanimous recommendations from the Commission become binding
after two months if neither Party's Government has raised any objection.
The Parties may instruct the Commission to deal with and study other questions which
arise.
Article 4
Given the fact that the capelin stock migrates in both Parties' zones, the Parties shall
seek to agree on the total allowable catch for capelin. If agreement is not reached, Iceland,
as the Party with the greatest interest in the capelin stock, may stipulate the total allowable
catch.
If it turns out that the total allowable catch of capelin for the season is altered as compared
with the catch volume which formed the basis for the Norwegian quota, Norway's
quota shall be adjusted correspondingly during the same or the subsequent fishing season.
Norway may consider herself unbound by the total allowable catch if the stipulation
thereof is considered to be clearly unreasonable.
Article 5
Norway's share of the total allowable catch for capelin in the Jan Mayen zone is stipulated
for the first four years, including 1980, at 15 per cent.
The distribution of the capelin quota between Norway and Iceland can be reexamined
in the Fisheries Commission at the latest at the expiry of the four-year period in the light of
the developments which have taken place in fishing and on the basis of research findings
with regard to the distribution of the capelin stock between the different zones. If agreement
is not reached, the Governments of the two countries shall discuss the situation with a view
to arriving at a solution paying due regard to the considerations on which the two Parties
have based themselves in drawing up this Agreement.
Article 6
Of that part of the total allowable catch which is due to Iceland pursuant to Article 5,
Icelandic fishermen shall be entitled to fish in the Jan Mayen zone a quantity of capelin corresponding
to that part of the total allowable catch which is due to Norway pursuant to Article
5.
As regards other migrating stocks, reasonable regard shall be paid to Iceland's dependence
on fishing in general and to Iceland's interest in fishing in the Jan Mayen zone. Of
that share which is allocated to Iceland in negotiations with Norway and other countries,
Iceland may fish a reasonable part in the Jan Mayen zone. Iceland's catch volume in the Jan
Mayen zone shall be discussed in the annual consultations in the Fisheries Commission.
Article 7
Each of the Parties may transfer to third countries the right to fish within the quotas
they themselves are allocated pursuant to Article 5. Such fishing by third countries may
only take place in that Party's own zone.
Article 8
The Parties recognize that effective conservation and rational exploitation of migrating
stocks may necessitate consultations and the coordination of fishery measures with other
countries, including the stipulation of the total allowable catch and the distribution thereof,
in accordance with the principles in Article 63 in the text of the Conference on the Law of
the Sea and the provisions of the present Agreement.
Article 9
The question of the dividing line for the shelf in the area between Iceland and Jan Mayen
shall be the subject of continued negotiations.
For this purpose the Parties agree to appoint at the earliest opportunity a Conciliation
Commission composed of three members, of which each Party appoints one national member.
The chairman of the Commission shall be appointed by the Parties jointly.
The Commission shall have as its mandate the submission of recommendations with
regard to the dividing line for the shelf area between Iceland and Jan Mayen. In preparing
such recommendations, the Commission shall take into account Iceland's strong economic
interests in these sea areas, the existing geographical and geological factors and other special
circumstances.
The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure. The unanimous recommendations
of the Commission shall be submitted to the two Governments at the earliest oppor
tunity. The Parties envisage the presentation of the recommendations within five months of
the appointment of the Commission.
These recommendations are not binding on the Parties: but during their further negotiations
the Parties will pay reasonable regard to them.
Article 10
In the event of activities taking place on the shelf areas between Iceland and Jan Mayen
in connection with the exploration for or exploitation of the natural resources on or in the
shelf, the Parties undertake to initiate close mutual consultations and close cooperation with
regard to the adoption and enforcement of the necessary safety regulations in order to avoid
any pollution which might endanger the living resources in these sea areas or otherwise
have a harmful effect on the marine environment.
The Parties undertake to submit to each other specific plans for such activities in connection
with the exploration for or exploitation of the shelf resources in ample time prior to
the commencement of such activities.
Article 11
This Agreement shall not become binding until the Parties, by an exchange of notes,
have notified each other that the necessary constitutional steps have been taken.
In witness whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed this Agreement.
Done at Reykjavik the twenty-eighth day of May, nineteen hundred and eighty, in duplicate
in Norwegian and in Icelandic, both texts being equally authoritative.
For the Government of Norway:
[KNUT VOLLEBAEK ]
For the Government of Iceland:
[HALLDOR ASGRIMSSON]
