FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE STATE OF ISRAEL
AND
MERCOSUR
THE STATE OF ISRAEL
AND
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC, THE
FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL, THE
REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY, AND THE
ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY,
MEMBER STATES OF THE COMMON MARKET
OF THE SOUTH (MERCOSUR) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
CHAPTERS
CHAPTER I INITIAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER II GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER III TRADE IN GOODS
 ANNEX I LIST OF CONCESSIONS MADE BY MERCOSUR
 ANNEX II LIST OF CONCESSIONS MADE BY ISRAEL
CHAPTER IV RULES OF ORIGIN
 ANNEX I UNDERSTANDING ON THE APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 13.3
 ANNEX II SPECIMEN OF CERTIFICATE OF ORIGIN
 ANNEX III INVOICE DECLARATION ISRAEL-MERCOSUR
CHAPTER V SAFEGUARDS
CHAPTER VI TECHNICAL REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND CONFORMITY
 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
CHAPTER VII SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
 ANNEX I FORM FOR CONSULTATIONS ON SPECIFIC TRADE CONCERNS
 REGARDING SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
CHAPTER VIII TECHNICAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL COOPERATION
CHAPTER IX INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER X PUBLICATIONS AND NOTIFICATIONS
CHAPTER XI DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
 ANNEX I CODE OF CONDUCT FOR ARBITRATORS OF ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL
 ANNEX II RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL PROCEEDINGS
CHAPTER XII EXCEPTIONS
CHAPTER XIII FINAL PROVISIONS
ANNEXES
 ANNEX I MUTUAL ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS
 ANNEX II JOINT DECLARATION BETWEEN ARGENTINA AND ISRAEL RELATING
 TO CHAPTER III OF THE FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
 MERCOSUR AND THE STATE OF ISRAEL 
PREAMBLE
The State of Israel (hereinafter- referred to as "Israel"),
and
The Argentine Republic, The Federative Republic of Brazil, The Republic of Paraguay, and
the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (hereinafter- referred to as "Member States of
MERCOSUR")
HAVING REGARD to the Treaty establishing the Common Market of the South between the
Argentine Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay and the
Oriental Republic of Uruguay (hereinafter- referred to as "MERCOSUR");
CONSIDERING the Framework Agreement signed by the State of Israel and by
MERCOSUR on December 8, 2005;
CONSIDERING the importance of the existing economic links between MERCOSUR and its
Member States and Israel, and the common values that they share;
DESIROUS to strengthen their economic relations and to promote economic cooperation, in
particular for the development of trade and investments as well as technological cooperation;
DESIROUS to create an expanded and secure market for their goods;
WISHING to establish clear, predictable and lasting rules governing their trade;
WISHING to promote the development of their trade with due regard to fair conditions of
competition;
CONSIDERING the mutual interest of the Government of the State of Israel and the
Governments of the Members States of MERCOSUR in the reinforcement of the multilateral
trading system as reflected in the WTO Agreements; 
RESOLVED TO:
ESTABLISH a free trade area between the two Parties through the removal of trade barriers;
DECLARE their readiness to explore other possibilities for extending their economic
relations to other fields not covered by this Agreement;
HAVE AGREED as follows: 
CHAPTER I
INITIAL PROVISIONS
Article 1 - Contracting and Signatory Parties
For the purposes of this Agreement, the “Contracting Parties”, hereinafter referred to as
“Parties” are MERCOSUR and the State of Israel. The “Signatory Parties” are the Argentine
Republic, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Republic of Paraguay, and the Oriental
Republic of Uruguay, Member States of MERCOSUR, and the State of Israel.
Article 2 - Establishment of the Free Trade Area
The Parties to this Agreement, consistent with Article XXIV of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994, hereby establish a free trade area.
Article 3 - Objectives
The objectives of this Agreement, as elaborated more specifically in its provisions are to:
1. eliminate barriers to trade in, and facilitate the movement of goods between the territories
of the Parties;
2. promote conditions of fair competition in the free trade area;
3. increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties, and
increase cooperation in areas which are of mutual interest to the Parties;
4. create effective procedures for the implementation, application and compliance with this
Agreement, and its joint administration; and 
5. establish a framework for further bilateral and multilateral cooperation to expand and
enhance the benefits of this Agreement.
Article 4 - Interpretation and Administration
1. The Parties and Signatory Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this
Agreement in the light of its objectives set out in Article 3 of this Chapter and in accordance
with applicable rules of international law.
2. Each Party and Signatory Party shall administer in a consistent, impartial and reasonable
manner all its laws, regulations, decisions and rulings affecting matters covered by this
Agreement.
Article 5 - Relations to other Agreements
The Parties and Signatory Parties affirm their rights and obligations with respect to each other
in accordance with the WTO Agreement, including GATT 1994, and its successor agreements
and other agreements to which the Parties and Signatory Parties are party.
Article 6 - Extent of Obligation
Each Signatory Party shall ensure that the necessary measures are taken in order to give effect
to the provisions of this Agreement, including their observance by states, provinces and
municipal governments and authorities within its territory.
Article 7 - Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:
1. customs duty: includes any duty and charge of any kind imposed in connection with the
importation of a good, including any form of surtax or surcharge in connection with such
importation, but does not include any: 
(a) internal taxes or other internal charges imposed in accordance with Article III of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994;
(b) antidumping or countervailing duty imposed in accordance with Articles VI and
XVI of GATT 1994, the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of
GATT 1994, and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures;
(c) safeguard duty or levy imposed in accordance with Article XIX of GATT 1994, the
WTO Agreement on Safeguards and Article 2 of Chapter V (Safeguards) of this
Agreement;
(d) other fees or charges imposed in accordance with Article VIII of GATT 1994 and
the Understanding on the Interpretation of Article II:1 (b) of the GATT 1994.
2. GATT 1994 means the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994, which is part of
the WTO Agreement;
3. Good means a domestic good as this is understood in GATT 1994 or such a good as the
Parties may agree, and includes an originating good of that Party;
4. Harmonized System means the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System,
and its General Rules of Interpretation, Section notes and Chapter notes, as adopted and
implemented by the Parties in their respective tariff laws;
5. Measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice;
6. Originating goods or material means a good or material that qualifies as originating under
the provisions of Chapter IV (Rules of Origin); and
7. WTO Agreement means the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, including GATT 1994. 
CHAPTER II
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1 - National Treatment
1. Each Signatory Party of MERCOSUR or, wherever applicable, MERCOSUR shall accord
national treatment to the goods of Israel and Israel shall accord national treatment to the goods
of each Signatory Party of MERCOSUR or, wherever applicable, MERCOSUR in accordance
with Article III of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. To this end, Article III of
GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes, or any equivalent provision of a successor agreement
to which each Signatory Party of MERCOSUR and Israel are parties, are incorporated into
and made part of this Agreement.
2. The Signatory Parties agree, in accordance with their constitutional rules and their internal
legislation, to comply with the provisions of paragraph 1 in their territory at federal,
provincial, state or any other territory subdivision.
Article 2 - Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas and Frontier Trade
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of customs unions,
free trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade which are in accordance with the provisions
of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and with the Understanding on the Interpretation of
Article XXIV of the GATT 1994, as well as, for MERCOSUR, those trade agreements
established under the “Enabling Clause” (Decision L/4903, adopted on 28 November 1979)
of GATT 1994.
2. Upon request, consultations between the Parties shall take place within the Joint
Committee in order for the Parties to inform each other on agreements establishing customs
unions or free trade areas and, where required, on other major issues related to their respective
trade policy with third countries. 
Article 3 - Antidumping, Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
In the application of antidumping or countervailing measures and with respect to subsidies,
the Signatory Parties shall be governed by their respective legislation, which shall be
consistent with the WTO Agreement.
Article 4 - Agreement on Agriculture
The Signatory Parties reaffirm their obligations pursuant with the WTO Agreement on
Agriculture.
Article 5 - State Trading Enterprises
Each Signatory Party shall ensure that any State Trading Enterprise it maintains or establishes
acts in a manner consistent with the provisions of Article XVII of GATT 1994.
Article 6 - Payments
1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to trade in goods between the Signatory
Parties and the transfer of such payments to the territory of a Signatory Party, where the
creditor resides, shall be free from any restrictions.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, any measures concerning current
payments connected with the movement of goods shall be in conformity with the conditions
laid down under Article VIII of the Statutes of the International Monetary Fund.
Article 7 - Competition Policy
Subject to its laws, regulations and decisions regarding competition, each Signatory Party
shall accord to the individuals and companies of the other Party such treatment as necessary to
the pursuit of their activities under this Agreement. This Article shall not be subject to
Chapter XI (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement.
 
Article 8 - Restrictions to Safeguard the Balance of Payments
1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Signatory Party from taking any
measure for balance-of-payments purposes. Any such measures adopted by a Signatory Party
shall be in accordance with Article XII of GATT 1994 and the Understanding on the Balanceof-Payments provisions of GATT 1994, which shall be incorporated into and made a part of
this Agreement.
2. The Signatory Party concerned shall promptly notify the other Party of the measures
applied pursuant to paragraph 1.
3. In applying temporary trade measures as described in paragraph 1, the Signatory Party in
question will accord treatment no less favourable to imports originating in the other Party than
to imports originating in any other country.
Article 9 - Investments and Trade in Services
1. The Parties recognize the importance of the areas of investments and trade in services. In
their efforts to gradually deepen and broaden their economic relations, they will consider in
the Joint Committee the possible modalities for opening negotiations on market access on
investments and trade in services, on the basis of the GATS framework as applicable.
2. In order to broaden reciprocal knowledge about trade and investment opportunities in both
Parties, the Signatory Parties shall stimulate trade promotion activities such as seminars, trade
missions, fairs, simposia and exhibitions.
Article 10 - Customs Cooperation
The Parties commit themselves to developing customs cooperation to ensure that the
provisions on trade are observed. For this purpose they shall establish a dialogue on customs
matters and provide mutual assistance in accordance with the provisions of Annex 1 of the
Agreement (Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters). 
CHAPTER III
TRADE IN GOODS
Article 1- Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to goods originating in Israel and in MERCOSUR
except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.
Article 2 - Basic Principles
1. For the purposes of this Agreement the Israeli customs tariff shall apply to the
classification of goods for imports to Israel, and the MERCOSUR Common Nomenclature
shall apply with regard to the classification of goods for imports to MERCOSUR, at a level of
eight (8) digits, both based on the Harmonized Goods Description and Coding System in its
2002 version.
2. A Party may create new tariff openings, provided that the basic custom duties, as defined
in Article 3(1) of this Chapter, and preferential conditions applied to the other Party in the
new item(s) opened are the same as those applied to the item(s) segregated.
3. The Parties and Signatory Parties hereby agree on the bilateral trade liberalization
schedule on trade in goods listed in Annexes I and II referred to in Article 3 of this Chapter.
The provisions of this Agreement shall apply only to tariff items listed and, where applicable,
to the quantities detailed in those Annexes. Any other tariff items shall remain subject to
WTO agreements and the provisions of Chapter VII (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) of
this Agreement, and shall not be subject to any of the other provisions of this Agreement.
Article 3 - Customs Duties and Tariff Elimination
1. The basic customs duty for the successive reductions set out in this Agreement shall be
the most-favored-nation rate effectively applied by each Party or Signatory Party on
December 18, 2007. If, after this date, any tariff reduction is applied on a most-favored-nation 
basis, such reduced customs duties shall replace the basic customs duties as from the date
when such reduction is effectively applied. To this end, each Party shall cooperate to inform
the other Party of basic customs duties and preferential rates in force.
2. Customs duties on imports applied by each Party or Signatory Party on goods originating
in the other Party specified in Annexes I (for products originating in Israel imported to
MERCOSUR) and II (for products originating in MERCOSUR imported to Israel) of this
Chapter shall be treated according to the following categories:
Category A - Customs duties shall be eliminated upon entry into force of this Agreement.
Category B - Customs duties shall be eliminated in 4 (four) equal stages, the first one taking
place on the date of entry into force of this Agreement and the other three on January 1st of
each successive year.
Category C - Customs duties shall be eliminated in 8 (eight) equal stages, the first one taking
place on the date of entry into force of this Agreement and the other seven on January 1st of
each successive year.
Category D - Customs duties shall be eliminated in 10 (ten) equal stages, the first one taking
place on the date of entry into force of this Agreement and the other nine on January 1st of
each successive year.
Category E - Customs duties shall be subject to preferences, as specified for each tariff item,
upon entry into force of this Agreement, under the conditions also specified for each tariff
item. 
3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party or Signatory Party may increase
any existing customs duty, or adopt any customs duty, on an originating good of the other
Party referred to in paragraph 2.
4. For the purpose of elimination of duties in accordance with this Article, rates shall be
rounded down, at least to the nearest tenth of a percentage point or, if the rate of duty is
expressed in monetary units, at least to the nearest .01 of the official monetary unit of the
Signatory Party.
5. Upon request of either Party, the Parties shall consider granting further concessions in
their bilateral trade.
Article 4 - Import and Export Restrictions
1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, no Party or Signatory Party may adopt or
maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of the other Party or on
the exportation or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party
whether applied by quotas, licenses or other measures, except in accordance with Article XI
of GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. To this end, Article XI of GATT 1994 and
its interpretative notes, or any equivalent provision of a successor agreement to which the
Parties or Signatory Parties are party, are incorporated into and made a part of this
Agreement.
2. The Parties or Signatory Parties understand that the rights and obligations incorporated by
paragraph 1 prohibit, in any circumstances in which any other form of restriction is
prohibited, export price requirements and, except as permitted in enforcement of
countervailing and antidumping orders and undertakings, import price requirements. 
Article 5 - Customs Valuation
The Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade of 1994 (Agreement of the WTO on Customs Valuation) shall govern the customs
valuation rules applied by the Signatory Parties to their mutual trade.
Article 6 - Duty-free Importation of Certain Commercial Samples and Printed Advertising
Material
Each Signatory Party shall authorize the duty-free importation of commercial samples of
insignificant value and printed advertising materials from the territory of the other Party.
Article 7 - Goods Reimported after Being Repaired or Modified
1. Neither of the Parties or Signatory Parties may apply customs duties to a good which is
reimported to its territory after export to the territory of the other Party in order to be repaired
or modified.
2. Neither of the Parties or Signatory Parties may apply customs duties to goods which,
regardless of their origin, are temporarily admitted in the territory of the other Party in order
to be repaired or modified.
Article 8 – Domestic Support
The domestic support for agricultural goods of each Signatory Party shall be consistent with
the provisions of the Agreement on Agriculture, which forms part of the WTO Agreement and
to the disciplines established within the framework of future multilateral negotiations in that
field. 
Article 9 - Export Subsidies
1. The Parties and Signatory Parties share the goal of achieving the multilateral elimination
of export subsidies for agricultural products and shall cooperate in efforts to achieve an
agreement within the framework of the WTO to eliminate such subsidies.
2. The Signatory Parties agree not to apply export subsidies and other measures and practices
of equivalent effect which distort trade and production of agricultural origin, to their mutual
agricultural trade. 
CHAPTER IV
RULES OF ORIGIN
Article 1- Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) manufacture means any kind of working or processing, including assembly or
specific operations;
(b) material means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in the
manufacture of the product;
(c) product means the product manufactured, even if it is intended for later use in
another manufacturing operation;
(d) goods means both materials and products;
(e) customs value means the value as determined in accordance with Article VII of
GATT 1994 and the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of GATT
1994 (WTO Agreement on Customs Valuation);
(f) CIF value – Value of the goods, including freight and insurance costs to the port of
importation in Israel or in the first Member State of MERCOSUR;
(g) ex-works price means the price paid for the product ex-works to the manufacturer in
Israel or in a Member State of MERCOSUR in whose undertaking the last working
or processing is carried out, provided the price includes the value of all the materials
used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the product
obtained is exported; 
(h) value of non-originating materials means the CIF value or if it is not known its
equivalent in accordance with Article VII of GATT 1994 and the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VII of GATT 1994 (WTO Agreement on Customs
Valuation).
For the purposes of determining the CIF value in the weighting of non – originating
materials for countries without a coastline, shall be considered as port of destination
the first seaport or inland waterway port located in any of the other Signatory
Parties, through which those non – originating materials have been imported.
(i) chapters, headings and subheadings mean the chapters, the headings and the
subheadings (two, four and six digit codes respectively) used in the nomenclature
which makes up the Harmonized System or HS;
(j) classification refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular
heading or sub-heading;
(k) consignment means products which are either sent simultaneously from one exporter
to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering their shipment
from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a document, by a single
invoice;
(l) competent governmental authorities refers to:
a. in Israel: The Customs Directorate of the Israeli Tax Authority of the Ministry
of Finance or their successors.
b. in MERCOSUR:
- Secretaría de Industria, Comercio y Pequeña y Mediana Empresa in
Argentina or their successors.
- Secretaria de Comércio Exterior do Ministério do Desenvolvimento,
Indústria e Comércio Exterior e Secretaria da Receita Federal do Ministério
da Fazenda in Brazil or their successors. 
- Ministerio de Industria y Comercio in Paraguay or their successors
- Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas in Uruguay, Asesoría de Política
Comercial - Unidad de Origen or their successors.
Article 2 - General Requirements
1. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be
considered as originating in Israel:
(a) products wholly obtained in Israel within the meaning of Article 4 of this Chapter;
(b) products obtained in Israel incorporating materials which have not been wholly
obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or
processing in Israel within the meaning of Article 5 of this Chapter.
2. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be
considered as originating in a Member State of MERCOSUR:
(a) products wholly obtained in a Member State of MERCOSUR within the meaning of
Article 4 of this Chapter;
(b) products obtained in a Member State of MERCOSUR incorporating materials which
have not been wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone
sufficient working or processing in a Member State of MERCOSUR within the
meaning of Article 5 of this Chapter.
Article 3 - Bilateral Cumulation
1. Notwithstanding, Article 2(1)(b) of this Chapter, goods originating in a Member State of
MERCOSUR, shall be considered as materials originating in Israel and it shall not be
necessary that such materials had undergone working or processing. 
2. Notwithstanding Article 2(2)(b) of this Chapter, goods originating in Israel, shall be
considered as materials originating in a Member State of MERCOSUR and it shall not be
necessary that such materials had undergone sufficient working or processing.
Article 4 - Wholly Obtained Products
1. The following shall be considered as wholly produced or obtained in Israel or in a
Member State of MERCOSUR:
(a) mineral products extracted from the soil or subsoil of any of the Signatory Parties,
including its territorial seas, continental shelf or exclusive economic zone;
(b) plants and vegetable products grown, harvested, picked or gathered there, including
in their territorial seas, exclusive economic zone or continental shelf;
(c) live animals born and raised there, including by aquaculture;
(d) products from live animals as in (c) above;
(e) animals and products obtained by hunting, trapping, collecting, fishing and capturing
there; including in its territorial seas, continental shelf or in the exclusive economic
zone;
(f) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials; *
(g) waste and scrap resulting from utilization, consumption or manufacturing operations
conducted there;*

*
 These norms are without prejudice to national legislation regarding the import of the goods mentioned therein. 
(h) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the waters in the high seas
(outside the continental shelf or in the exclusive economic zone of the Signatory
Parties), only by their vessels;
(i) products of sea fishing obtained, only by their vessels, under a specific quota or
other fishing rights allocated to a Signatory Party by the international agreements to
which the Signatory Parties are parties;
(j) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to in (h)
and (i);
(k) products obtained from the seabed and subsoil beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction are considered to be wholly obtained in the Signatory Party that has
exploitation rights under international Law;
(l) Goods produced in any of the Signatory Parties exclusively from the products
specified in subparagraphs (a) to (g) above.
2. The terms 'their vessels' and 'their factory ships' in paragraph 1 (h), (i) and (j) shall apply
only to vessels and factory ships:
(a) which are flagged and registered or recorded in a Signatory Party; and
(b) which are owned by a natural person with domicile in that Signatory Party or by a
commercial company with domicile in this Signatory Party, established and
registered in accordance with the laws of the said Signatory Party and performing
its activities in conformity with the laws and regulations of the said Signatory Party;
and
(c) on which at least 75% of the crew are nationals of that Signatory Party, provided
that the master and officers are nationals of that Signatory Party. 
Article 5- Sufficiently Worked or Processed Products
1. For the purpose of Articles 2(1)(b) and 2(2)(b) of this Chapter, a product is considered to
be originating if the non-originating materials used in its manufacture undergo working or
processing beyond the operations referred to in Article 6 of this Chapter; and
(a) the production process results in a tariff change of the non-originating materials
from a four-digit heading of the Harmonized Coding System into another four-digit
heading,
 or
(b) the value of all non-originating materials used in its manufacture does not exceed 50
% of the ex-works price..In case of Paraguay, the value of all non-originating
materials does not exceed 60% of the ex-works price.
2. A product will be considered to have undergone a change in tariff classification pursuant
to paragraph 1 (a) if the value of all non-originating materials that are used in the production
of the good and that do not undergo the applicable change in tariff classification does not
exceed 10% of the ex-works value of the product.
This provision shall not be applicable to products classified under Chapters 50 to 63 of the
Harmonized Coding System
3. Paragraph 2 shall apply only to trade between:
(a) Uruguay and Israel; and
(b) Paraguay and Israel.
4. The Sub Committee on Rules of Origin and Customs Matters, which shall be established
by the Joint Committee, in accordance with Chapter IX (Institutional Provisions) of the
Agreement, can determine specific rules of origin in the framework of this Chapter by mutual
agreement 
Article 6- Insufficient Working or Processing Operations
1. The following operations shall be considered as insufficient working or processing to
confer the status of originating products, whether or not the requirements of Articles 5(1)(a)
and 5(1)(b) of this Chapter are satisfied:
(a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition during
transport and storage;
(b) simple changing of packaging and breaking-up and assembly of packages;
(c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
(d) simple painting and polishing operations, including applying oil;
(e) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;
(f) ironing or pressing of textiles;
(g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;
(h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;
(i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
(j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching; (including the making-up
of sets of articles);
(k) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on
products or their packaging;
(l) dilution in water or other substances, providing that the characteristics of the
products remain unchanged; 
(m)simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or boards
and all other simple packaging operations;
(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or disassembly of
products into parts in which the non originating materials comprise more than 60 %
of the ex-works price of the product;
(o) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds;
(p) slaughter of animals;
(q) a combination of two or more of the above operations.
Article 7- Unit of Qualification
1. The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Chapter shall be the
particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining classification using
the nomenclature of the Harmonized System.
It follows that:
(a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under the
terms of the Harmonized System in a single heading, the whole constitutes the unit
of qualification;
(b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under the
same heading of the Harmonized System, each product must be taken individually
when applying the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonized System, packaging is included with the
product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining origin. 
Article 8 - Accounting Segregation
1. For the purpose of establishing if a product is originating when in its manufacture are
utilized originating and non-originating fungible materials, mixed or physically combined, the
origin of such materials can be determined by any of the inventory management methods
applicable in the Signatory Party.
2. Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks of
originating and non-originating materials which are identical and interchangeable, the
competent governmental authorities may, at the written request of those concerned, authorize
the so-called "accounting segregation" method to be used for managing such stocks.
3. This method must be able to ensure that the number of products obtained which could be
considered as "originating" is the same as that which would have been obtained if there had
been physical segregation of the stocks.
4. The competent governmental authorities may grant such authorizations, subject to any
conditions deemed appropriate.
5. This method is recorded and applied on the basis of the general accounting principles
applicable in the country where the product was manufactured.
6. The beneficiary of this facilitation may issue or apply for proofs of origin, as the case may
be, for the quantity of products which may be considered as originating. At the request of the
competent governmental authorities, the beneficiary shall provide a statement of how the
quantities have been managed.
7. The competent governmental authorities shall monitor the use made of the authorization
and may withdraw it at any time whenever the beneficiary makes improper use of the
authorization in any manner whatsoever or fails to fulfil any of the other conditions laid down
in this Chapter. 
Article 9 - Accessories, Spare Parts and Tools
Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine, apparatus
or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or which
are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece of equipment, machine,
apparatus or vehicle in question.
Article10 - Sets
Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded as originating
when all component goods are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed of
originating and non-originating goods, the set as a whole shall be regarded as originating,
provided that the CIF value of the non-originating goods does not exceed 15 % of the exworks price of the set.
Article11- Neutral Elements
In order to determine whether a product is originating in one of the Parties, it shall not be
necessary to determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:
(a) energy and fuel;
(b) plant and equipment;
(c) machines and tools;
(d) goods which do not enter into the final composition of the product.
Article 12 - Principle of Territoriality
1. Except as provided for in Article 3 and paragraph 3 of this Article, the conditions for
acquiring originating status set out in Article 5 of this Chapter must be fulfilled without
interruption in Israel or in a Member State of MERCOSUR. 
2. Where originating goods exported from Israel or from a Member State of MERCOSUR to
another country return, they must be considered as non-originating, unless it can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(a) the returning goods are the same as those exported;
and
(b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in
good condition while in that country or while being exported.
3. The acquisition of originating status in accordance with the conditions set out in Articles
2-11 of this Chapter shall not be affected by working or processing done outside Israel or a
Member State of MERCOSUR on materials exported from Israel or from a Member State of
MERCOSUR and subsequently re-imported there, provided:
(a) the said materials are wholly obtained in Israel or in a Member State of
MERCOSUR or have undergone working or processing beyond the operations
referred to in Article 6 of this Chapter prior to being exported;
and
(b) it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
i) the re-imported goods have been obtained by working or processing the exported
materials; and such working or processing have not resulted in a change of the
classification at a six digit level of the Harmonized System or HS of the said reimported goods.
and
ii) the total added value acquired outside Israel or a Member State of MERCOSUR
by applying the provisions of this Article does not exceed 15 % of the ex-works
price of the end product for which originating status is claimed. 
4. (a) For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraph 3, 'total added value' shall be
taken to mean all costs arising outside Israel or a Member State of MERCOSUR, including
the value of the materials incorporated there.
 (b) The total added value as detailed in paragraph a) shall be considered as non originating
materials for the purposes of article 5-1b) of this Chapter.
5. The provisions of paragraph 3 shall not apply to products which do not fulfill the
conditions set out in Article 5 of this Chapter.
6. In the cases that paragraph 3 is applied, that fact will be indicated in Box N° 7 of the
Certificate of Origin.
Article 13- Direct Transport
1. The preferential treatment provided under the Agreement applies only to products,
satisfying the requirements of this Chapter, which are transported directly between Israel and
one or more Member States of MERCOSUR.
However, products constituting one single consignment may be transported through other
territories with, should the occasion arise, trans-shipment or temporary warehousing in such
territories, under the surveillance of the customs authorities therein, provided that:
i) the transit entry is justified for geographical reasons or by considerations related
exclusively to transport requirements; and
ii) they are not intended for trade, consumption, use or employment in the country
of transit; and
iii) they do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any operation
designed to preserve them in good condition. 
2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be supplied to
the customs authorities of the importing country by the production of:
(a) Any single through transport documents, that meets international standards and that
proves that the goods were directly transported from the exporting country through
the country of transit to the importing country; or
(b) A certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit which
contains an exact description of the goods, the date and place of the loading and reloading of the goods in the country of transit and the conditions under which the
goods were placed; or
(c) In the absence of any of the above documents, any other documents that will prove
the direct shipment.
3. Goods originating in Israel and exported to a Member State of MERCOSUR, shall
maintain their originating status when re-exported to another Member State of MERCOSUR,
subject to the Understanding attached to this Chapter as Annex I.
Article 14 - Exhibitions
1. Originating goods, sent for exhibition in a country other than Israel or a Member State of
MERCOSUR and sold after the exhibition for importation in Israel or in a Member State of
MERCOSUR shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement provided it is
shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(a) an exporter has consigned these goods from Israel or a Member State of
MERCOSUR to the country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them
there;
(b) the goods have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person in
Israel or in a Member State of MERCOSUR ; 
(c) the goods have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter in the
state in which they were sent for exhibition; and
(d) the goods have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any
purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.
2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the normal
manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or
similar public show or display which is not organized for private purposes in shops or
business premises with a view to the sale of foreign goods, and during which the goods
remain under customs control.
Article 15- General Requirements
1. Products originating in Israel shall, on importation into a Member State of MERCOSUR
and products originating in a Member State of MERCOSUR shall, on importation into Israel
benefit from this Agreement upon submission of one of the following proofs of origin.
(a) a Certificate of Origin, a specimen of which appears in Annex II of this
Chapter;
(b) in the cases specified in Article 20(1) of this Chapter, a declaration,
subsequently referred to as the 'invoice declaration' given by the exporter on an
invoice, which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to enable
them to be identified; the text of the invoice declaration appears in Annex III
of this Chapter.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this Chapter
shall, in the cases specified in Article 24 of this Chapter, benefit from the Agreement without
it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above. 
Article 16- Procedures for the Issuance of Certificates of Origin
1. Certificates of Origin shall be issued by the competent governmental authorities of the
exporting country on application having been made by the exporter or under the exporter's
responsibility by his authorized representative, in accordance with the domestic regulations of
the exporting country.
2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorized representative shall fill out the Certificate
of Origin in the English language and shall apply for its issuance in accordance with the rules
and regulations in force in the exporting country. If the Certificate of Origin is handwritten, it
shall be completed in ink in printed characters. The description of the products must be given
in the box reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not
completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the
empty space being crossed through.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the competent governmental authorities may authorize a
government office or a representative commercial institution to issue Certificates of Origin, in
accordance with the provisions of this Article provided that:
(a) the authorized government office or the authorized representative commercial
institution is monitored by the delegating competent governmental authorities;
(b) the competent governmental authorities take all the necessary measures in order to
ensure that the authorized government office or the authorized representative
commercial institution complies with all the provisions of this Chapter.
For this purpose, the competent governmental authorities may require guarantees from the
authorized government office or the authorized representative commercial institution,
ensuring that the issuance of the Certificates of Origin complies with the provisions of this
Chapter.
All the export documents including the Certificates of Origin shall remain accessible at
anytime to the competent governmental authorities and/or customs authorities. 
4. The competent governmental authorities may withdraw at anytime the authorization for
issuing Certificates of Origin given to the government office or the representative commercial
institution, according to the domestic procedures of the Signatory Parties.
5. The exporter applying for the issuance of a Certificate of Origin shall be prepared to
submit at any time, at the request of the competent governmental authorities and/or the
customs authorities of the exporting country where the Certificates of Origin are issued, all
appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the
fulfillment of the other requirements of this Chapter.
6. The Certificates of Origin shall be issued if the goods to be exported can be considered as
products originating in the exporting country in accordance with Article 2 of this Chapter.
7. The competent governmental authorities and/or customs authorities shall take any steps
necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfillment of the other
requirements of this Chapter. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any
evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's books or any other check considered
appropriate. The competent governmental authorities or the authorized government office or
the authorized representative commercial institution shall also ensure that the forms referred
to in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space
reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to
exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
8. The date of issue of the Certificate of Origin shall be indicated in Box 11 of the Certificate
of Origin.
9. Each Certificate of Origin will be assigned a specific number by the issuing authority.
10. Certificates of Origin shall only be issued before the goods have been exported. 
Article 17- Certificates of Origin Issued Retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 16(10) of this Chapter, a Certificate of Origin may exceptionally
be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if it was not issued by the time
of exportation because of special circumstances.
2. Where originating goods are placed under Customs control in one of the Member States of
MERCOSUR for the purpose of shipping all or some of them to another Member State of
MERCOSUR, Israel may issue Certificates of Origin retrospectively for such goods pursuant
to this Article.
3. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the
place and date of exportation of the products to which the Certificate of Origin relates, and
state the reasons for his request.
4. The issuing authorities may issue a Certificate of Origin retrospectively only after
verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees with that in the
corresponding file.
5. Certificates of Origin issued retrospectively must be endorsed with the following phrase in
English:
 "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY”
6. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 5 shall be inserted in Box No.7 of the
Certificate of Origin.
7. The provisions of this Article may be applied to goods which comply with the provisions
of this Agreement including this Chapter, and which on the date of entry into force of this
Agreement are either in transit or are in Israel or in a Member State of MERCOSUR in
temporary storage in customs warehouses, subject to the submission to the customs
authorities of the importing country, within six months of the said date, of a Certificate of 
Origin issued retrospectively by the competent governmental authorities of the exporting
country together with the documents showing that the goods have been transported directly in
accordance with the provisions of Article 13 of this Chapter.
Article 18- Issuance of a Duplicate Certificate of Origin
1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a Certificate of Origin, the exporter may apply
to the issuing authority for a duplicate made out on the basis of the export documents in their
possession.
2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with the following word in English:
 'DUPLICATE'
3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in Box No.7 of the duplicate
Certificate of Origin and shall also include the number and the date of issue of the original
Certificate of Origin.
4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original Certificate of Origin, shall
take effect as from that date.
Article 19- Issuance of Certificate of Origin on the Basis of a Proof of Origin Issued or Made
out Previously
1. When originating goods are placed under the control of a customs office in Israel or in a
Member State of MERCOSUR, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by
one or more Certificates of Origin for the purpose of sending all or some of these goods
elsewhere within the Member States of MERCOSUR or Israel. The replacement Certificate(s)
of Origin shall be issued by the competent governmental authority under whose control the
products are placed or another competent governmental authority of the importing country.
2. In the case of MERCOSUR, this Article shall apply only to the Signatory Parties that have
decided on its implementation and that have duly notified the Joint Committee thereof. 
Article 20 - Conditions for Making out an Invoice Declaration
1 An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 15(1)(b) of this Chapter may be made out
by any exporter for any consignment consisting of one or more packages containing
originating products whose total value does not exceed 1,000 USD.
2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any time, at
the request of the competent governmental authorities and/or customs authorities of the
exporting country, all appropriate documents proving the originating status of the products
concerned, as well as the fulfillment of the other requirements of this Chapter.
3. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or printing
on the invoice, the declaration, the text of which appears in Annex III to this Chapter in the
English language. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be written in ink in printed
characters.
4. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in handwriting.
Article 21 - Validity of Proof of Origin
1. A proof of origin shall be valid for six months from the date of issue in the exporting
country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs authorities of the
importing country.
2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country
after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted for the purpose
of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these documents by the final
date set is due to exceptional circumstances.
3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing country
may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted before the said final
date. 
Article 22 - Submission of Proof of Origin
Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in
accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may require
the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that
the products meet the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement.
Article 23 - Importation by Installments
Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs
authorities of the importing country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the
meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System are imported by installments, a
single proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the customs authorities upon
importation of the first installment.
Article 24 - Exemptions from Proof of Origin
1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or forming part of
travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products without requiring the
submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are not imported by way of trade
and have been declared as meeting the requirements of this Chapter and where there is no
doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the case of products sent by post, this
declaration can be made on the customs declaration or on a sheet of paper annexed to that
document.
2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use of the
recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade if it
is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no commercial purpose is in view.
3. In the case of small packages or products forming a part of traveller's personal luggage,
the total value of these products shall not exceed the value stipulated in the national
legislation of the Signatory Party concerned.
4. The competent authorities of Israel and of the Member States of MERCOSUR shall notify
each other of the values mentioned in paragraph 3 no later than the date of the signing of the
Agreement. Thereafter, they shall notify each other of any changes in these values within 60
days thereof.
Article 25- Supporting Documents
1. The documents referred to in Articles 16(5) and 20(2) of this Chapter used for the purpose
of proving that products covered by a Certificate of Origin or an invoice declaration can be
considered as products originating in Israel or in a Member State of MERCOSUR and fulfill
the other requirements of this Chapter may consist inter alia of the following:
(a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain the
goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;
(b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in
Israel or in a Member State of MERCOSUR where these documents are used in
accordance with domestic law;
(c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in Israel or in a Member
State of MERCOSUR, issued or made out in Israel or in MERCOSUR, where these
documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
(d) Certificates of Origin or invoice declarations proving the originating status of
materials used, issued or made out in Israel or in a Member State of MERCOSUR in
accordance with this Chapter; 
(e) appropriate evidence concerning working or processing undergone outside Israel or
a Member State of MERCOSUR by application of Article 12 of this Chapter,
proving that the requirements of that Article have been satisfied.
2. In the case where an operator from a country which is not the exporting country, whether
or not this country is a Signatory Party to this Agreement, issues an invoice covering the
consignment, that fact shall be indicated in Box 7 of the Certificate of Origin and the number
of the invoice shall be indicated in Box 8.
Article 26- Preservation of Proof of Origin and Supporting Documents
1. The exporter applying for the issue of the Certificate of Origin shall keep for at least five
years the documents referred to in Article 16(5) of this Chapter.
2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least five years a copy of
this invoice declaration, as well as the documents referred to in Article 20(2) of this Chapter.
3. The authority in the exporting country that issued a Certificate of Origin shall keep for at
least five years any document relating to the application procedure referred to in Article 16(2)
of this Chapter.
4. The customs authorities or the competent governmental authorities of the importing
country or whomsoever has been designated by them shall keep for at least five years the
Certificates of Origin and the invoice declarations submitted to them.
Article 27- Discrepancies and Formal Errors
1. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof of origin
and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the purpose of carrying
out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto render the proof of origin
null and void if it is duly established that this document does correspond to the products
submitted. 
2. Obvious formal errors on a proof of origin should not cause this document to be rejected if
these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made
in this document.
Article 28- Amounts Expressed in USD
1. For the application of the provisions of Article 20(1) and Article 24(3) of this Chapter in
cases where products are invoiced in a currency other than USD, amounts in the national
currencies of Israel or a Member State of MERCOSUR equivalent to the amounts expressed
in USD shall be fixed annually by each of the countries concerned.
2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 20(1) or Article 24(3) of this
Chapter by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the
amount fixed by the country concerned.
3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in that
currency of the amounts expressed in USD as at the first working day of October. The
amounts shall be communicated to the competent governmental authorities in Israel or to the
Secretariat of MERCOSUR by October 15 and shall apply from January 1 the following year.
The Secretariat of MERCOSUR shall notify all countries concerned of the relevant amounts.
4. A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into its
national currency of an amount expressed in USD. The rounded off amount may not differ
from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5%. A country may retain
unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount expressed in USD if, at the time of
the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3, the conversion of that amount, prior to any
rounding off, results in an increase of less than 15% in the national currency equivalent. The
national currency equivalent may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a
decrease in that equivalent value. 
5. The amounts expressed in USD shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee at the request of
Israel and a Member State of MERCOSUR. When carrying out this review, the Joint
Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits concerned in
real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts expressed in USD.
Article 29- Mutual Assistance
1. The competent governmental authorities of Israel and the Member States of MERCOSUR
shall provide each other, through their respective relevant authorities, with specimen
impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of Certificates of Origin, and
with the addresses of the competent governmental authorities responsible for verifying those
certificates and invoice declarations.
2. Where the competent governmental authorities have authorised a government office or a
representative commercial institution to issue Certificates of Origin in accordance with Article
16(3) of this Chapter, they shall provide the competent governmental authorities of all the
Signatory Parties of the Agreement with the relevant details of the authorized institutions or
governmental bodies, as well as the specimen of stamps used by these bodies in accordance
with paragraph 1.
3. In order to ensure the proper application of this Chapter, Israel and the Member States of
MERCOSUR shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in
checking the authenticity of the Certificates of Origin, the invoice declarations and the
correctness of the information given in these documents.
Article 30-Verification of Proofs of Origin
1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever
the competent governmental authorities and/or customs authorities of the importing country
have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the
products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Chapter. 
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the competent
governmental authorities of the importing country shall return the Certificate of Origin and
the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of these documents, to
the competent governmental authorities of the exporting country giving, where appropriate,
the reasons for the inquiry. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the
information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the
request for verification.
3. The verification shall be carried out by the competent governmental authorities of the
exporting country. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to
carry out any inspection of the exporter's books or any other check considered appropriate.
4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of
preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification,
release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures
judged necessary.
5. The competent governmental authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of
the results of this verification as soon as possible, but not later than 10 months from the date
of the request. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and
whether the products concerned can be considered as products originating in Israel or in a
Member State of MERCOSUR and fulfill the other requirements of this Chapter.
6. If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within ten months of the date of the
verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the
authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the products, the requesting
competent governmental authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse
entitlement to the preferences.
7. This Article shall not preclude the exchange of information or the granting of any other
assistance as provided for in customs cooperation agreements. 
Article 31- Dispute Settlement
Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 30 of this Chapter
which cannot be settled between the competent governmental authorities requesting a
verification and the competent governmental authorities responsible for carrying out the
verification or where a question is raised by one of those competent governmental authorities
as to the interpretation of this Chapter, the matter shall be submitted to the Sub-Committee on
Rules of Origin and Customs Matters, which shall be established by the Joint Committee in
accordance with Chapter IX (Institutional Provisions) of the Agreement. If no solution is
reached, Chapter XI (Dispute Settlement) of this Agreement shall apply.
In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the
importing country shall be under the legislation of the said country.

Article 32-Amendments to the Chapter
The Joint Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this Chapter. 
ANNEX I
Understanding on the Application of Article 13.3
In reference to Article 13.3 of Chapter IV Israel has agreed to the postponement of the
implementation of this provision until such time as the Member States of MERCOSUR have
established the necessary internal procedures for such implementation.
In the case that free circulation of goods within the Member States of MERCOSUR has not
been completed in accordance with CMC Decision 54/04 of MERCOSUR, the Joint
Committee of the Agreement shall determine the appropriate measures to ensure the
implementation of Article 13.3 of Chapter IV
Instructions how to fill out a Certificate of Origin ISRAEL-MERCOSUR
1. General
The Certificate must be clearly printed on an A4 white paper (210 x 297 mm), weighing not
less than 80 g/m2.
Each Signatory Party may decide on the means of obtaining a Certificate of Origin, including
publication on the Internet. The structure of the Certificate of Origin shall be identical to the
one that appears in this Annex, and must comply with the requirements stated in the previous
paragraph. Any alteration or omission shall render the Certificate void.
The Certificate of Origin may be downloaded from the Internet for use of the exporters under
this Agreement.
The Certificate of Origin must be completed, in accordance with these instructions together
with the relevant provisions set forth in the Agreement.
2. Box No.1 - " Exporter"
This box shall bear the details of the exporter, its name and its address in the exporting
country.
3. Box No. 2 - "Certificate Number"
This box is for the use of the issuing authority, which shall fill in the Certificate number.
4. Box No. 3 - "Importer"
This box shall bear the details of the importer of the goods in the country of final destination.
If, for commercial reasons it is not possible to designate the importer, the exporter shall
complete the box with "Unknown". 
5. Box No. 4 - "Country of Origin"
This box shall bear the name of the country where the goods in question have obtained their
originating status.
6. Box No. 5 - "Port of shipment and Transport Details" (Optional)
This box shall indicate the last port of shipment from MERCOSUR or from Israel.
7. Box No. 6 - "Country of Destination"
This box shall bear the name of the country which is the final destination of the goods.
8. Box No. 7 - "Observations"
This box shall bear observations made by the country of exportation, for example, the
mention "DUPLICATE", "ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY" or the mention that the goods
underwent a processing in a third country, as specified in Article 12 of Chapter III.
9. Box No. 8 - "Commercial Invoices"
This box shall bear the number of the invoices that are covered by the Certificate. If, for
commercial reasons it is not possible to designate the number of the invoice, the exporter shall
complete the box with "Unknown".
10. Box No. 9 - "Description of the goods"
This box shall bear a detailed description of all the goods covered by the Certificate.
In the field reserved for the HS Code (6 digits)* - the HS Code shall be filled in at the 6 digit
level. 
In the field reserved for Origin Criteria - the manner in which the goods obtained their
originating status according to the Agreement shall be detailed as follows:
 - "A" for goods that were wholly obtained in the territory of the Signatory Parties,
 as specified in Article 4.
 - "B" for goods that were not wholly obtained, but their non-originating materials were
sufficiently processed and those materials underwent a change of heading (4 digits).
 - "C" for goods that were not wholly obtained, but their non-originating materials were
sufficiently processed and the value of those non-originating materials do not exceed the rates
specified in Article 5 of Chapter III.
In the field reserved for gross weight or other quantity - the gross weight or any other units of
quantity of the goods shall be detailed.
* Lack of correspondence between the HS Code detailed on the Certificate and the actual
classification by the competent authority of the importing country, shall not in itself constitute
a reason for voiding the Certificate.

11. Box No. 10 - "Declaration by the Exporter"
The exporter shall indicate in the proper field whether or not he is the producer.
If the exporter is also the producer of the goods covered by the Certificate, he shall mark the
box "Producer". If not, he shall mark the box "Exporter".
12. Box No. 11 - "Certification"
This box shall bear the details of the certifying authority, and shall be signed and stamped by
that authority. 
ANNEX III
INVOICE DECLARATION ISRAEL-MERCOSUR
The exporter of the products covered by this document declares that these products comply
with the provisions of the Free Trade Agreement between Israel and the Member States of
MERCOSUR, and the products originated in : _________
Date and Signature of the Exporter: __________________ 
CHAPTER V
SAFEGUARDS
Article 1 - Bilateral Safeguard Measures
1. For purposes of this Article and Article 2 of this Chapter:
(a) competent investigating authority means:
(i) in the case of Israel, the Commissioner of Trade Levies, or its successor in the
Ministry of Industry, Trade and Labor or the corresponding unit in the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development.
(ii) in the case of MERCOSUR, Ministerio de Economía y Producción or its
successor in Argentina, Secretaria de Comércio Exterior do Ministério do
Desenvolvimento, Indústria e Comércio Exterior or its successor in Brazil,
Ministerio de Industria y Comercio or its successor in Paraguay, and Asesoría de
Política Comercial del Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas or its successor in
Uruguay ;
(b) domestic industry means the producers as a whole of the like or directly competitive
goods operating in the territory of a Party or Signatory Party or whose collective output of the
like or directly competitive goods constitutes a major proportion of the total production of
such goods;
(c) good originating in the territory of a Party means an “originating good”, as defined in
Chapter IV (Rules of Origin);
(d) interested parties means:
(i) exporter or foreign producer or the importer of goods subject to investigation, or
a trade or business association, a majority of the members of which are producers,
exporters or importers of such goods; 
(ii) the government of the exporting Party; and
(iii) producer of the like or directly competitive goods in the importing Party or a
trade and business association, the members of which produce the like or directly
competitive goods in the territory of the importing Party including an enterprise
established by law which represents the aforementioned producers;
(e) like good means a good which, although not alike in all respects, has like characteristics
and like component materials which enable it to perform the same functions and to be
commercially interchangeable with the good to which it is compared;
(f) serious injury means the significant overall impairment in the position of a domestic
industry;
(g) threat of serious injury means “serious injury” that is clearly imminent, based on facts
and not merely on allegation, conjecture or remote possibility.
2. Subject to Article 2 of this Chapter, if a good originating in the territory of a Party, as a
result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty provided for in this Agreement, is
being imported into the territory of the other Party (hereinafter-preferential imports) in such
increased quantities, in absolute and relative terms, and under such conditions that the imports
of the good from that Party alone constitute a substantial cause of serious injury or threat of
serious injury to a domestic industry , the Party or Signatory Party into whose territory the
goods is being imported may, to the minimum extent necessary to remedy the injury:
(a) suspend the further reduction of any rate of a customs duty provided for under this
Agreement on the goods; or
(b) increase the rate of a customs duty on the goods to a level not exceeding the base
rate of customs duty, as referred to in Chapter III (Trade in Goods). 
3. The Party or Signatory Party that applies a preferential safeguard measure may establish
an import quota for the product concerned under the agreed preference established in this
Agreement. The import quota shall not be less than the average imports of the product
concerned in the thirty-six (36) months previous to the period used for determining the
existence of serious injury.
The period used for determining the existence of serious injury shall not be more than thirtysix (36) months.
In case a quota is not established, the bilateral safeguard measure shall consist only of a
reduction of the preference which shall not be greater than 50% of the tariff preference
established in this Agreement.
4. Bilateral Safeguard measures may not be applied in the first year after the tariff
preferences negotiated under Chapter III (Trade in Goods) of the Agreement come into
force.
Bilateral safeguard measures may not be applied after five years from the date of the
finalization of the tariff elimination or reduction program applicable to the goods unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties. After this period, the Joint Committee shall evaluate whether
or not to continue the bilateral safeguard measures mechanism included in this Chapter.
5. In the investigation to determine whether preferential imports have caused or are threatening
to cause serious injury, the competent investigating authority shall evaluate all relevant factors
of an objective and quantifiable nature having a bearing on the situation of the domestic
industry concerned, particularly the following:
(a) the amount and rate of the increase in preferential imports of the goods concerned in
absolute and relative terms;
(b) the share of the domestic market taken by increased preferential imports;
(c) the price of the preferential imports; 
(d) the consequent impact on the domestic industry of the like or directly competitive
goods, based on factors, including: production, productivity, capacity utilization, profits and
losses, and employment;
(e) other factors other than the preferential imports, which may be causing injury or threat of
injury to the domestic industry.
6. When factors other than increased preferential imports are causing injury to the domestic
industry at the same time, such injury caused by those other factors shall not be attributed to
the increased preferential imports.
7. MERCOSUR may adopt bilateral safeguard measures:
(a) as a sole entity, as far as all requirements to determine the existence of serious injury
or threat thereof is being caused by the imports of goods as a result of the reduction
or elimination of a customs duty provided for in this Agreement, have been fulfilled
on the basis of conditions applied to MERCOSUR as a whole; or
(b) on behalf of one of its Member States, in which case the requirements for the
determination of the existence of serious injury or threat thereof, being caused by the
imports as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty provided for in
this Agreement, shall be based on the conditions prevailing in the affected Member
State of the customs union and the measure shall be limited to that Member State.
8. Israel may apply bilateral safeguard measures to the imports from MERCOSUR or
MERCOSUR Member States where such serious injury or threat thereof is being caused by
the imports of a good as a result of the reduction or elimination of a customs duty provided
for in this Agreement.
9. In critical circumstances where delay may cause damage which would be difficult to
repair, a Party or Signatory Party, after due notification, may take a provisional safeguard
measure pursuant to a preliminary determination that there is clear evidence that increased 
preferential imports have caused or are threatening to cause serious injury. The duration of the
provisional measure shall not exceed two hundred (200) days, during which period the
requirements of this Chapter shall be met. If the final determination concludes that there was
no serious injury or threat thereof to domestic industry caused by preferential imports the
increased tariff or provisional guarantee, if collected or imposed under provisional measures,
shall be promptly refunded according to the domestic regulation of the relevant Signatory
Party.
10. The competent investigating authority may initiate a bilateral safeguard measure
investigation at the request of the domestic industry in the importing Party or Signatory Party
of the like or directly competitive goods in accordance with its internal legislation.
11. The purpose of investigation shall be:
(a) to assess the quantities and conditions under which the goods under investigation
are being imported;
(b) to determine the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury to the
domestic industry in accordance with the provisions this Chapter; and
(c) to determine the causal link between the increased preferential imports of the goods
concerned and the serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry, in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
12. The following conditions and limitations shall apply to a proceeding that may result in
bilateral safeguard measures under paragraph 2:
(a) each Party or Signatory Party shall establish or maintain transparent, effective and
equitable procedures for the impartial and reasonable application of bilateral
safeguard measures;
(b) the Party or Signatory Party initiating such a proceeding shall, within 10 days,
deliver to the other Party written notice thereof including the following information: 
i) the name of the petitioner;
ii) the complete description of the imported goods under investigation, which is
sufficient for customs purposes, and its classification under the Harmonized
System;
iii)the deadline for the request for hearings and the venue where hearings shall be
held;
iv)the deadline for the submission of information, statements and other documents;
v) the address where request or other documents related to the investigation can be
examined;
vi)the name, address and telephone number of the competent investigating authority
which can provide further information; and
vii)a summary of the facts upon which the initiation of the investigation was based,
including data on imports that have allegedly increased in absolute or relative
terms to total production or internal consumption and analysis of the domestic
industry situation.
(c) the Party or Signatory Party applying provisional or final bilateral safeguard
measures shall without delay, deliver to the other Party written notice thereof
including the following:
i) the complete description of the goods subject to the bilateral safeguard measure,
which is sufficient for customs purposes, and its tariff classification under the
Harmonised System;
ii) information and evidence leading to the decision, such as: the increasing or
increased preferential imports, the situation of the domestic industry, the fact that 
the increase in imports is causing or threatening to cause serious injury to the
domestic industry; in the case of provisional measures, the existence of critical
circumstances as specified in paragraph 9 above;
iii) other reasoned findings and conclusions on all relevant issues of fact and law;
iv) description of the measure to be adopted;
v) the date of entry into force of the measure and its duration.
(d) consultations, with a view to finding an appropriate and mutually acceptable
solution, shall take place in the Joint Committee if any Party or Signatory Party so
requests within 10 days from receipt of a notification as specified in paragraph (c).
In case of the absence of a decision or if no satisfactory solution is reached within 30
days of the notification being made the Party or Signatory Party may apply the
measures.
(e) any bilateral safeguard measure shall be taken no later than one (1) year after the
date of initiation of the investigation; no bilateral safeguard measure shall be applied
in case this time frame is not observed by the competent authorities;
(f) no bilateral safeguard measure may be taken by a Party or Signatory Party against
any particular good originating in the territory of the other Party more than two
times or for a cumulative period exceeding two years; for perishable or seasonal
goods no measure may be taken more than four times or for a cumulative period
exceeding four years.
(g) upon termination of the bilateral safeguard measure, the rate of duty or quota shall
be the level which would have been in effect but for the measure;
(h) priority shall be given to such bilateral safeguard measures as will least disturb the
functioning of this Agreement. 
(i) at any stage of the investigation, the notified Party or Signatory Party may request
any additional information that it considers necessary.
(j) if a Party or Signatory Party subjects imports of goods to an administrative
procedure, the purpose of which is the rapid provision of information on the trend
of trade flows, liable to give rise to bilateral safeguard measures, it shall inform the
other Party.
(k) the bilateral safeguard measures taken shall be subject to periodic consultations
within the Joint Committee with a view to their relaxation or abolition when
conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
13. A bilateral safeguard measure does not include any safeguard measure pursuant to a
proceeding instituted prior to the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 2 - Global Emergency Measures
1. Each Signatory Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994,
the WTO Agreement on Safeguards or any other safeguard agreements pursuant thereto
except those regarding exclusion from a measure to the extent that such right or obligation is
inconsistent with this Article. Any Party or Signatory Party taking an emergency measure
under Article XIX, the WTO Agreement on Safeguards or any such agreement shall exclude
imports of goods from the other Party or Signatory Party from the measure unless:
(a) the specific product is not covered by this Agreement; or
(b) imports from the other Signatory Party account for a substantial share of total
imports and contribute importantly to the serious injury or threat thereof caused by
total imports.
“Contribute importantly”- means an important cause, but not necessarily the most
important cause. 
2. In determining whether:
(a) imports from the other Signatory Party account for a substantial share of total
imports, those imports normally shall not be considered to account for a substantial
share of total imports if that Signatory Party is not among the top five suppliers and
does not supply at least 15 percent of the good subject to the proceeding, measured
in terms of import share during the most recent representative period, that shall
normally be three-years. During the first three years after the entry into force of this
Agreement, the import share may be calculated for a period shorter than three years
to the extent not to include the years before the date of entry into force of this
Agreement; and
(b) imports from the other Signatory Party contribute importantly to the serious injury
or threat thereof, the competent investigating authority shall consider such factors as
the change in the import share of the other Signatory Party and the level and change
in the level of imports of the other Signatory Party. In this regard, imports from the
other Signatory Party normally shall not be deemed to contribute importantly to
serious injury or threat thereof, if the growth rate of imports from that Signatory
Party during the period in which the injurious increase in imports occurred is
appreciably lower than the growth rate of total imports from all sources over the
same period.
3. The following conditions and limitations shall apply to a proceeding that may result in
emergency measures under paragraph 1 or 4:
(a) the Party or Signatory Party initiating such a proceeding shall, without delay, deliver
to the other Party written notice thereof;
(b) where, as a result of a measure, the rate of a customs duty is increased, the margin of
preference shall be maintained; 
(c) upon the termination of the measure, the rate of a customs duty or quota shall be the
rate which would have been in effect but for the measure.
(d) the imports from the Signatory Party that have been excluded from the applied
safeguard measure, shall not be included in the calculation of the serious injury
caused to the domestic industry of the Party or Signatory Party who applied such
measure.
4. A Party or Signatory Party taking such measures, from which a good from the other
Signatory Party is initially excluded pursuant to paragraph 1, shall have the right subsequently
to include that good from the other Signatory Party in the measure in the event that the
competent investigating authority determines that an increase in imports of such good from
the other Signatory Party is contributing importantly to the serious injury or threat thereof and
thereby undermines the effectiveness of the measure.
5. A global emergency measure does not include any emergency measure pursuant to a
proceeding instituted prior to the entry into force of this Agreement. 
CHAPTER VI
TECHNICAL REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT
PROCEDURES
Article 1 - Objectives
The Parties and the Signatory Parties shall cooperate in the fields of standardization,
metrology, conformity assessment and product certification, with the aim of eliminating
technical barriers to trade and promoting harmonized international standards in technical
regulations.
Article 2 - General Provisions
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to prevent the technical regulations, standards and
conformity assessment procedures, and metrology, adopted and applied by the Parties and
Signatory Parties from becoming unnecessary technical barriers to mutual trade. In this regard
the Parties and the Signatory Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations in respect of the
WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (WTO/TBT Agreement), and agree on the
provisions established in this Chapter.
1. The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures,
supply of services and government procurement.
2. The definitions of Annex 1 of the WTO/TBT Agreement, of the International Vocabulary
of Basic and General Terms in Metrology – VIM – and the Vocabulary of Legal Metrology
shall apply to this Chapter.
3. The Parties and Signatory Parties agree to comply with the International System of Units
(SI). 
Article 3 - International Standards
The Parties and the Signatory Parties agree to strengthen their national standardization,
technical regulation, conformity assessment and metrology systems, based on relevant
international standards or international standards in imminent completion.

Article 4 - Mutual Recognition Agreements
1. The Parties and Signatory Parties, in order to facilitate trade, may commence negotiations
with a view to the signing of Mutual Recognition Agreements between competent bodies in
the areas of technical regulation, conformity assessment and metrology based on the
WTO/TBT Agreement principles and the international references in each matter.
2. In order to facilitate this process, preliminary negotiations may begin to assess
equivalence between their technical regulations.
3. In the framework of this recognition process, the Parties and Signatory Parties shall
facilitate access to their territories to demonstrate the implementation of their conformity
assessment system.
4. The terms of the Mutual Recognition Agreements of conformity assessment systems and
equivalence of the technical regulations shall be defined in each case by the competent bodies,
which, inter alia, shall establish the conditions and terms of compliance.
5. The Parties and the Signatory Parties shall meet whenever necessary, in order to discuss
ways of enhancing and improving cooperation, with a view to commencing negotiations on
Mutual Recognition Agreements. Each Party shall submit annually a report to the Joint
Committee on the progress of the negotiations on Mutual Recognition Agreements.
Article 5 - International Cooperation
The Parties and the Signatory Parties agree to provide mutual cooperation and technical
assistance through competent international or regional organizations in order to: 
(a) promote the application of this Chapter;
(b) promote the application of the WTO/TBT Agreement;
(c) strengthen their respective metrology, standardization, technical regulation,
conformity assessment bodies as well as their information and notification systems
within the framework of the WTO/TBT Agreement;
(d) strengthen technical confidence between such bodies, mainly with a view to
establishing Mutual Recognition Agreements of interest to the Parties and the
Signatory Parties;
(e) increase participation and seek coordination of common positions at international
organizations on issues related to standardization and conformity assessment;
(f) support the development and application of international standards;
(g) increase the training of the human resources needed for the purposes of this Chapter;
(h) increase the development of joint activities between the technical bodies involved in
the activities covered by this Chapter.
Article 6 -Transparency
The Parties and the Signatory Parties shall favour the adoption of a mechanism to identify and
seek concrete ways to overcome unnecessary technical barriers to trade arising from the
application of technical regulations, standards and conformity assessment procedures.
Article 7 - Dialogue
The Parties and the Signatory Parties agree to promote dialogue between their focal points of
information on technical barriers to trade, in order to meet the needs derived from the
implementation of this Chapter. 
CHAPTER VII
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES
Article 1 - Objective
The objective of this Chapter is to facilitate trade between the Parties in animals and animal
products, plants and plant products, regulated articles or any other product deemed to require
sanitary and phytosanitary measures, included in this Agreement, whilst safeguarding human,
animal and plant health.
This Chapter applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures of a Party or Signatory Party
that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the Parties or the Signatory Parties.
Article 2 - Multilateral Obligations
The Parties or the Signatory Parties reaffirm their rights and obligations under the Agreement
on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the World Trade Organization
(WTO-SPS Agreement).
Article 3 - Transparency
The Parties or Signatory Parties shall exchange the following information:
(a) Any changes in the sanitary and phytosanitary status, including important
epidemiological findings, which may affect the trade between the Parties or the
Signatory Parties;
(b) Results of import checks in case of rejected or non-compliant consignments, within
three working days; 
(c) Results of verification procedures, such as inspections or on site audits within 60-
days, which may be extended for a similar period in case of appropriate justification;
Article 4 - Consultations on Specific Trade Concerns
1. The Parties or Signatory Parties shall create a consultation mechanism to facilitate the
solution of problems arising from the adoption and application of sanitary or phytosanitary
measures, in order to prevent these measures from becoming an unjustified restriction on
trade.
2. The competent official authorities, as defined in Article 5 of this Chapter, shall
implement the mechanism established in paragraph 1, as follows:
(a) The exporting Party or Signatory Party affected by a sanitary or phytosanitary
measure shall inform the importing Party or Signatory Party of its concern through
the form established in Annex I of this Chapter and communicate this to the Joint
Committee.
(b) The importing Party or Signatory Party shall respond to the request, in writing,
before a 60 day term indicating whether the measure:
i) Is in conformity with an international standard, guideline or recommendation
which, in this case, should be identified by the importing Party or Signatory
Party; or
ii) Is based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation. In this case,
the importing Party or Signatory Party shall present the scientific justification
and other information that support those aspects differing from the international
standard, guideline or recommendation; or
iii) Results in a higher level of protection for the importing Party or Signatory Party
than would be achieved by measures based on international standards, guidelines
or recommendations. In this case, the importing Party or Signatory Party shall 
present the scientific justification for such measure, including the description of
the risk/risks to be avoided by it and, if pertinent, the risk assessment on which it
is based; or
iv) In the absence of an international standard, guideline or recommendation, the
importing Party or Signatory Party shall present the scientific justification for
such measure, including the description of the risk/risks to be avoided by it and,
if pertinent, the risk assessment on which it is based.
(c) Additional technical consultations may be held, whenever necessary, to analyze and
suggest courses of action to overcome difficulties, within 60 days.
(d) In case that the mentioned consultations be considered satisfactory by the exporting
Party or Signatory Party, a joint report on the settled solution shall be submitted to
the Joint Committee. If a satisfactory solution is not reached, each Party or Signatory
Party shall submit its own report to the Joint Committee.
Article 5 - Competent Official Authorities
For the purpose of implementing the above Articles of this Chapter, the competent official
authorities are the following:
For MERCOSUR
Argentina
- Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Pesca y Alimentos – SAGPyA (Agriculture,
Livestock, Fisheries and Food Secretariat)
- Servicio Nacional de Sanidad y Calidad Agroalimentaria – SENASA (National Service
for Agrifood Health and Quality)
- Administración Nacional de Alimentos, Medicamentos y Tecnología Médica – ANMAT
(National Administration of Food, Medicines and Medical Technology )
- Instituto Nacional de Alimentos – INAL (National Food Institute) 
Brazil
- Ministério da Agricultura, Pecuária e Abastecimento – MAPA (Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Supply )
- Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária - ANVISA (Brazilian Health Surveillance
Agency)
Paraguay
- Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Sanidad Vegetal y de Semillas – SENAVE (National
Service for Health and Quality Plants and Seeds )
- Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal – SENACSA (National Service of Quality
and Animal Health).
- Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería – MAG (Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock)
- Subsecretaría de Estado de Ganadería - SSEG - (Under Secretariat of Livestock)
Uruguay
- Dirección General de Servicios Agrícolas/MGAP DSSA (General Directorate of Plants
Inspection Services/ Ministry of Livestock , Agriculture and Fisheries)
- Dirección General de Recursos Acuáticos/MGAP – DINARA (General Directorate of
Aquatic Resources/ General Direction of Livestock/Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and
Fisheries)
- Dirección General de Servicios Ganaderos/MGAP - DSSG (General Directorate of
Livestock/Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries)
- Dirección Nacional de Salud/MSP (National Health Office/Ministry of Health)
For Israel

- Plant Protection and Inspection Services – PPIS, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development
- Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
ANNEX I
FORM FOR CONSULTATIONS ON SPECIFIC TRADE CONCERNS REGARDING
SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES

Measure consulted:____________________
Country applying the measure: _______________________________
Institution responsible for the application of the measure: ___________
WTO Notification Number (if applicable): _________________________
Country consulting: _________________________________________
Date of consultation: ______________________________________________
Institution responsible for consultation: __________________________
Name of the Division: ______________________________________________
Name of the Responsible Officer: ___________________________________
Title of the Responsible Officer: ____________________________________
Telephone, fax, e-mail and postal address: ___________________________
Product(s) affected by the measure: ___________________________________
Tariff subheading(s): ____________________________________
Description of product (s) (specify): ____________________________ 
Does an international standard exist? YES________ NO________
If one exists, list the specific international standard(s), guideline(s) or
recommendation(s):_________________________________
Objective or justification for the consultation: _________________________ 
CHAPTER VIII
TECHNICAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL COOPERATION
Article 1 - Objectives
Having regard to Article 7 of the Framework Agreement signed by the Parties on December 8,
2005, the Parties reaffirm the importance of technological and technical cooperation as means
to contribute to the implementation of this Agreement.
Article 2 - Technological Cooperation
1. The Parties shall establish a technological cooperation mechanism in order to develop
their industrial sectors and infrastructure, in particular in the fields of agricultural and agroindustrial activities, banking, engineering and construction, chemistry, fine chemistry,
fertilizers, pharmacy (especially active principles), automation and robotics, irrigation, alloys
and super alloys, avionics, microelectronics, telecommunication, health, medical equipment,
education, security equipment systems and other fields. The technological cooperation may be
comprised of technology transfer and joint projects for the development of new technologies
as well as other initiatives.
2. With this aim, the Joint Committee shall, no later than six months after the entry into force
of this Agreement, define priority sectors for technological cooperation, and request the
Parties' respective relevant authorities to identify specific projects and to establish
mechanisms for their implementation.
Article 3 - Technical Cooperation
1. The Parties shall establish a technical cooperation mechanism in order to develop their
technical capabilities in specific sectors, with particular attention to smaller economies which
are Signatory Parties to this Agreement, and SME's (Small and Medium Enterprises),
including: 
- organization and holding of fairs, exhibitions, conferences, advertising, consultancy and
other business services;
- development of contacts between business entities, manufacturers associations, chambers
of commerce and other business associations of both Contracting Parties;
- training of technicians.
2. With this aim, the Joint Committee shall, no later than six months after the entry into force
of this Agreement, define priority sectors for technical cooperation and request the Parties'
respective relevant authorities to identify specific projects and to establish mechanisms for
their implementation.
Article 4 - Bilateral Instruments
The activities undertaken under this Chapter shall not affect the cooperation initiatives based
on bilateral instruments between any two of the Signatory Parties. 
CHAPTER IX
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 1 - The Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established, in which each Party shall be represented.
2. The Joint Committee shall be responsible for the administration of the Agreement and
shall ensure its proper implementation.
3. For this purpose the Parties shall exchange information and, at the request of any Party,
shall hold consultations within the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep under
review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade between the MERCOSUR
Member States and Israel.
Article 2 - Procedures of the Joint Committee
1. The Joint Committee shall meet at an appropriate level whenever necessary at least once a
year. Special meetings shall also be convened at the request of either party.
2. The Joint Committee shall be chaired alternately by the two Parties.
3. The Joint Committee shall take decisions. These decisions shall be taken by consensus.
The Joint Committee may also make recommendations to matters related to this Agreement.
4. In the case of a decision taken by the Joint Committee which is subject to the fulfillment
of internal legal requirements of either of the Parties or Signatory Parties, this decision shall
enter into force, if no later date is contained therein, on the date of the receipt of the latter
diplomatic note confirming that all internal procedures have been fulfilled. 
5. The Joint Committee shall establish its own rules of procedure.
6. The Joint Committee may decide to set up sub-committees and working groups as it
considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks. 
CHAPTER X
PUBLICATION AND NOTIFICATION
Article 1 - Contact Points
Each Party shall designate a contact point to facilitate communications between the Parties on
any matter covered by this Agreement. On the request of the other Party, the contact point
shall identify the office or official responsible for the matter and assist, as necessary, in
facilitating communication with the requesting Party.
Article 2 - Publication
Each Party or Signatory Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and
administrative rulings of general application respecting any matter covered by this Agreement
are promptly published.
Article 3 - Notification and Provision of Information
1. To the maximum extent possible, each Party shall notify the other Party of any actual
measure that the Party considers might materially affect the operation of this Agreement or
otherwise substantially affect that other Party's interests under this Agreement. This obligation
will be considered accomplished in the cases where the Parties or Signatory Parties already
follow the procedures of notification and provision of information established under the WTO
Agreements.
2. MERCOSUR shall promptly inform Israel on any relevant internal decisions or legal
instruments, upon their entry into force, relating to the further consolidation of the customs
union of MERCOSUR. 
3. On request of the other Party, a Party shall promptly provide information and respond to
questions pertaining to any actual measure, whether or not that other Party has been
previously notified of that measure.
Any notification or information provided under this Article shall be without prejudice as to
whether the measure is consistent with this Agreement. 
CHAPTER XI
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Article 1 - Objective and Parties to a Dispute
1. The objective of this Chapter is to settle disputes between the Parties or between Israel
and one or more Signatory Parties with a view to reaching mutually acceptable solutions.
2. The Parties to a dispute - hereinafter in this Chapter the “parties”- may be either the
Parties or Israel and one or more of the other Signatory Parties.
Article 2 – Scope
Disputes arising from the interpretation, application, fulfillment or non fulfillment of the
provisions contained in the Free Trade Agreement signed between MERCOSUR and the State
of Israel, hereinafter the “Agreement”, and from Joint Committee decisions taken pursuant to
this Agreement shall be ruled by the disputes settlement procedure established under this
Chapter, except as otherwise provided in the Agreement.
Article 3 - Direct Negotiations
1. Whenever a dispute is between Israel and one or more Signatory Parties of MERCOSUR,
the parties involved shall attempt to settle the disputes referred to in Article 2 of this Chapter
through direct negotiations aimed at a mutually satisfactory solution.
If the dispute is between Israel and one Signatory Party of MERCOSUR, negotiations shall be
carried out by the National Coordinator of the Common Market Group of that Signatory
Party. If the dispute is among Israel and more than one Signatory Parties of MERCOSUR,
negotiations shall be carried out by the National Co-ordinator of the Common Market Group
appointed by those Signatory Parties. 
In the case of Israel, direct negotiations shall be carried out by the Ministry of Industry, Trade
and Labor.
2. In order to initiate the procedure any of the parties shall make a written request to the
other party for direct negotiations to be held and shall give the reasons for the request,
including identification of the measures at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the
complaint.
3. The party receiving the request for direct negotiations shall reply within ten (10) days of
receiving it.
4. The parties shall exchange the information needed to facilitate direct negotiations and
shall treat such information as confidential.
5. These negotiations shall not extend for more than thirty (30) days, as from the date of
receipt of the written request to start them, unless the parties agree to extend that period.
6. The direct negotiations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the
parties in the consultations held within the Joint Committee in accordance with Article 4 of
this Chapter and the proceedings of the Arbitration Tribunal conducted in accordance with
this Chapter.
Article 4 - Consultations within the Joint Committee
1. Whenever a dispute is between Israel and MERCOSUR as a Contracting Party,
consultations shall be carried out within the Joint Committee, by means of a written request of
any party to the other party. 
2. In the case of disputes between Israel and Signatory Parties of MERCOSUR which have
not reached a mutually satisfactory solution within the term established in the fifth paragraph
of Article 3 of this Chapter or if the dispute has been settled only partially, the party that
initiated a procedure of Direct Negotiations under the second paragraph of Article 3 of this
Chapter may request consultations to be held within the Joint Committee, by means of a
written request to the other party.
3. In the case of MERCOSUR, if the dispute is between Israel and MERCOSUR as a
Contracting Party, consultations shall be carried out by the National Coordinator of the
Common Market Group who is acting as Pro Tempore President at that moment.
If the dispute is between Israel and a Signatory Party of MERCOSUR, consultations shall be
carried out by the National Co-ordinator of the Common Market Group of that Signatory
Party. If the dispute is among Israel and more than one Signatory States Party of
MERCOSUR, consultations shall be carried out by the National Coordinator of the Common
Market Group appointed by those Signatory Parties.
In the case of Israel, consultations shall be carried out by the Ministry of Industry, Trade and
Labor.
4. This written request shall include the reasons for the request, including identification of
the measures at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint.
5. Consultations shall be held within the Joint Committee within thirty (30) days of
submission of the request to all Signatory Parties and take place, unless the parties agree
otherwise, on the territory of the party complained against. The consultations shall be deemed
concluded within thirty (30) days of the date of the consultation request, unless both parties
agree to continue consultations.
Consultations on matters of urgency, including those regarding perishable goods and seasonal
goods shall commence within fifteen (15) days of the date of submission of the request. 
6. The Joint Committee, by consensus, may deal jointly with two or more procedures related
to the cases it hears, only when due to their nature or possible thematic link, it considers their
joint examination convenient.
7. The Joint Committee shall evaluate the dispute and allow the parties an opportunity to
inform it of their position and, if necessary, to give additional information in order to reach a
mutually satisfactory solution.
The Joint Committee shall make any recommendations it deems fit within thirty (30) days as
from the date of the first meeting.
8. The Joint Committee may seek the opinion of experts if it deems necessary to make its
recommendations.
9. If consultations are not held within the timeframe laid down in paragraph 5, or no
agreement has been reached on a mutually acceptable solution, the stage provided for in this
Article shall immediately be considered ended and the complaining party may then directly
request the establishment of an Arbitration Tribunal in accordance with Article 7 of this
Chapter.
10. The consultations shall be confidential and without prejudice to the rights of the parties in
the proceedings of the Arbitration Tribunal conducted in accordance with this Chapter.
Article 5 - Mediation
1. If consultations fail to produce a mutually acceptable solution, the parties may, by mutual
agreement, seek recourse to the services of a mediator appointed by the Joint Committee. Any
request for mediation must be made in writing and state the measure which has been the
subject of consultations, in addition to the mutually agreed terms of reference for the
mediation. 
2. The Chairperson of the Joint Committee shall appoint within ten (10) days of receipt of
the request a mediator selected by lot from the persons included in the list referred to in
Article 8 of this Chapter who is not a national of either of the parties. The mediator will
convene a meeting with the parties no later than thirty (30) days after being appointed. The
mediator shall receive the submissions of both parties no later than fifteen (15) days before
the meeting and issue an opinion no later than forty-five (45) days after having been
appointed. The mediator’s opinion may include a recommendation on steps to resolve the
dispute that is consistent with the Agreement. The mediator’s opinion will be non-binding.
3. Deliberations and all information including documents submitted to the mediator shall be
kept confidential and shall not be brought for the Arbitration Tribunal proceedings conducted
in accordance with this chapter, unless the parties agree otherwise.
4. The time limits referred to in paragraph 2 may be amended, should circumstances so
demand, with the agreement of both parties. Any amendment must be notified in writing to
the mediator.
5. In the event that mediation produces a mutually acceptable solution to the dispute, both
parties must submit a notification in writing to the mediator.
Article 6 - Choice of Forum
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 2 of this Chapter, any disputes arising from the
provisions in this Agreement, on issues regulated by the Marrakech Agreement establishing
the World Trade Organization (hereinafter “WTO Agreement”), or the agreements negotiated
in accordance with it, may be settled in either forum, at the complaining party's choice.
2. Once a dispute settlement procedure has started in accordance with this Agreement, or in
accordance with the WTO Agreement, the forum chosen shall exclude the other forum. 
3. For the purposes of this Article:
(a) dispute settlement procedures shall be considered to have been initiated in accordance
with the WTO Agreement when the complaining party requests the establishment of a
panel under Article 6 of the WTO Understanding on Rules and Procedures governing
the Settlement of Disputes,
(b) whenever a dispute is between Israel and MERCOSUR as a Contracting Party, the
initiation of dispute settlement proceedings under this Agreement shall follow
consultations within the Joint Committee under Article 4 thereof,
(c) whenever a dispute is between Israel and one or more Signatory Parties of
MERCOSUR, dispute settlement proceedings under this Agreement are deemed to be
initiated once a party has requested the establishment of a Tribunal under Article 7 (1)
of this Chapter following direct negotiations held under Article 3 of this Chapter and
following consultations, if held, within the Joint Committee under Article 4 of this
Chapter.
Article 7 - Arbitration Procedure
1. If the dispute cannot be settled by the procedures provided for in Articles 3 and 4 of this
Chapter or where the parties have had recourse to mediation as provided for in Article 5 of
this Chapter and no mutually acceptable solution has been notified within fifteen (15) days of
the mediator issuing his or her opinion, or if a party fails to comply with the mutually agreed
solution, the complaining party may submit a request in writing to the other party for the
establishment of an Arbitration Tribunal.
2. The complaining party shall state in its request for the establishment of an Arbitration
Tribunal the reasons for the request, including identification of the measures at issue and an
indication of the legal basis for the complaint. The request to establish the Arbitration
Tribunal, the initial submission and counter submission shall form the terms of reference of
the Arbitration Tribunal, unless otherwise agreed by the parties. 
3. The parties acknowledge as binding, ipso facto and with no need for a special agreement,
the jurisdiction of the Arbitration Tribunal set up in each case to hear and solve the disputes
referred to in this Chapter.
Article 8 - Appointment of Arbitrators
1. Within thirty (30) days as of the entry into force of the Agreement, each Contracting Party
shall prepare a list of national arbitrators and a list of non-national arbitrators. Both
Contracting Parties should agree with the list of appointed non-national arbitrators.
Each of the States parties to MERCOSUR will appoint five (5) possible arbitrators for the list
of national arbitrators, and two (2) for the list of non national arbitrators.
Israel will appoint a cumulative and proportionate number of possible national and nonnational arbitrators to the lists as appointed by the States parties to MERCOSUR.
2. The list of arbitrators and its successive modifications shall be informed to all Signatory
Parties and to the Joint Committee.
3. The arbitrators in the list referred to in the previous paragraph shall have specialized
knowledge or experience of law and/or international trade. The chairperson shall be a jurist
with knowledge and experience of law and/or international trade.
4. As of the notification of a party of its intention to resort to the Arbitration Tribunal as
provided for in Article 6 of this Chapter, it may not modify the lists referred to in the first
paragraph of this Article.
Article 9 - Composition of the Arbitration Tribunal
1. The Arbitration Tribunal, to which the proceedings shall be submitted, shall be formed by
three (3) arbitrators as follows:
(a) Within fifteen (15) days following notification to the other party as referred to in
Article 7 of this Chapter, each party shall appoint an arbitrator chosen among the 
persons that such party has proposed for the list of national arbitrators mentioned in
Article 8 of this Chapter.
(b) Within the same term, the parties shall mutually appoint a third arbitrator from the
list of non national arbitrators referred to in Article 8 of this Chapter, who shall chair
the Arbitration Tribunal.
(c) If the appointments referred to in paragraph a) are not made within the term
provided for, they shall be made by means of a draw held by the Chairperson of the
Joint Committee in the presence of representatives of the parties, at the request of
any of the parties, among the arbitrators appointed by the parties and included in the
list referred to in Article 8 of this Chapter. This procedure shall take no more than
five (5) days.
(d) If the appointment referred to in paragraph b) is not made within the term provided
for, it shall be made by means of a draw held by the Chairperson of the Joint
Committee in the presence of representatives of the parties, at the request of any of
the parties, among the non-national arbitrators appointed by the Signatory Parties
and included in the list referred to in Article 8 of this Chapter. This procedure shall
take no more than five (5) days.
2. If in any case during the proceedings covered by this Chapter, an arbitrator or the
chairperson is unable to participate, withdraws or is replaced pursuant to paragraph 4, an
alternate shall be selected within five (5) days in accordance with the selection procedures
followed to appoint the original arbitrator as specified in paragraph 1(a) or chairperson as
specified in paragraph 1(b). All time periods regarding the Arbitration Tribunal’s proceedings
shall be suspended for the period taken to carry out this procedure.
3. The appointments provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 must be notified to the parties.
(a) Where a party considers that an arbitrator does not comply with the requirements of
Annex I (Code of Conduct) and Article 10 of this Chapter, it shall send a written
notice to the other party providing a proper explanation for its objection, based on 
clear evidence that the arbitrator is in violation of Annex I (Code of Conduct) and
Article 10 of this Chapter. The parties shall consult and come to a conclusion within
seven (7) days.
(b) If the parties agree that there exists evident proof of such a violation they shall
replace the arbitrator or chairperson and select a replacement in accordance with
paragraph1 above.
(c) If the parties fail to agree on the need to replace an arbitrator or chairperson, a
replacement shall be selected by draw from the lists referred to in Article 8 of this
Chapter. In the case of disputes between Israel and Signatory Parties of
MERCOSUR, the draw shall apply only to the lists of national arbitrators of the
Signatory Parties involved in the disputes. The selection of the new arbitrator shall
be done by the Chairperson of the Joint Committee in the presence of representatives
of the parties, unless otherwise agreed between the parties. This procedure shall
apply and take no more than seven (7) days.
4. In the event that an arbitrator is unable to continue participating in any of the proceedings
pursuant to this Chapter an alternate that was selected according to paragraph 2 shall take his
place and continue in his stead. In this event, time periods shall remain unchanged, unless
otherwise agreed by the parties.
Article 10- Independence of the Arbitrators
The members of the Arbitration Tribunal shall be independent and impartial, shall maintain
confidentiality of the proceedings, serve in their individual capacities, neither be affiliated
with, nor take instructions from, any trade organization or Government. The parties shall
refrain from giving them instructions and exercising any influence on them regarding the
issues submitted to the Arbitration Tribunal. 
After accepting their appointment and before beginning their work, the arbitrators shall sign
an undertaking (attached to Annex I of this Chapter) to be submitted to the Joint Committee
upon their acceptance of their appointment.
Article 11- Rules of Procedure
1. The Arbitration Tribunal shall for each case establish its seat in the territory of party
complained against, unless the parties agree otherwise.
2. Arbitration Tribunals shall apply the Rules of Procedure which include the rights to
hearings and the exchange of written submissions as well as deadlines and time tables for
ensuring expediency, as set out in Annex II to this Chapter for conducting the Arbitration
Tribunal proceedings. The Rules of Procedure shall be modified or amended subject to the
agreement of the parties hereto.
3. The deliberation of the Arbitration Tribunals and all information including documents
submitted to it shall be kept confidential.
Article 12 - Information and Technical Advice
1. Only under special circumstances may the Arbitration Tribunal seek the opinion of
experts or information from any relevant source. Before the Arbitration Tribunal seeks such
information or advice it shall inform the parties and provide them with duly justified reasons
for doing so. Any information obtained in this manner must be disclosed to both parties. The
expert’s opinion shall be non-binding.
2. The Arbitration Tribunal shall set a reasonable time limit for the submission of the report
of the expert, no longer than sixty (60) days, unless extended by mutual agreement of the
parties. 
3. When a request is made for a written report of an expert, any time-limit applicable to the
Arbitration Tribunal proceedings shall be suspended for a period beginning on the date of the
report being requested by the Arbitration Tribunal and ending on the date the report is
delivered to it.
Article 13- Information to the Tribunal
The parties shall inform the Arbitration Tribunal of the steps taken prior to the arbitration
procedure and shall submit the factual and legal grounds on which their respective positions
are based. Other discussions including proposals shall remain strictly confidential, unless
agreed otherwise by the parties.
Article 14 - Applicable Law
The Arbitration Tribunal shall apply the provisions of the Agreement and Joint Committee
decisions taken pursuant to this Agreement in accordance with the applicable principles of
international law.
Article 15 - Interpretation
The provisions of the Agreement and Joint Committee decisions taken pursuant to this
Agreement shall be interpreted in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public
international law.
Article 16 - Arbitration Award
1. The Arbitration Tribunal shall base its decisions and award on the written submissions of
the parties, expert reports, information obtained under Article 12.1 of this Chapter and
hearings held, including evidence and information received from the parties.
2. The Arbitration Tribunal shall render its written award within ninety (90) days as from the
date of its establishment, which shall be official fifteen (15) days after the acceptance by the
last arbitrator. Where it considers that this deadline cannot be met, the chairperson of the
Arbitration Tribunal shall notify in writing stating the reasons for the delay. Under no
circumstances should the award be issued later than one hundred and twenty (120) days
following the establishment of the Arbitration Tribunal.
3. It is desirable that the Arbitration Tribunal takes its decisions by consensus. Where,
nevertheless, a decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided
by a majority vote. In such case the Arbitration Tribunal shall not include in its report the
dissenting opinion and shall keep such opinion and the votes confidential.
4. In cases of urgency, including those involving perishable goods, the Arbitration Tribunal
shall make every effort to issue its award within thirty (30) days of the establishment of the
Arbitration Tribunal. Under no circumstance should it take longer than sixty (60) days from
the establishment of the Arbitration Tribunal. The Arbitration Tribunal shall give a
preliminary ruling within ten (10) days of its establishment on whether it deems the case to be
urgent.
5. The Arbitration award is unappealable, final and binding on the parties as from receipt of
the respective notification. Decisions of the Arbitration Tribunal are unappealable and binding
on the parties.
Article 17 - Suspension of Proceedings
The Arbitration Tribunal may, at the request of both parties, suspend its work at any time for a
period not exceeding twelve (12) months. Once the period of twelve (12) months has been
exceeded, the authority for the establishment of the Arbitration Tribunal will lapse, without
prejudice to the right of the complaining party to request at a later stage the establishment of
an Arbitration Tribunal on the same measure. 
Article 18- Request for Clarification
Any of the parties may request, within fifteen (15) days as from the notification date of the
award, its clarification of the award. The Arbitration Tribunal shall resolve on the request for
clarification within fifteen (15) days as from its filing.
Clarifications shall be given by the Arbitration Tribunal rendering the award.
Should the Arbitration Tribunal consider that circumstances so require, it may postpone the
enforcement of the award until it resolves the request submitted.
Article 19- Compliance with the Award
1. The party complained against shall take the measures necessary to comply with the award
of the Arbitration Tribunal. In the case the Arbitral award does not have a term for
compliance it must be understood that the term is for one hundred eighty (180) days.
2. The award of the Arbitration Tribunal shall include the period of time for compliance of
the award. That period of time shall be final unless one of the parties justifies in written the
need for a different period of time. The Arbitration Tribunal shall render its decision within a
period of 15 days from the date of the written request.
In case it is essential, the Arbitration Tribunal shall decide on the basis of written submissions
of the parties. The Arbitration Tribunal shall convene for this purpose only under special
circumstances.
3. Before the end of the period of the time established in the award for the implementation of
the award, the party complained against shall notify the other party of the implementing
measures in compliance with the award that it has adopted or intends to adopt in order to
comply with the award of the Arbitration Tribunal. 
4. In the event that there is disagreement between the parties concerning the compatibility of
the measure adopted in compliance with the award, the complaining party may seek recourse
to the original Arbitration Tribunal to rule on the matter, by submitting a written request to
the other party explaining why the measure is incompatible with the award. The Arbitration
Tribunal will issue its decision within forty-five (45) days of the date of its re-establishment.
5. In the event of the original Arbitration Tribunal, or some of its members, being unable to
reconvene, the procedures laid down in Article 9 of this Chapter shall apply; however, the
period for issuing the ruling remains forty-five (45) days from the date of establishment of the
Arbitration Tribunal.
6. If the Arbitration Tribunal decides under paragraph 4 that the implementing measures
adopted are not in compliance with the Arbitration award, the complaining party shall be
entitled, upon notification to suspend the application of benefits granted under this Agreement
at a level equivalent to the adverse economic impact caused by the measure found to violate
this Agreement.
7. The suspension of benefits shall be temporary and shall be applied only until the measure
found to be in violation of this Agreement is withdrawn or amended so as to bring it into
conformity with this Agreement, or until the parties have agreed to settle the dispute.
8. If the party complained against considers that the level of suspension is not equivalent to
the adverse economic impact caused by the measure found to violate this Agreement, it may
make a written request within thirty (30) days from the date of suspension for the reconvening
of the original Arbitration Tribunal. The Joint Committee and the parties shall be informed of
the Arbitration Tribunal's decision on the level of the suspension of benefits within thirty (30)
days of the date of the request for its establishment. 
9. The party complained against shall submit a notification of the implementing measures it
has adopted to comply with the decision of the Arbitration Tribunal and of its request to end
the suspension of benefits applied by the complaining party.
The party complained against shall reply to any request from the complaining party for
consultations on the implementing measures notified within ten (10) days of receipt of the
request.
If the parties do not reach an agreement on the compatibility of the notified implementing
measures with this Agreement within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request for
consultations, the complaining party may request that the original Arbitration Tribunal decide
on the matter within sixty (60) days of the notification of the implementing measures. The
decision shall be issued within forty-five (45) days of the written request for its reestablishment. If the Arbitration Tribunal decides that the implementing measure is not in
conformity with this Agreement, it will determine whether the complaining party can resume
the suspension of benefits at the same or a different level.
 Article 20 - Expenses
1. The expenses of the Arbitration Tribunal shall be borne in equal parts by the parties to the
dispute.
2. The expenses of the Arbitration Tribunal include:
i) the fees of the Chair and the other arbitrators, as well as the costs of tickets,
transport and allowances, whose reference values will be established by the
Joint Committee,
ii) travel and other expenses of the experts required by the Arbitration Tribunal
pursuant to Article 12 of this Chapter whose reference values will be established
by the Joint Committee,
iii) notifications and other expenses customarily incurred by the routine functioning
of the Arbitration Tribunal. 
3. All other expenses incurred by a party shall be borne by that party.
Article 21- Notifications
Notwithstanding the provisions stipulated in this Chapter, all documents, notifications and
requests of all types referred to throughout this Chapter shall be sent to the parties, and
simultaneously transmitted to the Joint Committee and copied to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Israel, and to the Pro Tempore Presidency of MERCOSUR, and to the National
Coordinators of the Common Market Group. All aforesaid documents shall also be submitted
to each of the arbitrators from the time of the establishment of the Arbitration Tribunal.
Article 22 - Time-limits
Any time limit referred to in this Chapter may be extended by mutual agreement of the
parties.
Article 23- Confidentiality
All documentation, decisions and proceedings linked to the procedure established in this
Chapter, as well as the sessions of the Arbitration Tribunal, shall be confidential, except for
the awards of the Arbitration Tribunal. Nevertheless, the award will not include any
confidential information submitted by the parties to the Arbitration Tribunal which any of
them deem confidential.
Article 24 - Withdrawal
At any time before the Arbitration award is transmitted to the parties, the complaining party
may withdraw its complaint by written notification to the other party or the parties may reach
a settlement.
In both cases the dispute shall be terminated.
Such notification shall be copied to the Joint Committee and Arbitration Tribunal, as
appropriate. 
Article 25 - Language
1. In the case of Israel, all its notifications, written and oral submissions, may be made in
English or in Hebrew with their translations into English.
2. In the case of MERCOSUR, all its notifications, written and oral submissions, may be
made in Spanish or Portuguese with their respective translations into English.
3. Awards, decisions and notifications of the Arbitration Tribunal shall be in English.
4. Each party shall arrange and bear the costs of translation of its oral submissions into
English. 
ANNEX I
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR ARBITRATORS OF ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL
Definitions
1. In this Code of Conduct:
(a) arbitrator means a member of an Arbitration Tribunal effectively established under
Article 7 of this Chapter;
(b) assistant means a person who, under the terms of appointment of an arbitrator,
conducts, researches or provides assistance to the arbitrator;
(c) proceeding, means an arbitration panel proceeding under Chapter XI of this
Agreement;
(d) staff, in respect of an arbitrator, means persons under the direction and control of the
arbitrator, other than assistants;
(e) Chapter means Chapter XI of the Agreement titled Dispute Settlement.
Commitment to the Process
2. The arbitrators shall abide by the terms of the Chapter, the rules set out in this Code of
Conduct and the rules of procedure.
3. The arbitrators shall be independent and impartial, shall avoid direct or indirect conflicts
of interest and shall respect the confidentiality of the proceedings established in the Chapter,
so as to preserve the integrity and impartiality of the dispute settlement mechanism. 
Disclosure Obligations
4. To ensure the observance of this Code each arbitrator, prior to the acceptance of his/her
selection, shall disclose the existence of any interest, relationship or matter that he/she could
reasonably be expected to know and that is likely to affect or could raise justifiable doubt as
to the arbitrator´s independence or impartiality, including public statements of personal
opinion on issues relevant to the dispute and any professional relationship with any person or
organization with interest in the case.
5. The disclosure obligation is a continuing duty which requires an arbitrator to disclose any
such interests, relationships or matters that may arise during any stage of the proceeding. The
arbitrator shall disclose such interests, relationships or matters by informing the Joint
Committee, in writing, for consideration by the parties.
Duties of Arbitrators
6. Upon selection an arbitrator shall perform his/her duties thoroughly and expeditiously
throughout the course of the proceeding, and with fairness and diligence.
7. An arbitrator shall consider only those issues raised in the proceeding and necessary for a
ruling and shall not delegate this duty to any other person.
8. An arbitrator shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that his or her assistant and staff are
aware of, and comply with, paragraphs 18 and 19 of this Code of Conduct.
9. A arbitrator shall not engage in “ex parte” contacts concerning the proceeding.
Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators
10. As stated in Article 10 of the Chapter the arbitrator shall exercise his/her position without
accepting or seeking instructions from any international, governmental or non-governmental
organization or any private source, and shall not have intervened in any previous stage of the
dispute assigned to him/her. 
11. An arbitrator must be independent and impartial and shall not be influenced by selfinterest, political considerations or public opinion.
12. An arbitrator shall not, directly or indirectly, incur any obligation or accept any benefit
that would in any way interferes with, or which could give rise to justifiable doubts as to, the
proper performance of his/her duties.
13. An arbitrator may not use his/ her position on the Arbitration Tribunal to advance any
personal or private interests.
14. An arbitrator may not allow financial, business, professional, family or social
relationships or responsibilities to influence his or her conduct or judgment.
15. An arbitrator must avoid entering into any relationship or acquiring any financial interest
that is likely to affect his or her impartiality.
Obligations of Former Arbitrators
16. All former arbitrators must avoid any kind of derived advantage from the decision or
award of the Arbitration Tribunal.
Confidentiality
17. No arbitrator or former arbitrator shall at any time disclose or use any non-public
information concerning a proceeding or acquired during a proceeding except for the purposes
of that proceeding and shall not, in any case, disclose or use any such information to gain
personal advantage or advantage for others or to adversely affect the interest of others.
18. An arbitrator shall not disclose an arbitration award prior to its publication in accordance
with Article 16 of the Chapter. 
19. An arbitrator or former arbitrator shall not at any time disclose the deliberations of an
arbitration panel, or any arbitrator's view.
Undertaking
20. In accordance with Article 10 of the Chapter, the Chairperson of the Joint Committee will
contact the arbitrators immediately after their designation, presenting the following
undertaking which shall be signed and submitted to the Joint Committee upon their
acceptance of their appointment:
UNDERTAKING
By the means of this Undertaking I accept the appointment to hereby act as a arbitrator/
assistant in accordance with Article 10 of Chapter XI and the Code of Conduct of the Chapter
on Dispute Settlement of the Free Trade Agreement between MERCOSUR and the State of
Israel. I declare not to have any interest in the dispute or any other reason that could be an
impediment to my continuing duty to serve on the Arbitration Tribunal established with the
purpose of solving this dispute between the parties.
I undertake to act independently, impartially and with integrity and, to avoid direct and
indirect conflicts of interests and to not accept suggestions or impositions of third parties, as
well as not to receive remuneration related to this performance except that comprised in the
Chapter of Dispute Settlement of this Agreement.
I undertake to disclose herewith and in the future any information likely to affect my
independence and impartiality, or which could give rise to justifiable doubts as to the integrity
and impartiality of this dispute settlement mechanism.
I undertake to respect my obligations regarding the confidentiality of the dispute settlement
proceedings, as well as the content of my vote. 
Moreover, I accept the possibility of being required to serve after the rendering of the Award,
in accordance with Articles 18 and 19 of the Chapter of Dispute Settlement of this
Agreement.
ANNEX II
RULES OF PROCEDURE
FOR ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL PROCEEDINGS
Definitions
1. In these rules:
(a) adviser means a person retained by a party to advise or assist that party in connection
with the Arbitration Tribunal proceeding;
(b) complaining party means any party, as defined in Article 1 of the Chapter, that
requests the establishment of an Arbitration Tribunal under Article 7 of the Chapter;
(c) Chapter means Chapter XI of the Agreement titled Dispute Settlement.
(d) party complained against means the party against whom a dispute is brought arising
from the alleged non fulfillment of the provisions of the Agreement or the Joint
Committee decisions taken pursuant to the Agreement;
(e) Arbitration Tribunal means a Tribunal established under Article 7 of the Chapter;
(f) representative of a party means an employee or any person appointed by a government
department or agency or any other public entity of a party;
(g) day means a calendar day. 
Notifications
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 21 of the Chapter:
(a) The parties and the Arbitration Tribunal shall transmit any request, notice, written
submission or other document by delivery against receipt, registered post, courier,
facsimile transmission, telex, telegram or any other means of telecommunication that
provides a record of the sending thereof. A copy of the documents shall also be
provided in electronic format.
(b) The documents submitted by the parties shall be signed by the duly authorized
representatives of the party in order to be considered officially submitted to the
Arbitration Tribunal.
(c) Minor errors of a clerical nature in any request, notice, written submission or other
document related to the arbitration panel proceeding may be corrected by delivery of a
new document clearly indicating the changes.
3. Notifications, documents and requests of all types shall be deemed to be received, on the
date upon which the electronic version of them is received.
(a) In the case of MERCOSUR, if the dispute is between Israel and MERCOSUR as a
Contracting Party, notifications, documents and requests of all types shall be sent to
the National Coordinator of the Common Market Group who is acting as a Pro
Tempore President at that moment.
(b) If the dispute is among Israel and more than one Signatory Parties of MERCOSUR,
notifications, documents and requests of all types shall be sent to the National
Coordinator of the Common Market Group appointed by those Signatory Parties.
4. The terms referred to in the Chapter are stated in calendar days and shall be counted as
from the day after the act or fact to which it refers to. When the term begins or is due on a
Friday, a Saturday or Sunday, it shall begin or become due on the following Monday. 
5. If the last day for delivery of a document falls on an official holiday of the Parties the
document may be delivered on the next business day. The Parties shall exchange a list of
dates of their official holidays on the first Monday of every December, for the following year.
No documents, notifications and requests of all types shall be sent or deemed received on
official holidays.
Record of the Meetings of the Tribunal
6. The Arbitration Tribunal shall record minutes of the meetings held during each
proceeding, which shall be kept in the files of the dispute.
Commencing the Arbitration
7. Unless the parties agree otherwise, the Arbitration Tribunal within seven (7) days of its
establishment shall contact the parties in order to determine such matters that the parties or
the Arbitration Tribunal deem appropriate.
Initial Submissions
8. The complaining party shall deliver its initial written submission to the other party and to
each of the arbitrators, no later than fifteen (15) days after the date of establishment of the
Arbitration Tribunal.
This submission shall:
(a) designate a duly authorized representative;
(b) inform the service address, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses to which
communications arising in the course of the proceeding shall be sent;
(c) a summary of the relevant facts and circumstances;
(d) indicate the relevant provisions of the Agreement and the legal basis of the complaint; 
(e) state clearly the party’s claim; including identification of the measures at issue and an
indication of the legal basis for the complaint; a request for an award addressing the
issue of fulfillment /non-fulfillment of the provisions of the Agreement or Joint
Committee decisions taken pursuant to the Agreement;
(f) include supporting evidence, including expert or technical opinion, and specify any
other evidence which cannot be produced at the time of the submission, but will be
presented to the Arbitration Tribunal before or during the first hearing;
(g) be dated and signed.
9. The party complained against shall deliver its written counter-submission to the other
party and to each of the arbitrators, no later than twenty (20) days after the date of delivery of
the initial written submission.
This submission shall:
(a) designate a duly authorized representative;
(b) inform the service address, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses to which
communications arising in the course of the proceeding shall be sent;
(c) state the facts and arguments upon which its defense is based;
(d) include supporting evidence and specify any other evidence, including expert or
technical opinion, which cannot be produced at the time of the submission, but will
be presented to the Arbitration Tribunal during or before the first hearing.
(e) be dated and signed. 
Work of Arbitration Tribunal
10. The chairperson of the Arbitration Tribunal shall preside at all its meetings.
11. Unless provided otherwise in these rules, the Arbitration Tribunal may conduct its
activities by any means, including telephone, facsimile transmissions, computer links or
video-conference.
12. Only arbitrators may take part in the deliberations of the Arbitration Tribunal but the
Arbitration Tribunal may permit their assistants to be present at its deliberations.
13. The drafting of the award or any decision shall remain the exclusive responsibility of the
Arbitration Tribunal.
14. If a procedural question arises that is not covered by these rules, the Arbitration Tribunal,
after consulting the parties, may adopt the appropriate procedure.
15. Notwithstanding Article 11.2 of the Chapter, when the Arbitration Tribunal considers,
after consulting the parties, that there is a need for modifying any time-limit or any other
procedure, it shall propose a new procedure or timeframe to the parties by means of a written
notification. Any modification of procedure or of time-limits shall be mutually agreed
between the parties.
Hearings
16. The party complained against shall be in charge of the logistical administration of the
hearings, particularly the venue, the assistance of interpreters and other staff necessary, unless
otherwise agreed.
17. The chairperson shall fix the date and time of the hearing in consultation with the parties
and the other members of the Arbitration Tribunal, and confirm this in writing to the parties,
no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
18. Unless the parties agree otherwise, the hearing shall be held in a place to be decided upon
by the party complained against.
19. The Arbitration Tribunal may convene additional hearings if the parties so agree.
20. All arbitrators shall be present at hearings.
21. The following persons may attend the hearing:
(a) representatives of the parties;
(b) advisers to the parties;
(c) administrative staff, interpreters and translators;
(d) arbitrators’ assistants.
Only the representatives and advisors of the parties may address the Arbitration Tribunal.
22. No later than five (5) days before the date of a hearing, each party shall deliver a list of
the names of persons who will make oral arguments or presentations at the hearing on behalf
of that party and of other representatives or advisers who will be attending the hearing.
23. The Arbitration Tribunal shall conduct the hearing in the following manner, ensuring that
the complaining party and the party complained against are afforded equal time:
Argument
a) argument of the complaining party
b) argument of the party complained against
Rebuttal Argument
a) rebuttal argument of the complaining party
b) rebuttal argument of the party complained against 
24. The Arbitration Tribunal may direct questions to either party at any time during the
hearing.
25. The Arbitration Tribunal shall arrange for a transcript of each hearing to be prepared and
delivered as soon as possible to the parties.
26. Each party may deliver a supplementary written submission concerning any matter that
arose during the hearing within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing.
Evidence
27. Parties shall submit all evidence to the Tribunal no later than during the course of the first
hearing provided for in paragraph 17 other than evidence necessary for purposes of rebuttals
and answers to questions. Exceptions to this procedure will be granted upon a showing of
good cause. In such cases, the other party shall be accorded a period of time for comment on
the newly submitted evidence, as the Tribunal deems appropriate.
28. All the evidence submitted by the parties shall be kept in the files of the dispute.
29. In case the parties so request, the Arbitration Tribunal shall hear witnesses or experts, in
the presence of the parties, during the hearings.
Questions in Writing
30. The Arbitration Tribunal may at any time during the proceedings address questions in
writing to the parties involved in the dispute and set a time-limit for submission of the
responses. The parties shall receive a copy of any question put by the Tribunal.
31. A party shall also provide a copy of its written response to the Arbitration Tribunal’s
questions to the other parties. Each party shall be given the opportunity to provide written
comments on the other party’s reply within seven (7) days of the date of receipt. 
32. Whenever a party fails to submit in due time its initial written submission, is absent from
a scheduled hearing or in any other way breaches the procedures without good and sufficient
cause, the Tribunal shall, upon assessment of the aforesaid circumstances decide on its effect
on the future course of the proceedings.
Arbitration Decisions and Award
33. The Arbitration decision and award must contain the following details, in addition to any
other elements which the Arbitration Tribunal may consider appropriate:
(a) The parties to the dispute;
(b) The name and nationality of each of the members of the Arbitration Tribunal and
the date of its establishment;
(c) The names of the representatives of the parties;
(d) The measures subject of the dispute;
(e) A report on the development of the arbitration procedure, including a summary of
the arguments of each of the parties;
(f) The decision reached concerning the dispute indicating its factual and legal grounds;
(g) The period of time for compliance with the award, when appropriate;
(h) The share of the expenses in accordance with Article 21 of the Chapter; 
(i) The date and place of the issue;
(j) The signature of all the members of the Arbitration Tribunal.
“Ex parte” Contacts
34. The Arbitration Tribunal shall not meet or contact a party in the absence of the other
parties.
35. No arbitrator may discuss any aspect of the subject matter of the proceedings with one
party or other parties in the absence of the other arbitrators.
Urgent Cases
36. In cases of urgency referred to in Article 16.4 of the Chapter, the Arbitration Tribunal
shall, after consulting the parties, modify the time-limits referred to in these rules as
appropriate and shall notify the parties of any such adjustments. 
CHAPTER XII
EXCEPTIONS
Article 1 -General Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent any Signatory Party from taking actions and adopting
measures consistent with Articles XX and XXI of the GATT 1994 including measures
affecting re-exports to non-parties or re-imports from non-parties.
Article 2- Taxation
1. Except as set out in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation
measures.
2. Notwithstanding Paragraph 1, the obligation of national treatment as defined in Article 1
of Chapter II (General Provisions) shall apply to internal taxation measures to the same extent
as does Article III of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994.
3. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of any Party or Signatory
Party under any tax convention to which they are a party. In the event of any inconsistency
between this Agreement and that convention, that convention shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.
Article 3- Limitations on Imports
The limitation on the importation of non- kosher meat in Israel shall not be considered as a
measure in violation of this Agreement. 
CHAPTER XIII
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 1- Evolutionary Clause
Where a Party considers that it would be useful in the interests of the economies of the Parties
to develop and deepen the relations established by the Agreement by extending them to fields
not covered thereby, it shall submit a reasoned request to the Joint Committee. The Joint
Committee shall examine such a request and, where appropriate, make recommendations by
consensus, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
Article 2- Protocols and Annexes
Protocols and Annexes to this Agreement are an integral part of it. The Joint Committee is
authorised to amend the Protocols and Annexes, by a Joint Committee decision.
Article 3- Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement other than those referred to in Article 2 of this Chapter, which
are decided upon by the Joint Committee, shall be submitted to the Signatory Parties for
ratification and shall enter into force after confirming that all internal legal procedures
required by each Signatory Party for their entry into force have been completed.
Article 4 – Application of the Agreement
The Agreement shall apply to the territories where the customs laws of the Signatory Parties
are applied, as well as to free-trade zones.
Article 5- Entry into Force
Until all Signatory Parties have completed their ratification processes, this Agreement shall
enter into force, bilaterally, 30 days after the Depositary has informed the reception of the two 
first instruments of ratification, provided that Israel is among the Signatory Parties that have
deposited the instrument of ratification.
Concerning the other Signatory Parties, this Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after the
Depositary has notified the reception of each of the instruments of ratification.
Article 6-Depositary
The Government of the Republic of Paraguay shall act as Depositary of this Agreement and
shall notify all Parties that have signed or acceeded to this Agreement of the deposit of any
instrument of ratification, acceptance or accession, the entry into force of this Agreement, of
its expiry or of any withdrawal therefrom.
Article 7 -Accession
1. Upon a decision to accede to the Agreement, any State that becomes a party to
MERCOSUR after the date of signature of this Agreement shall deposit the instruments of
accession with the Depositary.
2. The Agreement shall enter into force for the new MERCOSUR Party thirty (30) days after
the deposit of its instrument of accession.
3. The terms and conditions of the Agreement shall apply to the same extent and in
accordance with the levels of concessions and preferences in force on the date of the entry
into force of its accession.
4. With regard to paragraph (1), the Joint Committee shall hold consultations in order to
consider relevant developments in light of further consolidation of the customs union of
MERCOSUR. 
Article 8- Withdrawal
1. This Agreement shall be valid indefinitely.
2. Each Party may withdraw from this Agreement by means of a written notification to the
Depositary. The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the date on which the
notification through diplomatic channels is received by the Depositary unless a different
period is agreed by the Parties.
3. If Israel withdraws from the Agreement, it shall expire at the end of the notice period, and
if all Member States of MERCOSUR withdraw it shall expire at the end of the latest notice
period.
4. In case any of the Member States of MERCOSUR withdraws from MERCOSUR, it shall
notify the Depositary through diplomatic channels. The Depositary shall notify all Parties of
the deposit. The present Agreement will no longer be valid for that Member State of
MERCOSUR. The withdrawal shall take effect six months after the date on which the
notification of its withdrawal from MERCOSUR is received by the Depositary (unless a
different period is agreed by the Parties).
Article 9- Authentic Texts
Done in two copies in the Hebrew, English , Spanish and Portuguese languages, each version
being equally authentic. In case of differences of interpretation, the English text shall prevail.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective
Governments, have signed this Agreement. 
Done at Montevideo, on the 9th day of Tevet of 5768, which corresponds to the 18th day of
December of 2007.
FOR THE STATE OF ISRAEL FOR THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
FOR THE FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC
 OF BRAZIL


FOR THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
FOR THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC
 OF URUGUAY 
ANNEX I
ON MUTUAL ASSISTANCE IN CUSTOMS MATTERS
Article 1 - Definitions
For the purposes of the present Annex:
1. “Customs laws” shall mean such laws and regulations in force in the customs territories of
the Signatory Parties, concerning the importation, exportation, and transit of goods, as they
relate, inter alia, to customs duties, charges and other taxes or to prohibitions, restrictions and
other controls in respect of the movement of goods across national boundaries.
2. “Customs Authorities” shall mean, in the State of Israel, the Customs Directorate of the
Israel Tax Authority of the Ministry of Finance, and in the Member States of MERCOSUR,
as follows: Argentine Republic, Dirección Nacional de Aduanas, the Federative Republic of
Brazil, Secretaria da Receita Federal do Brasil do Ministerio da Fazenda, the Republic of
Paraguay, Dirección General de Aduanas and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, Dirección
Nacional de Aduanas_.
3. Offense shall mean any violation or infraction of the customs laws, as well as any
attempted violation or infraction thereof.
4. Requesting Customs Authority shall mean the Customs Authority that makes a request for
assistance under this Annex or that receives such assistance on a Customs Authority's own
initiative.
5. Requested Customs Authority shall mean the Customs Authority that receives a request
for assistance under this Annex or that provides such assistance on its own initiative.
6. Information shall mean, inter alia, reports, records, documents and documentation,
whether or not computerized or in any other electronic format, as well as certified copies
thereof. 
7. Controlled delivery shall mean the technique of allowing illicit consignments which
contain or are suspected of containing, narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, or substances
substituted for them, or other goods as agreed upon by the Customs Authorities, to pass out
of, through, or into the customs territories of one or more of the Signatory Parties, with the
knowledge and under the supervision of the competent authorities, with a view to
investigating offenses and identifying persons involved in the commission thereof.
8. Person shall mean a natural person or a legal entity.
9. Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances mean the substances listed in the Schedules to
the Single Convention of the United Nations relating to Narcotic Drugs of 30 March 1961 and
the Convention of the United Nations on Psychotropic Substances of 21 February 1971, as
well as chemical substances listed in the Annex to the Convention of the United Nations
Against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances of 20 December 1988.
Article 2 - Scope
1. The Signatory Parties shall provide each other assistance in order to ensure the proper
application of the customs laws, including prohibitions, restrictions or other controls, the
accurate assessment of customs duties and taxes on the importation and exportation of goods
and the correct determination of the classification, value and origin of such goods.
2. The Signatory Parties shall also assist each other in the prevention, investigation,
combating and prosecution of offenses.
3. Assistance under this Annex shall be provided by the Customs Authorities of the
Signatory Parties.
4. Assistance under this Annex shall be provided in accordance with the domestic law of the
requested Signatory Party. 
5. The provisions of this Annex are intended solely to provide for mutual assistance in
customs matters between the Signatory Parties. They shall in no way give rise to a right on
the part of any private person or legal entity to obtain, suppress or exclude any evidence, or to
impede the execution of a request.
6. Assistance pursuant to this Annex shall not include the arrest or detention of persons nor
the collection or forced collection of customs duties, other taxes, fines, or other monies.
Article 3 - Special Instances of Assistance
1. Upon request and in accordance with the domestic law of the requested Signatory Party,
the Customs Authorities shall inform each other whether goods exported from or imported
into the customs territory of one Signatory Party have been lawfully imported into or exported
from the customs territory of the other Signatory Party. This information shall, upon request,
contain the customs procedure used for clearing the goods.
2. To the extent of its competence and in accordance with the domestic law of the requested
Signatory Party, the requested Customs Authority, either upon request or on its own initiative
and subject to the subsequent written approval of the requesting Customs Authority, shall
exercise special surveillance over:
(a) means of transportation suspected of being used in the commission of offenses in the
customs territory of the requesting Signatory Party;
(b) goods designated by the requesting Customs Authority as being the subject of an
extensive illegal trade destined for the customs territory of the requesting Signatory
Party;
(c) particular persons known to be or suspected of being engaged in the commission of an
offense in the customs territory of the requesting Signatory Party. 
(d) particular places where stocks of goods have been built up, giving reason to assume
that they are to be used for illegal importation into the customs territory of the
requesting Signatory Party.
3. The Customs Authorities of the Signatory Parties shall, in accordance with the domestic
law of the requested Signatory Party, furnish any necessary information likely to be of use to
the requesting Customs Authority, regarding acts related to offenses that have been committed
or are expected to be committed within the customs territory of the requesting Signatory
Party. In cases which could involve narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances or which
could cause substantial damage to the economy, public health, security or any other vital
interest of the requesting Signatory Party, such information shall be supplied, whenever
possible, without being requested.
Article 4 - Professional and Technical Cooperation and Assistance
1. The Customs Authorities of the Signatory Parties, on their own initiative or upon request,
shall provide each other with information regarding:
(a) enforcement actions that might be useful in preventing offenses and, in particular,
special means of combating offenses;
(b) new methods used in committing offenses;
(c) observations and findings resulting from the successful application of new
enforcement aids and techniques;
(d) techniques and improved control procedures for passengers and cargo; and
(e) information on their respective customs laws. 
2. The Signatory Parties, through their respective Customs Authorities, shall seek to
cooperate in, inter alia:
(a) initiating, developing or improving specific training programs for their personnel;
(b) establishing and maintaining channels of communication between their Customs
Authorities to facilitate the secure and rapid exchange of information;
(c) facilitating effective coordination between their Customs Authorities including the
exchange of personnel, experts and the posting of liaison officers;
(d) the consideration and testing of new equipment and procedures;
(e) the simplification and harmonization of their respective customs procedures; and
(f) any other general administrative matters that may, from time to time, require their
joint action.
Article 5 - Communication of Requests
1. Requests pursuant to the present Annex shall be made in writing. Documents that may be
of help in the execution of such requests shall, when available, accompany them. When
required, because of the urgency of the situation, oral requests may also be accepted, but they
shall be promptly confirmed in writing.
2. Requests pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall include the following information:
(a) the authority making a request;
(b) the nature of the proceedings;
(c) the assistance sought, the object of and the reason for the request; 
(d) the names and addresses of the parties involved in the request, if known;
(e) a brief description of the matter under consideration and the legal elements involved;
and
(f) the connection between the assistance sought and the matter to which it relates.
3. All requests shall be submitted in the English language.
4. If a request does not meet the formal requirements as per paragraph 2, its correction or
completion may be requested. The ordering of precautionary measures need not be
affected thereby.
5. Assistance shall be carried out by direct communication between the respective Customs
Authorities.
Article 6 -Execution of Requests
1. The requested Customs Authority shall take all reasonable measures to execute a request
within a reasonable amount of time and, if necessary, shall initiate any official measure
necessary for the carrying out thereof
2. If the requested Customs Authority does not have the information requested, it shall take
any necessary measures to obtain such information. If necessary, the requested Customs
Authority may be assisted by another competent authority of the requested Signatory
Party in providing the assistance. However, answers to requests shall be conveyed solely
by the requested Customs Authority.
3. In cases where the requested Customs Authority is not the competent authority to comply
with a request, it shall either promptly transmit the request to the competent authority,
which shall act upon the request according to its powers under the domestic law of the
requested Signatory Party, or advise the requesting Customs Authority of the appropriate
procedure to be followed regarding such a request. 
4. All Subject to the domestic law of the requested Signatory Party,the Customs Authority
of a Signatory Party shall, upon the request of the Customs Authority of another Signatory
Party, conduct any necessary investigation, including the questioning of experts and
witnesses or persons suspected of having committed an offense, and undertake
verifications, inspections and fact-finding inquiries in connection with the matters referred
to in this Annex. The results of such investigations, verifications, inspections and factfinding inquiries shall be communicated as soon as possible to the requesting Customs
Authority.
5. a) Upon request, and under any terms and conditions it may set, the requested Customs
Authority may allow officials of the requesting Customs Authority to be present in the
territory of the requested Signatory Party, when its officials are investigating offenses
which are of concern to the latter, including allowing their presence at investigations
 b) The presence of officials of the requesting Customs Authority in the territory of the
requested Signatory Party shall be solely in an advisory capacity. Nothing in sub-paragraph
a), above shall be construed to allow them to exercise any legal or investigative power granted
to customs officials of the requested Customs Authority under the domestic law of the
requested Signatory Party.
6. When officials of the requesting Customs Authority are present in the territory of the
requested Signatory Party pursuant to this Annex, they may not carry weapons and must
be able, at all times, to furnish proof of their identity and shall be responsible for any
offenses they might commit.
7. Officials of the requesting Customs Authority, authorized to investigate offenses against
customs laws, may ask that officials of the requested Customs Authority examine any
relevant information, including books, registers and other documents or data-media, and
supply copies thereof or provide any other information relating to the offense.
8. The requesting Customs Authority shall, if it so requests, be advised of the time and place of
the action to be taken in response to a request so that such action may be coordinated 
Article 7 - Files, Documents and Witnesses
1. The Customs Authorities of the Signatory Parties shall, upon request and in accordance
with the domestic law of the requested Signatory Party, provide information relating to the
transportation and shipment of goods showing the value, origin, disposition and
destination of those goods.
2. Upon specific written request, copies of information and other materials provided
pursuant to this Annex shall be appropriately authenticated. Originals of such information
and other materials shall only be requested in cases wherein copies would be insufficient.
3. The provision of the originals of information and other materials pursuant to this Annex
shall not affect the rights of the requested Customs Authority nor of third parties thereto.
Such originals shall be returned as soon as possible. Upon request, originals necessary for
adjudicative or similar purposes shall be returned without delay.
4. The requested Customs Authority shall supply, together with the information provided, all
necessary instructions for its interpretation or utilization.
5. Upon request of the Customs Authority of one Signatory Party, the Customs Authority of
another Signatory Party shall authorize its officials, if such officials so consent, to appear
as witnesses in judicial or administrative proceedings in the territory of the requesting
Signatory Party, and to produce such files, documents, or other materials, or authenticated
copies thereof, as may be considered essential for the proceedings.
Such a request shall include the date and type of the proceeding, the names of the parties
involved, and the capacity in which the official is to appear.
Article 8 - Service of Documents
Upon request, the requested Customs Authority shall notify a person, residing or established
in the territory of the requested Signatory Party, in accordance with its domestic law and
administrative provisions, of any formal decision falling within the scope of this Annex
concerning that person, taken by the requesting Customs Authority. 
Article 9 - Controlled Delivery
1. The Customs Authorities shall take the necessary measures, within their capacity and in
accordance with the domestic law of the relevant Signatory Parties, including, whenever
necessary, the approval of and coordination with the relevant competent authorities, to allow
for the appropriate use of controlled delivery at the international level for the purpose of
identifying persons involved in the illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances or in other goods, as the case may be, and taking legal action against them.
2. Decisions to use controlled delivery shall be made on a case-by-case basis and, where
necessary, in accordance with any arrangements or agreements which may have been reached
concerning a particular case. The Customs Authorities may, if necessary, and provided it is in
conformity with the domestic law of the relevant Signatory Parties, take into account financial
arrangements and understandings reached.
3. Illicit consignments whose controlled delivery is agreed to may, by mutual consent of the
competent authorities, be intercepted and allowed to continue with the narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, or other goods, as the case may be, intact or removed or replaced in
whole or in part.
Article 10 - Exemptions from Assistance
1. In cases where the requested Signatory Party is of the opinion that the provision of
assistance under this Annex would infringe upon its sovereignty, security, public policy, or
any other substantive national interest, or involve the violation of a commercial, industrial, or
professional secret, assistance may be refused or compliance may be conditioned upon the
satisfaction of certain conditions or requirements.
2. In the event that a request is refused or cannot be complied with in full or in part, the
requesting Customs Authority shall be promptly notified of the fact and informed of the
reasons thereof. 
3. If the requesting Customs Authority requests assistance which it, itself, would not be able
to provide, it shall draw attention to that fact in the request. Compliance with such a request
shall then be within the discretion of the requested Customs Authority.
4. Assistance may be postponed by the requested Customs Authority on the ground that it
will interfere with an ongoing investigation, prosecution or proceeding. In such a case, the
requested Customs Authority shall consult with requesting Customs Authority to determine if
assistance can be given subject to such terms or conditions as the requested Customs
Authority may require.
Article 11 - Confidentiality
1. Information and other communications received pursuant to this Annex may be used only
for the purposes specified therein, except if the requested Customs Authority has given its
written consent for such use.
2. Any information or other communications received by the Customs Authority of a
Signatory Party, pursuant to this Annex, shall be treated as confidential and shall not be
communicated to any person or entity outside the requesting Customs Authority that received
them, except as provided for in this Annex.
3. Information and other communications received pursuant to this Annex may be used in
investigations and in judicial and administrative proceedings.
4. The provisions of Paragraph 2 shall not apply to cases concerning offenses relating to
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Such information may be communicated to other
authorities in the requesting Signatory Party directly involved in combating illicit drug traffic.
In addition, information on offenses relating to the public health, public security or
environmental protection of the Signatory Party whose Customs Authority received the
information may be conveyed to the competent governmental authorities which deal with
such matters. 
Such information shall be treated as confidential and shall enjoy any and all protection
afforded to similar information under the laws of confidentiality and secrecy as provided for
in the domestic law of the Signatory Party whose Customs Authority received them.
5. The requesting Customs Authority shall not use evidence or information obtained under
this Annex for purposes other than those stated in the request without the prior written
consent of the requested Customs Authority.
Article 12 - Costs
1. The Customs Authorities of the Signatory Parties shall normally waive all claims for the
reimbursement of costs incurred in the execution of this Annex, with the exception of
expenses for witnesses, fees of experts and the cost of interpreters other than government
employees.
2. If expenses of a substantial and extraordinary nature are, or will, be required to execute a
request, the Customs Authorities of the Signatory Parties shall consult to determine the terms
and conditions under which the request will be carried out, as well as the manner in which the
costs shall be borne.
Article 13 - Implementation
1. The Customs Authorities shall be responsible for the implementation of this Annex. They
shall, inter alia;
(a) communicate directly for the purpose of dealing with matters arising out of this
Annex;
(b) after consultation, if necessary, issue any administrative directives or agreed upon
procedures for the implementation of this Annex; 
(c) endeavor by mutual accord to resolve any problems or doubts arising from the
application of this Annex or any other customs matter which may arise between them;
(d) agree to meet, if one of them so requests, in order to discuss the application of this
Annex or to discuss any other customs matters arising out of the relationship between
them; and
(e) arrange for their investigation departments to be in direct contact with one another.
2. This Annex shall not prejudice the application of any bilateral Agreements on mutual
assistance in customs matters concluded or that may be concluded between the State of Israel
and a Member State of MERCOSUR; nor shall it prejudice the granting of assistance under
any other international agreements concerning assistance in customs matters to which both
sides are parties. 
ANNEX II
JOINT DECLARATION BETWEEN ARGENTINA AND ISRAEL RELATING TO
CHAPTER III (TRADE IN GOODS) OF THE FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN MERCOSUR AND THE STATE OF ISRAEL
1. Argentina shall start negotiations with Israel on the liberalization of Chapters 29 and 38 of
the Harmonized System no later than 2 years from the entry into force of the above mentioned
Agreement between Argentina and Israel.
2. In case Argentina grants concessions in Chapters 29 and 38 of the Harmonized System to
any country outside the Latin America region after the signature of this Joint Declaration,
similar concessions (reduction levels, scope and time tables) shall be granted automatically to
Israel.
3. For this purpose the Joint Committee shall meet as soon as possible to finalize the
inclusion of those concessions under the above mentioned Agreement. 