TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDA
AND THE KINGDOM OF MOROCO
- Introduction :
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of
the Kingdom of Morocco, here in after referred to as the contracting parties :
- -Being desirous to consolidate the bonds of brotherhood and friendship
existing between the two brotherly countries, and
- -Being keen to deepen and expand the fields of economic integration
between both countries, as set up towards the Arab economic integration, have
agreed as follows :
Chapter One General Provisions
Article One This Agreement aims at the following :
A- Develop the economic relations between both countries through he expansion and
diversification of their trade exchanges on the basis of equality and mutual
benefits.
B- Provide similar competitive circumstances trade economic dealers of both
countries.
C- Participate in the decampment and expansion of riter-Arab trade and international
trade, by eliminating the obstacles from the way of their trade exchanges.
Article Two
Both contracting parties shall endeavor to develop and consolidate their trade
exchanges, in accordance with the requirements of this agreement, with our
regard to the laws and regulations in force in both countries, taking in
consideration their obligations within the framework of :
* The agreements of commercial nature concluded between the states of the Arab
Maghreb union.
* The General Agreement on Tasiffs & Trade (GATT).
Chapter Two
Rules Pertaining to the Exchange of Commodities
Article Three
- Both contracting parties shall exempt partly or wholly, the commodities of local
origin and source, which are exchanged directly between themselves, and which
are stated in the lists to be agreed upon by the contracting parties, from customs
duties, with the exception of the taxes of similar effect.
- Customs duties are intended to mean the duteis shown in customs tafiffs of both
parties.
- Taxes of similar effect are intended to mean the other dues and taxes imposed by
either party on the imported commodities, but to which the products of the party
state itself are not subject, regardless of the name of such dues or taxes whenever
they occur.
Article Four
The commodities exchanged between both countries shall be accorded the same
treatment of the national commodities with respect to the internal taxes imposed
in the importing country on similar local products.
Article Five
The base of the tax dues on the added value or sales tax or similar taxes imposed
in both countries on the products imported within the framework of the lists
referred to above, shall be determined without taking in account the customs
duties from which the commodities exchanged between both contracting parties
are exepted, in conformity with the requirements of Article three above.
Article Six
The commodities exchanged between both countries, which are stated in the lists
to be agreed upon by the contracting parties, shall be liberated from non-customs
restraints applied at the time of import provided that the list of such restraints
shall be specified in a schedule to be agreed upon by the contracting parties.
However, any restraint which is not included in such schedule, shall be
considered as void and null.
Article Seven
The commodities which are not included in the lists referred to in Articles three
and six of this Agreement, shall be subject to the laws and regulations in force in 
the field of foreign trade, and to the taxes and fees applied at the time of import in
both countries.
Article Eight
The commercial transactions performed within the framework of this agreement,
shall be sattled in transferable currencies, in conformity, with the exchange
regulations valid in both countries.
Article Nine
The procedures for preventing or restraining the import or export, relating to the
maintenance of morals, security, public order, health of the individuals,
protection of plants, animals and national historical, archeological and artistic
heritage of both parties, shall be excepted from the provisions of this Agreement.
Chapter Three
Rules of Origin
Article Ten For the purposes of this Agreement, the following shall be considered to be
of local origin :
- The materials wholly produced by both contracting parties, including agricultural,
animal-based and fish products, live animals and natural resources which were
not subjected to any industrial convesion.
- The industrial products in which the ratio of the added value resulting from their
manufacturing in the country of either party is not less than 40% of the final
value of the finished commodity (value ex-factory). This ratis, however, shall be
applied to the commodities manufactured within the scope of the joint enterprises
set up between both countries.
Article Eleven
- The products of local origin which are exported from the country of either party
to the country of the other party, shall be accompanied by a certificate of origin
issued and attested by the competent authorities of both countries.
Chapter Four
Precautionary Measures
Article Twelve
Each contracting party shall undertake to present anything which may constitute 
activities for dumping the market of the other party, and shall refrain from
providing support to the commodity exported to the said party.
Shen the exercise of dumping or support of the commodities exported by either
party is confirmed, the prejudiced party may impose temporarily and exceptional
charge against the dumping, or compensation for the support of export (as stated
in Article thirteen).
Article Thirteen
A Before starting the application of the precautionary measures referred to in
Article twelve, both contracting parties shall to in Article twelve, both contracting
parties shall undertake to consult together.
B In the cases referred to in Article Twelve, the prejudiced party shall, prior to
taking the precautionary measures, notify the other party thereof and shall
provide it with all the useful information for the purpose of consultation, in order
to find out appropriate solutions acceptable to both parties. But, If the party
which caused the prejudice does not put a limit for such practices within three
months from the date of its notification, then the prejudiced party may take the
precautionary measures which it sees necessary for eliminating the prejudice.
However, precautionary measures of minimum prejudice to the implementation
of this Agreement shall be resorted to. The precautionary measures which are
taken, shall be notified immediately to the other party. Their extent and period,
however, shall be restricted to the elimination of the prejudice which necessitated
these application, and they should not exceed the level of such prejudice. The
precautionary measures shall be the subject of consultations dewing the meeting
of the technical committee referred to in Article fourteen, which shall be held
upon the request of either party for the purpose of alleviating their security or
their change or cancellation as early as possible.
C Where exceptional circumstances impose immediate interference and cannot
tolerate any delay, the prejudiced party may, in the cases provided for in Article
twelve and after contacting the other party, take the urgent precautionary
measures for eliminating the prejudice.
Chapter Five
Commercial Cooperation
Article Fourteen
For the situation of the good performance of this Agreement and of facilitating
the flow of goods smoothly between both countries, or joint trade committee shall
be formed under the chairmanship of the two competent ministers of both 
countries, and shall meet alternately in Rabat and Amman. A technical committee
shall boremed under the chairmanship of the secretary general for the two
relevant ministries or their designee, and shall beet every six months alternately
in Rabat and Amman, or at the request of either party. The said committee,
however, shall present its resolutions and recommendations to the joint trade
committee,and shall be entrusted with the following :
- Follow up the implementation of the requirements of this Agreement.
- Suggest the appropriate means and methods for strengthening the commercial
relations between both countries.
- Resolve the differences arising from the setting of the precautionary measures
referred to in Chapter Four of this Agreement.
- Any other matters which are desired to be discussed by either or both parties.
Article Fifteen
- Both contracting parties shall encourage reciprocal participation in the
international exhibitions and markets held in their two countries.
- Each party shall allow the other party to hold permanent or temporary
exhibitions, and each of them shall grant the other all the facilities required for
the exhibitions and commercial centers, in conformity with this Agreement and
with the laws and regulations in force in both countries.
Article Sixteen
For the purpose of consolidating the commercial relations, the contracting parties
shall encourage the exchange of visits by commercial and economic delegations
between themselves from both of the public and private sectors, and shall
intensify the contacts between the economic dealers of both countries.
Chapter Six
Final Provisions
Article Seventeen
This agreement shall come into force temporarily on its signing date, and
permanently after the exchange of the documents of its attestation, in conformity
with the constitutional procedures applicable in both countries. This agreement
shall be effective for a period of three years, and shall be renewal automatically
for a similar period, unless either contracting party gives at least a six-month
notice in writing to the other party of its willingness to cancel it.
Article Eighteen 
This Agreement shall supersede and replace the commercial agreement
concluded between the Kingdom of Morocco and the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan on 11 May 1978. However, the contracts concluded under it shall remain
valid up to the end of the term of such contracts.
Article Nineteen
The provisions of this Agreement shall remain effective after its termination, with
respect to the contracts concluded dewing the period of its validity, and which
were not yet completed as at the date of termination of this Agreement.
Article Twenty
Executive protocols shall stem from this Agreement.
This Agreement was signed at Amman on the twenty seventh of Rabi’e Thani
1415H, corresponding to 3/10/1994G.
For the Government of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Dr. Rima Khalaf Huneidi
Minister of Industry & Commerce
For the Government of
The Kingdom of Morocco
Idreis Jatoo
Minister of Industry, Commerce,
Traditional Industry & Foreign Trade
Protocol
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Government of
the Kingdom of Morocco, being desirous to facilitate the implementation of the
Commercial Agreement signed between both countries at Amman on 3/10/1994,
and based on Article twenty of the Commercial Agreement referred to above,
both parties have agreed as follows :
Article One
Lists of Commodities
1. The provisions of Articles three and six of the Commercial Agreement shall
apply to the commodities indicated in the list attached to this Protocol.
2. The commodities which are not included in the list attached to this Protocol, shall
be subject to the provision of Article seven of the Agreement.
3. The commodities indicated in the list shall be itemized according to the
harmonizing system (H5) applicable in both countries (the customs harmonizing
system).
4. In the case of existence of a difficulty in determining the commodities at the level
of customs itemization (classification), priority shall be given to the commodity
name as set out in the list.
Article Two
Non-Customs Restraints
- In conformity with Article six of the Commercial Agreement, and as of the date
of entry of this Protocol into force, both contracting parties shall cancel the noncustoms restraints detailed below with respect to the commodities set out tin the
list attached to this Protocol.
1. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan :
- Import licenses (import approvals).
2. The Kingdom of Morocco
- Customs exemption requests (import licenses and import approvals).
- Referential or similar prices.
Article Three
Certificate and Rules of Origin
1. Pending the approval of the unified Arab from for the certificate of origin, both
parties shall continue to use the two certificates of origin applicable in both
countries.
2. The Authorities concerned with the Insurance and attestation of the certificate of
origin :
a. The Kingdome of Morocco :
The Department of Customs & Indirect Taxes, in respect of the insurance
and attestation of the certificate.
b. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan :
The Chambers of Industry or Commerce, in respect of the insurance of the
certificate, and the Ministry of Industry & Commerce in respect of its
attestation.
3. Subsequent Control
The competent authorities of both countries shall be entitled to request
classifications, in order to verify the accuracy of the information stated in the
certificate of origin.
4. Calculations of the Value added Ratio.
The value added ratis shall be calculated by applying the following formula :
“Total value of the commodity ex-factory net of dues and taxes, less the value of
foreign materials directly included in the manufacture of the commodity (CIF).
The resultant, however, shall be divided over the total value of the commodity
ex-factory net of fees and taxes, multiplied by 100 (one hundred)”.
5. Direct Transport of Goods
The provisions of Articles three and six of the commercial Agreement shall apply
to the commodities of local origin exchanged directly between both countries and
which are set out in this Protocol, even if these are stored in or imported to or
through the free zones of both countries, provided that no change, manufacture or
assignment will occur thereto in the free zones, and that such commodities will be
subject to the control of the competent authorities of both countries.
Likewise, the said commodities shall be considered as transported directly to any
of the two countries, in case they are transported by transit from and to any of
them, provided that no change, conversion or assignment will occur thereto in the 
country of transmit.
Article Four Exhibitions
1. The holding of exhibitions for display or sale shall be allowed annually in both
countries, where each party shall submit a request to the competent authorities of
the hosting country, indicating therein the time and place of the exhibition,
provided that the approvals will be granted within one month from the date or
which the request was submitted.
2. The commodities displayed in such exhibitions shall be subject to the provisions
of the Commercial Agreement signed between both countries.
3. The sale proceeds of the exhibition shall be remitted in transferable free
currencies, and the unsold commodities or those brought in for the purposes of
display in such exhibitions, shall be allowed to stay these, in conformity with the
laws and regulations in force in both countries
4.
a. Each party shall allow the other party to bring in the commodities allocated
for display only, under a written guarantee from the relevant authorities of
both countries, according to the lists proposed by each party.
b. As regards the commodities allocated for sale, the relevant qurantees shall
be provided, in conformity with the laws and regulations in force in both
countries.
Article Five
This Protocol shall come into force as of the date of its approval by the relevant
authorities of both countries.
This Protocol was done and signed at Amman on the twenty seventh of Rabi’e
Thani 1425H, corresponding to 3/10/1994G.
For the Government of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Dr. Rima Khalaf Huneidi
Minister of Industry & Commerce
For the Government of
The Kingdom of Morocco
Idreis Jatoo
Minister of Industry, Commerce,
Traditional Industry & Foreign Trade
Consolidated list for goods exempt of customs fees and free from non-customs restriction
1- Fish, fresh or chilled, including fish fillets and other fish meat except for
crustaceans.
2- Processed cheese, not grated or powdered
3- Seeds of coriander
4- Sardines, sardinella and brisling or sprats Tunas, skipjack an bonito (Sarda
spp.) Mackerel Anchovies
5- Marble and travertine : Crude or roughly trimmed
6- Oil or petrol-filters for internal combustion engines Intake air filters for
internal combustion engines (oil and air filters).
7- Pressure-reducing valves for propane and potane gases.
8- Ballasts for discharge lamps or tubes
9-
Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for
making connections to or in electrical circuits (for example, switches, relays,
fuses, surge suppressors, plugs, sockets,lamp-holders, junction boxes), for a
voltage not exceeding 1000 Volt.
10- Metal furniture of a kind used in offices
11- Radiators of the motor vehicles of headings Nos. 87.01 to 87.05.
12- Gaskets and similar joints of metal sheeting combined with other material or
of two or more layers of metal
13- Variable or adjustable (pre-set) capacitors of the type used in vehicles.
14- Electric sound or visual signaling apparatus (bells, burglar or fire alarms)
15- Cotton thread.
16- Sewing thread and single threads of synthetic or artificial filaments.
17- Sewing thread of synthetic or man-made staple fibbers.
18- Non wovens, whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated.
19- Knitted Of man-made textile materials :
20-
Clasps, frames with clasps, buckles, buckle-clasps, hooks, eyes, eyelets and
the like, of base metal, of a kind used for clothing, footwear, winnings,
handbags, travel goods.
21- Uppers and parts thereof, other than stiffeners Outer soles and heels, of
rubber or plastic shoes.
22- Trunks, suit-cases, vanity-cases, -- With outer surface of leather, of
composition leather or of patent leather
23- Slide fasteners and parts thereof. Blankets and travelling rugs.
24- Footwear with outer soles of natural leather.
25- Embroidery clothes of traditional industry (Embroidery garments and dresses
for women , men, and children.
26- Cotton, carded or combed.
27- Prepared unrecorded media for sound recording or similar recording of other
phenomena, other than products of Chapter 37.
28- Aluminum ladders.
29- Baby carriages and parts thereof.
30- Gas Heaters.
31- Brakes and servo-brakes and parts thereof :
32- Electrical panels (including digital control panel).
33- Curtain rails made of metal or plastic.
34- Thermal apparatus for heating mosquito killer disk.
35- Dead Sea preparations except for table salt.
36- White cement, whether or not artificially colored
37-
Float glass and surface ground or polished glass, in sheets, whether or not
having an absorbent, reflecting or non-reflecting layer, but not otherwise
worked.
38-
Safety glass, consisting of toughened (tempered) or laminated glass. (except
for forms and sizes suitable for vehicles, aircrafts, boats and ships or other
transport equipment).
39- Glass mirrors not framed,
40- Ball point pens
41- Fountain pens.
42- Pencils crayons, pencil leads, pastels, drawing charcoals, black or colored.
43- Fertilizers liquids`
44- Agricultural or horticultural irrigation systems (pipes, droplets and filters).
45- Contact lenses
46- Spectacle lenses of glass
47- Spectacle lenses of other materials
48- Electric motors
49- potassium chloride
50- Gloves for surgery of rubber.
51- Tubes, pipes and hoses, of vulcanized rubber other than hard rubber, -
Reinforced or otherwise combined only with textile material, without fittings
52- Blood-grouping reagents
53- Diagnostic or laboratory reagents other than those of heading No. 30.02 or
30.06
54- Rubber thread and cord, textile covered
55- Calcium carbonate
56- Insecticides, rodencides, fungicides, herbicides, anti-sprouting products and
plant-growth regulators.