Agreement of Free Trading Zone Between The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (HKJ) & The Government of the Tunisian Republic (TR). The Government of the HKJ & the Government of the TR based on the strength of the brotherly links that attach their two countries and the old historical relations inter ail, of their with to develop and cement the economic and trading relation between them on equal footing basis to expand the mutual interest basis and mutual interest in all fields and enhancing economic integration inter alia and backing up development and progress for both, and out of their belief of the importance of freeing the trading exchange between them through new formulas that fit with the new economic directions on both regional and international arena within the framework of the Arab states league and the principle of WTO, have agreed on the following : First Chapter Article One The two contracting parties shall commit to gradually free the trading exchange inter alia to reach a free trading zone within a transitional period of 10 years from entering this agreement the stage of implementation, under the rules of this agreement and the annexes attached thereto and also the protocol of origin bases attached to it, which are all indivisible part thereof and within the framework of the rules and producers applicable in both countries. Article Two Definitions. 1. The agreement: It the agreement of a free trading zone between the HKJ & the TR. 2. The contracting parties: The HKJ and the government of the TR. - The Customs fees and the fees & other taxes of similar effect: The fees levied by the party state by virtue of the customs tariff on the imported goods, and also the other fees and taxes of similar effect levied on imported good but the party state goods and fall under it, whatsoever the nomenclatures of it was neither falls under this definition these collected against a specific service such as demurrage, or storing or transport or shipping off, etc. 3. The non-customs restrictions. - They are the measures and procedures that may be taken by the party state to control importing from the other party including in particular, import licenses, qualitative and monetary restriction, and the way the imported items are managed. The Second Chapter The Trading Exchange. Article Three The trading exchange shall be made as follows: 1. Vegetables and fruits shall be exchanged within the basis agreed upon within the framework of the free Arab great trading area set by the Arab state league, and until this is introduced to execution, the two countries shall apply the laws and regulations applicable in both of them. 2. The total cancellation of customs fees and other fees and taxes of similar effect on goods of Tunisian origin (annex No.1) and goods of Jordanian origin (annex No.2) as of date this agreement is enforced. 3. In otherwise to what has been stated above, the freeing of all the exchanged goods of national origin shall be done directly between the contracting parties as of the ate this agreement is enforceable, and that is by reducing the customs fees and fees and other taxes of similar effect by 10% (ten percent) annually, so that the complete liberation of these goods shall be finished after ten years of the date of enforcement of this agreement (exempted from the gradual liberation the exchanged goods, on the lists, of Tunisian origin (annex No.3) whereas the reduction of custom fees shall be postponed and fees and taxes of similar effect levied thereon, provided they shall be looked into in the future by the joint committee. Article Four 1. No increase on the custom fees shall be approved or levying new fees or fees or other taxes of similar effect on the trade exchanged between the two countries after signing this agreement 2. If any reductions in the custom fees and fees and other taxes of similar effect was made at or after this agreement is enforced, the custom fees and fees and the other taxes of similar effect and reduced shall replace these provided for in para (3) of Article-3. 3. The two parties shall follow the customs tariff fee take based on the system (H.S) used in classifying the goods exchanged inter alia. 4. The two parties on signing this agreement shall exchange the custom tariff tables related to custom fees, fees and other taxes of similar effect actually applicable by them at the date of signing this agreement Article Six The goods of Tunisian origin and those of Jordanian origin shall be treated as those of the national ones in respect of the internal taxes imposed in the importing country on the similar products. Article Seven It’s provided to consider the goods and products for the purposes of this agreement, from a national origin, the abidance with the rules of origin set forth in this protocol annexed to this agreement, which is considered indivisible part thereof. All the customs restrictions shall be cancelled between the two contracting parties, if any, once this agreement enters enforcement without prejudice to the international obligations of each party within in framework of WTO. Article Eight A. The rules of this agreement don’t apply to the products or materials banned to enter or negotiated or used in any of the two countries for religious, medical, security or environments, reasons under the rules and regulations operative in the two countries. B. The two sides shall apply the procedures and the laws of agricultural and veterinary quarantine on the goods subject to the goods falling under them per the laws and procedures followed and applicable in both countries. C. This constraints and restrictions and procedures should not be used as indirect barriers or restrictions in trading between the two countries. Article Nine - The two contracting parties shall have the right to apply control measures provided for in this agreement of WTO and the control agreement of the tour of Uruguay per the rules included in these two agreements, and shall be applied only to the products which any of the parties shall decide that it has been imported inside its territories in an increasingly quantities either absolutely or comparatively to local production, and in a way that cause serious harm or threat to cause such on the local industry that produce similar or competitive products in a direct way to those imports from the other part, per laws and legislations applied in both countries. Article Ten If any of the two parties encountered a case of support or dumping from the other side, he may take necessary action to address such cases per the rules of the agreements of support and compensatory fees, and procedures of dump combating annexed to the WTO, per the laws and legislation applicable in both countries. Article Eleven If any of the two parties encountered hazards or problem or fault in the payment balance or threatens by that, he may take appropriate action per the WTO, and the party sustaining harm shall inform the other party in due course with these measures, and specify the Tunis schedule for canceling same Article Twelve The two contracting parties shall commit to review this agreement according to the development of the economics IF the two countries and the future charges and the international economic relations within the framework of the WTO and the search for the possibility of growing and deepening cooperation to cover all sides not approached under this agreement. The joint trading committee referred to in Article 20 shall be entrusted to after recommendations in this respect plus conducting negotiations in this respect. These agreements resulting from these negotiations shall be subject to endorsement or sanction per the procedures applicable in both countries. Article Thirteen The two contracting parties shall observe that goods and products of national origin exported from one country to another shall conform to standards and metrology operative in the party state and the standards and metrology operative in the other party state. Incase a local standard is not applicable, then int’l standard and metrology approved by both of them, and the exam (test) certificate issued by the concerned departments in both countries, provided that both parties shall exchange the applicable laws and regulation in their countries and notify each other of any amendment that may come upon them. Article Fourteen. The two contracting parties shall commit to facilitate the date and information required to identify the trading track either in between or between them and other states. Article Fifteen The two parties shall encourage economic and trading cooperation between them within applicable laws and regulation in their countries per the following means: 1. Encouraging the joint industrial activities, including promoting market activities in their countries and the joint activities in a third country. 2. Helping and assisting in establishing promotion and coordination channels in both countries. 3. Encouraging direct communications among the trading, economic and industrial agencies. 4. Helping and facilitating visits of businessmen to both countries. 5. Encouraging the activities that aim to promote trading between them including public and private exhibitions, conferences, publicizing, advertising, public services and other types of service. Article Sixteen The two parties shall endeavor to facilitate transit trading, re-export, and commit to render all facilities, guarantees that each one of them serve to a third party in this respect. Article Seventeen The two parties shall encourage the involvement of the organizations of their country in the int’l exhibition held in the other country, and holding temporary exhibitions for the product, of each in the country of the other, and also the trading week, and each shall submit the necessary help to achieve that. Article Eighteen. The two parties shall make available the adequate and effective protection and unbiased plus applying same in respect of the intellectual, industrial and trading property including patents; trade marks registrations and date of manufacturing and the regulations in force. Article Nineteen For the purposes of tracing the application of this agreement and handling the problems that may arise through implementation, a trading joint committee shall be set up under the chairmanship of the two ministers of external trading in the two countries or on their behalf, including the representatives of the ministries and the concerned department. The trading committee shall meet once a year rotationally (alternatively) in the capitals of the two countries, and each party shall have the right for a meeting of the said committee whenever needed. This committee shall in particular take up the following functions: A. Guarantee to respect the obligations of the freeing of trading exchange between the two countries against the customs fees, fees and other taxes of similar effect per items of agreement and its attachments. B. Study the requests by one of the parties for the sake of increasing of expanding the two lists (1+2) or reduce items of goods on lists (3+4) whose liberation (freeing) is postponed. C. Study the requests submit by any of the parties that aim to expand this agreement D. Study the requests submitted by any of the two parties to apply the preventive measures per Articles (9,10,11). E. Settle the disputes that may arise between the two contracting parties about the interpretation and application the exigencies of this agreement and the formalities with its parameter. From the joint trading committee a technical trading committee at experts level that look into matters, which the trading committee authorizes to. Article Twenty This agreement comes in force (application) as of exchanging notification documents (informing) by completing the legal procedures per applicable procedures in countries. And remain enforce unless either party notifies the other party in writing through diplomatic channels of his desire to terminate the agreement sit months of the required termination date and the text of this agreement remain enforce after its expiry date in relation to trade contracts concluded during its validity period. This agreement super cedes all previous bilateral trade agreements between the two parties. Written in Tunisia on 22.4.1998, of two original copies. For the Republic of Tunisia Dr. Hamid Al-Qarawi Prime Minister For the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan Dr. Abel Salaam Al-Medial Prime Minister