EXCHANGE OF NOTES CONSTITUTING AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
CONCERNING DRIFTNET FISHERY IN THE NORTH PACIFIC
OCEAN

NOTE I.
The Department of State refers the Embassy of the
Republic of Korea to the Record of Understandings
between the representatives of the United States
and the Republic of Korea regarding Korea's high seas
squid driftnet fishery in the North Pacific Ocean. 
The Department of State further refers to the temporary arrangements outlines
in the Record of Understandings.
If the enclosed Record of Understandings is acceptable
to the Government of the Republic of Korea, the Department of State proposes
that this note and the Embassy of the Republic of Korea's note
in reply confirming the acceptance by the Government of the Republic
of Korea of the temporary arrangements shall constitute an agreement between
the two governments, which shall enter into force on the date of the Embassy
of the Republic of Korea's note in reply and shall remain in force
through June 10, 1992.
Enclosure:
Record of Understandings
Department of State
Washington, May 8, 1991
RECORD OF UNDERSTANDINGS
Representatives of the United States and the Republic of Korea
agree to the following temporary arrangements through June 1992:
a) Officials of one party, upon encountering a driftnet vessel
of the other party that they desire to visit to verify
compliance with driftnet fishing regulations, shall transmit to
the appropriate officials of the other party a request to
conduct a cooperative visit.
b) If the officials of the other party find that they are
unable to join in the cooperative visit and verification, they
will cooperate and assist the officials of the requesting party
to conduct the visit and verification. In those cases where
the on-scene officials of the requesting party find that
officials of the other party are not immediately present to
join in the visit and verification, the officials of the
requesting party will initiate the visit and verification.
c) The visiting officials may verify compliance with driftnet
fishing requlations, remove any anadromous species on board,
document incidental catches of marine mammals, seabirds, and
anadromous species, and take representative samples of those
resources.
d) Officials of the party conducting the visit and
verification shall take all reasonable measures to ensure a
minimum interference to legitimate fishing operations of the
driftnet vessel. The officials will conduct their operations
in accordance with applicable rules of international law and
practice.
e) Upon arrival of officials of the other party, the officials.
of the two parties shall jointly continue the visit and
verification.
f) If the officials of the other party do not arrive before
the officials of the requesting party complete the visit and
verification, the authorities of the requesting party will
notify promptly the authorities of the other party of the
results of the visit and verification and will consult with the
authorities of the other party regarding the disposition of the
violations detected.
g) When no violation is detected as a result of the
verification activities, the visiting officials shall
immediately withdraw from the vessel.
h) The appropriate authorities will ensure that the visit and
verification procedure for driftnet vessels will also apply to
all transport vessels.
Note II.
EMBASSY OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
WASHINGTON, D.C.
The Embassy of the Republic of Korea has the honor to
acknowledge the receipt of the Department of State's note dated May
8, 1991, which reads as follows:
[See note I]
The Embassy of the Republic of Korea has further the honor to
accept on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Korea the
temporary arrangements outlined in the Record of Understandings,
and to agree that the Department of State's note and this note in
reply shall constitute an agreement between the two Governments
which will enter into force on the date of this note in reply and
shall remain in force through June 30, 1992.
Enclosure:
Record of Understandings
Kh. Chang
Washington, D.C.
August 7, 1991
[Record of Understandings as under note I]
