FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN
 AND
THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the Government of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred to individually
as a “Contracting Party” and collectively as the "Contracting Parties"),

CONSIDERING that the expansion of their domestic markets, through
commercial cooperation, is an important prerequisite for accelerating their processes
of economic development,
BEARING in mind the desire to promote mutually beneficial bilateral
trade in goods and services,
CONVINCED of the need to establish and promote free trade
arrangements for strengthening intra-regional economic cooperation and the
development of national economies,
RECOGNIZING that progressive reductions and elimination of obstacles
to bilateral trade through a bilateral free trade agreement (hereinafter referred
to as "The AGREEMENT") will contribute to the expansion of bilateral as well
as world trade,
HAVE agreed as follows:
ARTICLE I - OBJECTIVES
The Contracting Parties shall establish a Free Trade Area in accordance
with the provisions of this Agreement and in conformity with relevant provisions
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 1994.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
(i) To promote through the expansion of trade in goods and services
the harmonious development of economic relations between
Pakistan and Sri Lanka,
(ii) To provide fair conditions of competition for trade in goods and
services between Pakistan and Sri Lanka,
2
(iii) To contribute in this way, by the removal of barriers to trade in
goods and services, to the harmonious development and
expansion of bilateral as well as world trade,
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Agreement:
1. "Tariffs" mean basic customs duties included in the national schedules
of the Contracting Parties,
2. "Para tariffs" mean border charges and fees, other than "tariffs", on
foreign trade transactions of a tariff-like effect which are levied solely on
imports, but not those indirect taxes and charges, which are levied in the same
manner on like domestic products. Import charges corresponding to specific
services rendered are not considered as para-tariff measures,
3. "Non-tariff barriers" mean any measures, regulation, or practice,
other than "tariffs" and "para-tariffs", the effect of which is to restrict imports, or
to significantly distort trade within the Contracting Parties,
4. "Products" mean all products including manufactures and
commodities in their raw, semi-processed and processed forms.
5. "Preferential Treatment" means any concession or privilege
granted under this Agreement by a Contracting Party through the elimination of
tariffs on the movement of goods and services,
6. “The Committee" means the Joint Committee referred to in Article
Xl,
7. "Serious Injury" means significant damage to domestic producers,
of like or similar products, resulting from a substantial increase of preferential
imports in situations which cause substantial losses in terms of earnings,
production or employment unsustainable in the short term. The examination of
the impact on the domestic industry concerned shall also include an evaluation
of other relevant economic factors and indices having a bearing on the state of
the domestic industry of that product,
8. "Threat of Serious Injury" means a situation in which a substantial
increase of preferential imports is of a nature so as to cause "serious injury" to
domestic products, and that such Injury, although not yet existing is clearly
imminent. A determination of threat of serious injury shall be based on facts
and not on mere allegation, conjecture, or remote or hypothetical possibility. 
3
9. "Critical circumstances" mean the emergence of an exceptional
situation where massive preferential imports are causing or threatening to
cause "serious injury" difficult to repair and which calls for immediate action.
ARTICLE III - ELIMINATION OF TARIFFS, PARA TARIFFS
AND NON-TARIFF BARRIERS
1. The Contracting Parties hereby agree to establish a Free Trade
Area for the purpose of free movement of goods and services between their
countries through elimination of tariffs on the movement of goods and services
in accordance with the provisions of Annexes A & B which shall form an integral
part of this Agreement.
2. The Contracting Parties further agree to eliminate from the date
this Agreement enters into force, all non-tariff barriers, and any other equivalent
measures on the movement of goods and services, other than those imposed
in accordance with Article IV of this Agreement.
3. The Contracting Parties also agree not to make any increase in the
existing para tariffs, if any, or introduce new or additional para tariffs, without
mutual consent.
4. In the implementation of this Agreement the Contracting Parties
shall pay due regard to the principle of reciprocity.
ARTICLE IV - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking
action and adopting measures, which it considers necessary for the protection
of its national security, the protection of public morals, the protection of human,
animal or plant life and health, and the protection of articles of artistic, historic,
and archaeological value, as is provided for in Article XX and XXI of the
General Agreement on Tariff and Trade, 1994 and WTO Agreement on
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures.
ARTICLE V - NATIONAL TREATMENT
The Contracting Parties affirm their commitment to the principles
enshrined in Article III of GATT 1994.
ARTICLE VI - STATE TRADING ENTERPRISES
1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a
Contracting Party from maintaining or establishing a state trading enterprise as
understood in Article XVII of General Agreement on Tariff and Trade, 1994 
4
2. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that any state enterprise that it
maintains or establishes acts in a manner that is not inconsistent with the
obligations of that Contracting Party under this Agreement and accords
nondiscriminatory treatment in the import from and export to the other
Contracting Party.
ARTICLE VII - RULES OF ORIGIN
1. Products covered by the provisions of this Agreement shall be
eligible for preferential treatment provided they satisfy the Rules of Origin as set
out in Annex C to this Agreement which shall form an integral part of this
Agreement.
2. For the development of specific sectors of the industry of either
Contracting Party, lower value addition norms for the products manufactured or
produced by those sectors may be considered through mutual negotiations.
ARTICLE VIII - SAFEGUARD MEASURES
1. If any product which is subject to preferential treatment under this
Agreement is imported into the territory of a Contracting Party in such a manner
or in such quantities as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury in the
territory of that Contracting Party, such Contracting Party may, with prior
consultations with the other Contracting Party, except in critical circumstances,
suspend provisionally without discrimination, the preferential treatment
accorded to that product under the Agreement.
2. When action has been taken by either Contracting Party in terms of
paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall simultaneously notify the other Contracting
Party and the Joint Committee established in terms of Article Xl. The
Committee shall enter into consultations with the Contracting Parties and
endeavour to reach mutually acceptable agreement to remedy the situation. If
the consultations fail to resolve the issue within sixty days, the Contracting
Party affected by such action shall have the right to withdraw the equivalent
preferential treatment in accordance with the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.
ARTICLE IX - DOMESTIC LEGISLATION
The Contracting Parties shall be free to apply their domestic legislation to
restrict imports in cases where prices are influenced by unfair trade practices
like subsidies or dumping. Subsidies and dumping shall be understood to have
the same meaning as in the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade 1994 and
the relevant WTO Agreements. 
5
ARTICLE X - BALANCE OF PAYMENT MEASURES
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Agreement, any Contracting
Party, facing balance of payments difficulties, may suspend provisionally the
preferential treatment as to the quantity and value of merchandise permitted to
be imported under the Agreement. When such action has taken place, the
Contracting Party, which initiates such action, shall simultaneously notify the
other Contracting Party.
2. A Contracting Party, which takes action according to paragraph 1
of this Article, shall afford, upon request from the other Contracting Party,
adequate opportunities for consultations with a view to preserving the stability
of the preferential treatment provided under this Agreement.
ARTICLE Xl - JOINT COMMITTEE
1. A Joint Committee shall be established at Ministerial level. The
Committee shall meet initially within six months of the entry into force of the
Agreement and thereafter at least once a year to review the progress made in
the implementation of this Agreement and to ensure that benefits of trade
expansion emanating from this Agreement accrue to the Contracting Parties
equitably. The meetings of the Joint Committee will take place, to the extent
possible, to coincide with the meetings of the Sri Lanka-Pakistan Joint
Economic Commission.
2. The Committee may set up any other Sub-Committee and/or
Working Group for specific purposes as it may consider necessary.
3. In order to facilitate cooperation in customs matters, the
Contracting Parties agree to establish a Working Group on customs related
issues including harmonization of tariff headings. The Working Group shall
meet as often as required and shall report to the Joint Committee on its
deliberations.
4.(i) The Committee shall accord adequate opportunities for
consultation on representations made by either Contacting Party with respect to
any matter affecting the implementation of the Agreement.
 (ii) The Committee shall adopt appropriate measures for settling any
matter arising from such representations within 6 months of the representation
having been made. Each Contracting Party shall implement such measures
immediately.
5. The Committee shall nominate one apex Chamber of Trade and
Industry in each country as the nodal chamber to represent the views of the
trade and industry on matters relating to this Agreement. 
6
ARTICLE XII - CONSULTATIONS
1. Each Contracting Party shall accord sympathetic consideration to
and shall afford adequate opportunity for consultations regarding such
representations as may be made by the other Contracting Party with respect to
any matter affecting the operation of this Agreement.
2. The Committee set up under Article Xl may meet at the request of
a Contracting Party to consider any matter for which it has not been possible to
find a satisfactory solution through consultations under paragraph 1 above.
ARTICLE XIII - SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
1. Any dispute that may arise between commercial entities of the
Contracting Parties shall be referred for amicable settlement to the nodal
Chambers. Such references shall, as far as possible, be settled through mutual
consultations by the Chambers. In the event of an amicable solution not being
found, the matter shall be referred to an Arbitration Tribunal for a binding
decision. The Tribunal shall be constituted by the Joint Committee.
2. Any dispute between the Contracting Parties regarding the
interpretation and application of this Agreement or any instrument adopted
within its framework shall be amicably settled through negotiations failing which
a notification may be made to the Committee by any one of the Contracting
Parties for settlement of the dispute.
ARTICLE XIV - DURATION AND TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT
This Agreement shall remain in force until either Contracting Party
terminates this Agreement by giving six months written notice to the other
Contracting Party, through Diplomatic Channels, of its intention to terminate the
Agreement.
ARTICLE XV - AMENDMENTS
 The Agreement may be modified or amended through mutual agreement
of the Contracting Parties. Proposals for such modifications or amendments
shall be submitted to the Joint Committee and upon acceptance by the Joint
Committee shall be approved in accordance with the applicable legal
procedures of each Contracting Party. Such modifications or amendments shall
become effective when confirmed through an exchange of diplomatic notes and
shall constitute an integral part of the Agreement: 
7
 Provided, however, that in emergency situation proposals for
modifications may be considered by the Contracting Parties and if agreed,
given effect to through an exchange of diplomatic notes.
ARTICLE XVI – ANNEXES TO BE FINALISED
Annex A (Attachments I, II, III, and IV) containing the No Concession lists and
tariff preferences to be granted by the Government of Pakistan and Annex B
(Attachments I, II, and III) containing the No Concession list and tariff preferences to
be granted by the Government of Sri Lanka and Annex C containing the Rules of
Origin under the Agreement shall be finalized within a period of 90 days of the signing
of this Agreement.
All the Annexes shall become effective and shall constitute an integral
part of the Agreement when the two Contracting Parties have confirmed
through the exchange of Diplomatic Notes.
ARTICLE XVII – ENTRY INTO FORCE
The Agreement shall enter into force on the 30th day after the Contracting
Parties hereto have notified each other through Diplomatic Channels that their
respective constitutional requirements and procedures have been completed in
respect of this Agreement including the Annexes under Article XVI.
In Witness Whereof the undersigned, duly authorized thereto by their
respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.
 Done in duplicate at Colombo this 1st day of August, 2002 in two originals
in the English language.
For the Government of
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan
 For the Government of the
Democratic Socialist Republic
of Sri Lanka 