AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED ST ATES OF AMERICA
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA
CONCERNING FISHERIES OFF THE COASTS
OF THE UNITED STATES
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of
the Republic of Latvia (hereafter referred to as "the United States" and "Latvia",
respectively, or "the Parties"),
Considering their common concern for the rational management, conservation
and achievement of optimum yield of fish stocks off the coasts of the United
States;
Recognizing that the United States has established by Presidential Proclamation
of March 10, 1983 an exclusive economic zone within 200 nautical miles
of its coasts within which the United States has sovereign rights to explore,
exploit, conserve and manage all fish and that the United States also has such
rights over the living resources of the continental shelf appertaining to the United
States and anadromous species of fish of United States origin; and
Desirous of establishing reasonable terms and conditions pertaining to fisheries
of mutual concern over which the United States has sovereign rights to
explore, exploit, conserve and manage;
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE I
The purpose of this Agreement is to promote effective conservation, rational
management and the achievement of optimum yield in the fisheries of mutual
interest off the coasts of the United States, to facilitate the rapid and full development
of the United States fishing industry and to establish a common understanding
of the principles and procedures under which fishing may be conducted
by nationals and vessels of Latvia for the living resources over which the United
States has sovereign rights to explore, exploit, conserve and manage.
ARTICLE II
As used in this Agreement, the term
1. "living resources over which the United States has sovereign rights to
  explore, exploit, conserve and manage" means all fish within the exclusive economic
zone of the United States, all anadromous species of fish that spawn in
the fresh or estuarine waters of the United States and migrate to ocean waters
while present in the United States exclusive economic zone and in areas beyond
national fisheries jurisdictions recognized by the United States and all living
resources of the continental shelf appertaining to the United States;
2. "fish" means all finfish, mollusks, crustaceans, and other forms of
marine animal and plant life, other than marine mammals and birds;
3. "fishery" means
a. one or more stocks of fish that can be treated as a unit for purposes
of conservation and management and that are identified on
the basis of geographical, scientific, technical, recreational and
economic characteristics; and
b. any fishing for such stocks;
4. "exclusive economic zone" means a zone contiguous to the territorial
sea of the United States, the seaward boundary of which is a line drawn in such
a manner that each point on it is 200 nautical miles from the baseline from
which the breadth of the territorial sea of the United States is measured;
5. "fishing" means
a. the catching, taking or harvesting of fish;
b. the attempted catching, taking or harvesting of fish;
c. any other activity that can reasonably be expected to result in the
catching, taking or harvesting of fish;
d. any operations at sea, including processing, directly in support of,
or in preparation for, any activity described in subparagraphs a.
through c. above, provided that such term does not include other
legitimate uses of the high seas, including any scientific research
activity;
6. "fishing vessel" means any vessel, boat, ship, or other craft that is used
for, equipped to be used for, or of a type that is normally used for
a. fishing; or
b. aiding or assisting one or more vessels at sea in the performance
of any activity relating to fishing, including preparation, supply,
storage, refrigeration, transportation or processing; and
7. "marine mammal" means any mammal that is morphologically adapted
to the marine environment, including sea otters and members of the orders
Sirenia, Finnipedia, and Cetacea, or primarily inhabits the marine environment
such as polar bears.
ARTICLE III
1. The United. States is willing to allow access for fishing vessels of Latvia
to harvest, in accordance with terms and conditions to be established in permits
issued under Article VII, that portion of the total allowable catch for a specific
fishery that will not be harvested by United States fishing vessels and is determined
to be available to fishing vessels of Latvia in accordance with United
States law.
2. The United States shall determine each year, subject to such adjustments
as may be appropriate and in accordance with United States law:
a. the total allowable catch for each fishery based on optimum yield,
taking into account the best available scientific evidence, and
social, economic and other relevant factors;
b. the harvesting capacity of United States fishing vessels in respect
of each fishery;
c. the portion of the total allowable catch for a specific fishery to
which access will be provided, on a periodic basis each year, to
foreign fishing vessels; and
d. the allocation of such portion that may be made available to Latvia.
3. The United States shall determine each year the measures necessary to
prevent overfishing while achieving, on a continuing basis, the optimum yield
from each fishery in accordance with United States law. Such measures may
include, inter alia:
a. designated areas where, and periods when, fishing shall be permitted,
limited, or conducted only by specified types of fishing
vessels or with specified types and quantities of fishing gear;
b. limitations on the catch of fish based on area, species, size, number,
weight, sex, incidental catch, total biomass or other factors;
c. limitations on the number and types of fishing vessels that may
engage in fishing and/or on the number of days each vessel of the
total fleet may engage in a designated area for a specified fishery;
d. requirements as to the types of gear that may, or may not, be
employed; and
e. requirements designed to facilitate enforcement of such conditions
and restrictions, including the maintenance of appropriate positionfixing
and identification equipment.
4. The United States shall notify Latvia of the determinations provided for
by this Article on a timely basis.
ARTICLE IV
In determining the portion of the surplus that may be made available to Latvia
and to other countries, the United States will decide on the basis of the factors
identified in United States law, including:
1. whether, and to what extent, such nation imposes tariff barriers or nontariff
barriers on the importation, or otherwise restricts the market access, of both
United States fish and fishery products, particularly fish and fishery products for
which the foreign nation has requested an allocation;
2. whether, and to what extent, such nation is cooperating with the United
States in both the advancement of existing and new opportunities for fisheries
exports from the United States through the purchase of fishery products from
United States processors and the advancement of fisheries trade through purchase
of fish and fishery products from United States fishermen, particularly fish and
fishery products for which the foreign nation has requested an allocation;
3. whether, and to what extent, such nation and the fishing fleets of such
nation have cooperated with the United States in the enforcement of United
States fishing regulations;
4. whether, and to what extent, such nation requires the fish harvested
from the exclusive economic zone for its domestic consumption;
5. whether, and to what extent, such nation otherwise contributes to, or
fosters the growth of, a sound and economic United States fishing industry,
including minimizing gear conflicts with fishing operations of United States fishermen,
and transferring harvesting or processing technology which will benefit
the United States fishing industry;
6. whether, and to what extent, the fishing vessels of such nation have
traditionally engaged in fishing in such fishery;
7. whether, and to what extent, such nation is cooperating with the United
States in, and making substantial contributions to, fishery research and the
identification of fishery resources;
8. whether, and to what extent, such nation is cooperating with the United
States in matters pertaining to
a. the implementation of United Nations General Assembly Resolution
46/215 of December, 1991 on Large-scale Pelagic Driftnet
Fishing;
b. the conservation and management of anadromous species; and
c. the conservation of the pollock resource in the central Bering Sea;
and
9. such other matters as the United States deems appropriate.
ARTICLE V
Latvia shall cooperate with and assist the United States in the development
of the United States fishing industry and the increase of United States fishery
exports by taking such measures as facilitating the importation and sale of United
States fishery products, providing information concerning technical and administrative
requirements for access of United States fishery products into Latvia,
providing economic data, sharing expertise, facilitating the transfer of harvesting
or processing technology to the United States fishing industry, facilitating appropriate
joint venture and other arrangements, informing its industry of trade and
joint venture opportunities with the United States, and taking other actions as
may be appropriate.
ARTICLE VI
Latvia shall take all necessary measures to ensure:
1. that nationals and vessels of Latvia refrain from fishing for living
resources over which the United States has sovereign rights to explore, exploit,
conserve and manage except as authorized pursuant to this Agreement;
2. that all such vessels so authorized comply with the provisions of permits
issued pursuant to this Agreement and applicable laws of the United States;
and
3. that the total allocation referred to in Article III, paragraph 2.d. of this
Agreement is not exceeded for any fishery.
ARTICLE VII
Latvia may submit an application to the United States for a permit for each
fishing vessel of Latvia that wishes to engage in fishing in the exclusive economic
zone pursuant to this Agreement. Such application shall be prepared and
processed in accordance with the Annex, which constitutes an integral part of
this Agreement. The United States may require the payment of fees for such permits
and for fishing in the exclusive economic zone. While such fees shall be
applied without discrimination, the fee level may vary depending upon, inter
alia, whether, in the judgement of the United States, vessels or nationals of Latvia
are harvesting United States origin anadromous species at unacceptable levels,
or whether Latvia is failing to take sufficient action to benefit the conservation
and development of United States fisheries. Latvia undertakes to keep the
number of applications to the minimum required, in order to aid in the efficient
administration of the permit program.
ARTICLE VIII
Latvia shall ensure that nationals and vessels of Latvia refrain from
harassing, hunting/capturing or killing, or attempting to harass, hunt, capture or
kill, any marine mammal within the exclusive economic zone, except as may be
otherwise provided by an international agreement respecting marine mammals to
which the United States is a party, or in accordance with specific authorization
for and controls on incidental taking of marine mammals established by the
United States.
ARTICLE IX
Latvia shall ensure that in the conduct of the fisheries under this Agreement:
1. the authorizing permit for each vessel of Latvia is prominently displayed
in the wheel house of such vessel;
2. appropriate position-fixing and identification equipment, as determined
by the United States, is installed and maintained in working order on each vessel;
3. designated United States observers are permitted to board, upon request,
any such fishing vessel, and shall be accorded the courtesies and accommodations
provided to ship's officers while aboard such vessel, and owners, operators
and crews of such vessel shall cooperate with observers in the conduct of their
official duties, and, further, the United States shall be reimbursed for the costs
incurred in the utilization of observers;
4. agents are appointed and maintained within the United States possessing
the authority to receive and respond to any legal process issued in the United
States with respect to an owner or operator of a vessel of Latvia for any cause
arising out of the conduct of fishing activities for the living resources over which
the United States has sovereign rights to explore, exploit, conserve and manage;
and
5. all necessary measures are taken to minimize fishing gear conflicts and
to ensure the prompt and adequate compensation of United States citizens for
any loss, or damage to, their fishing vessels, fishing gear or catch, and resultant
economic loss, that is caused by any fishing vessel of Latvia as determined by
applicable United States procedures.
ARTICLE X
Latvia shall take all appropriate measures to assist the United States in the
enforcement of its laws pertaining to fishing in the exclusive economic zone and
to ensure that each vessel of Latvia that engages in fishing for living resources
over which the United States has sovereign rights to explore, exploit, conserve
and manage shall allow and assist the boarding and inspection of such vessel
by any duly authorized enforcement officer of the United States and shall
cooperate in such enforcement action as may be undertaken pursuant to the laws
of the United States.
ARTICLE XI
I. The United States will impose appropriate penalties, in accordance with
the laws of the United States, on vessels of Latvia or their owners, operators,
or crews that violate the requirements of this Agreement or of any permit issued
hereunder.
2. Arrested vessels and their crews shall be promptly released, subject to
such reasonable bond or other security as may be determined by the court.
3. In any case arising out of fishing activities under this Agreement, the
penalty for violation of fishery regulations shall not include imprisonment except
in the case of enforcement related offenses such as assault on an enforcement
officer or refusal to permit boarding and inspection.
4. In cases of seizure and arrest of a vessel of Latvia by the authorities
of the United States, notification shall be given promptly through diplomatic
channels informing Latvia of the action taken and of any penalties subsequently
imposed.
ARTICLE XII
1. The United States and Latvia shall cooperate in the conduct of scientific
research required for the purpose of managing and conserving living resources
over which the United States has sovereign rights to explore, exploit, conserve
and manage, including the compilation of the best available scientific information
for management and conservation of stocks of mutual interest.
2. The Parties shall cooperate in the development of a periodic research
plan on stocks of mutual concern through correspondence or meetings as appropriate,
and may modify it from time to time by agreement. The agreed research
plans may include, but are not limited to, the exchange of information and scientists,
regularly scheduled meetings between scientists to prepare research plans
and review progress, and jointly conducted research projects.
3. The conduct of agreed research during regular commercial fishing operations
on board a fishing vessel of Latvia in the exclusive economic zone shall
not be deemed to change the character of the vessel's activities from fishing to
scientific research. Therefore, it will still be necessary to obtain a permit for the
vessel in accordance with Article VII.
4. Latvia shall cooperate with the United States in the implementation of
procedures for collecting and reporting biostatistical information and fisheries
data, including catch and effort statistics, in accordance with procedures which
will be stipulated by the United States. Latvia shall similarly provide such economic
data as may be requested by the United States.
5. Latvia shall cooperate with the United States m matters pertaining to
the implementation of United Nations General Assembly Resolution 46/215 of
December, 1991 on Large-scale Pelagic Driftnet Fishing, the conservation and
management of anadromous species, and the conservation of the pollock resource
in the central Bering Sea.
ARTICLE XIII
1. The United States and Latvia shall carry out periodic bilateral consultations
regarding the implementation of this Agreement and the development of
further cooperation in the field of fisheries of mutual concern, including cooperation
within the framework of appropriate multilateral organizations for the collection
and analysis of scientific data respecting such fisheries.
2. At the request of either Party any dispute concerning the interpretation
or application of this Agreement shall be the subject of consultations between
them.
ARTICLE XIV
The United States undertakes to authorize fishing vessels of Latvia allowed
to fish pursuant to this Agreement to enter ports in accordance with United
States laws for the purpose of purchasing bait, supplies, or outfits, or effecting
repairs, changing crews, or for such other purposes as may be authorized.
ARTICLE XV
Should the United States indicate to Latvia that nationals and vessels of the
United States wish to engage in fishing in areas within the fisheries jurisdiction
of Latvia, Latvia shall allow such fishing on terms not more restrictive than those
established in accordance with this Agreement.
ARTICLE XVI
Nothing contained in the present Agreement shall prejudice:
1. the views of either Party with respect to the existing territorial or other
jurisdiction of the coastal State for all purposes other than the conservation and
management of fisheries; or,
2. any other international rights and obligations of either Party.
ARTICLE XVII
The Agreement shall apply to the territories of Latvia, and to the United
States, its territories and its possessions.
ARTICLE XVIII
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on a date to be agreed upon by
exchange of notes, following the completion of internal procedures of both Parties, 
and shall remain in force until June 1, 1995 unless extended by exchange
of notes between the Parties. Notwithstanding the foregoing, either Party may
terminate this Agreement after giving written notice of such termination to the
other Party six months in advance.
2. At the request of either Party, this Agreement shall be subject to review
by the two Parties two years after its entry into force.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized for this
purpose, have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Washington, in duplicate, this eighth day of April, 1993 in the
English and Latvian languages, each text being equally authentic.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:
David A. Colson
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF LATVIA:
Georgs Andrejevs


ANNEX
Application and Permit Procedures
The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of
annual permits authorizing vessels of Latvfr to engage in fishing for living
resources over which the United States has sovereign rights to explore, exploit,
conserve and manage:
1. Latvia may submit au application to the competent authorities of the
United States for each fishing Latvia that wishes to engage in fishing
pursuant to this Agreement. Such application shall be made on forms provided
by the United States for that purpose.
2. Any such application shall specify
a. the name and official number or other identification of each fishing
vessel for which a permit is sought, together with the name
and address of the owner and operator thereof;
b. the tonnage, capacity, speed, processing equipment, type and quantity
of fishing gear, and such other information relating to the fishing
characteristics of the vessel may be requested;
c. a specification of each fishery in which each vessel wishes to fish;
d. the amount of fish or tonnage of catch by species contemplated
for each vessel cluring the time such permit is in force;
e. the ocean area in which, and the season or period during which,
such fishing would be conducted; and
f. such other relevant information as may be requested, including
desired transshipping areas.
3. The United States shall review each application, shall determine what
conditions and restrictions may be needed, and what fee will be required, and
shall infonn Latvia of such determinations. The United States reserves the right
not to approve applications. If permit applications are disapproved, the United
States authorities will inform Latvia of the reasons for such disapproval.
4. Latvia shall thereupon notify the United States of its acceptance or
rejection of such conditions and restrictions and, in the case of a rejection, of
its objections thereto.
5. Upon acceptance of the conditions and restrictions by Latvia and the
payment of any fees, the United States shall approve the application and issue
a permit for each fishing vessel of Latvia, which fishing vessel shall thereupon
be authorized to fish in accordance with this Agreement and the terms and conditions
set forth in the permit. Such permits shall be issued for a specific vessel
and shall not be transferred.
6. In the event Latvia notifies the United States of its objections to specific
conditions and restrictions, the Parties may consult with respect thereto and Latvia
may thereupon submit a revised application.
7. The procedures in this Annex may be amended by agreement through
an exchange of notes between the Parties.
