Boundary Waters
Agreement effected by exchange of notes
Dated at Mexico June 24 and November 10, 1987;
Entered into force November 10, 1987.
NOTE I.
The American Embassy to the Mexican Secretariat of Foreign
Relations
Note No. 1271
EMBASSY OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its compliments to
the Secretariat of Foreign Relations and has the honor to refer to the convention
between the United States and Mexico for the equitable distribution of the waters
of the Rio Grande, signed May 21, 1906, by which the United States delivers
to Mexico a total of 60,000 acre-feet of water annually in the bed of the Rio
Grande at the point where the headworks of the Acequia Madre, known as the
Old Mexican Canal, exist above the city of Ciudad Juarez, Mexico.
The Acting Commissioner for the United States before the International
Boundary and Water Commission has informed this government of the plans,
provided by the Commissioner for Mexico, of the Government of Mexico to
return Mexico's waters to the Rio Grande for their conveyance and subsequent
rediversion some 13 miles farther downstream. We understand that the Government
of Mexico proposes the change in the conveyance to deal with social and
economic problems associated with the current practice of conveying Mexico's
deliveries through the urbanized area of Ciudad Juarez.
The Government of the United States does not object to the Mexican plans
with the understanding that construction of such works and carrying out of such
measures would not in any way alter the existing rights and obligations under
the 1906 convention. We recognize that the Mexican rediversion plans will result
in the commingling of the waters delivered to Mexico with those waters in the
channel of the river belonging to the United States. In this Government's view,
this requires a joint monitoring, measurement, determination and accounting by
the two governments of those waters so that Mexico may be properly charged
with any losses of Mexican waters due to conveyance in the river channel. Further,
this government recognizes that the Mexican government proposes that the
works that Mexico may design, construct, operate and maintain to redivert its
waters would be under the joint supervision of the governments of the United
States and Mexico through the International Boundary and Water Commission.
This Government is prepared to authorize the United States Commissioner
to join with the Commissioner for Mexico in the joint supervision through the
Commission of the diversion works as may be constructed in Mexico and a joint
program of measuring the waters delivered to Mexico at the point specified in
the 1906 treaty and the determination and accounting of losses below that point
attributed to the conveyance of the Mexican waters in the channel of the Rio
Grande downstream to the point of rediversion.
If the Government of Mexico is similarly prepared to authorize the Commissioner
for Mexico to join with the Commissioner for the United States in such
joint supervision and joint program and finds the contents of this note otherwise
acceptable, this note and the reply of the Secretariat of Foreign Relations shall
constitute an agreement between our two Governments regarding their authority
to jointly supervise the above-cited Mexican diversion works through the International
Boundary and Water Commission.
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of this opportunity
to renew to the Secretariat of Foreign Relations the assurances of its highest
consideration.
The Embassy of the United States of America.
Mexico, D. F., June 24, 1987.
NOTE II.
The Mexican Secretariat of Foreign Relations
to the American Embassy
No. 10 00771
The Secretariat of Foreign Relations presents its compliments to the
Embassy of the United States of America and has the honor to refer to its note
No. 1271 regarding the use of the waters of the Rio Grande (Rio Bravo) in the
area of Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua.
The Government of Mexico has taken note with satisfaction of the willingness
of the Government of the United States to have new diversion works constructed
approximately 20 kilometers downstream from the existing intake without
altering the rules and obligations set forth in the 1906 Convention.
The Government of Mexico agrees with the Government of the United
States that it is necessary for the planning, design, construction, and maintenance
of those works to take place under the supervision of the International Boundary
and Water Commission. It is therefore authorizing the Mexican Commissioner
to act jointly with his counterpart in providing the above-mentioned supervision
and in the determination and accounting of any losses resulting from the conveyance
of the Mexican waters in the channel of the Rio Grande (Rio Bravo)
between the existing intake and the new one.
The Secretariat of Foreign Relations considers that note No. 1271 and this
note constitute an agreement between our two Governments on joint supervision
of the new diversion works through the International Boundary and Water Commission.
The Secretariat of Foreign Relations avails itself of this opportunity to
renew to the Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its high
consideration.
Mexico, D.F., November 10, 1987
[Initialed]
Embassy of the United States of America,
Mexico, D.F.

