Free Trade Agreement between the Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the Republic of Nicaragua
PREAMBLE
The Government of the Republic of Nicaragua and the Government of the United Mexican States,
RESOLVED TO:
STRENGTHEN the special bonds of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between their peoples;
ACCELERATE and promote the revitalization of American integration schemes;
ACHIEVE a better balance in trade relations between their countries, taking into account their levels of economic development;
CONTRIBUTE to harmonious development, the expansion of world trade and the expansion of international cooperation;
CREATE a more extensive and secure market for goods produced and services supplied in their territories;
REDUCE distortions in their reciprocal trade;
ESTABLISH clear and mutually beneficial rules for your commercial exchange;
ENSURE a predictable commercial framework for the planning of productive activities and investment;
DEVELOP their respective rights and obligations derived from the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), as well as from other bilateral and multilateral integration and cooperation instruments;
STRENGTHEN the competitiveness of their companies in world markets;
ENCOURAGE innovation and creativity through the protection of intellectual property rights;
CREATE new job opportunities, improve working conditions and living standards in their respective territories;
PROTECT the fundamental rights of its workers;
TO UNDERTAKE all of the above in a manner consistent with the protection and conservation of the environment;
STRENGTHEN the preparation and application of environmental laws and regulations;
PROMOTE sustainable development;
PRESERVE its ability to safeguard the public welfare, and
PROMOTE the dynamic participation of the different economic agents, particularly the private sector, in efforts aimed at deepening economic relations between the Parties and developing and maximizing the possibilities of their joint presence in international markets;
CELEBRATE THIS FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
in accordance with the provisions of the WTO Agreement.
Chapter I Initial Provisions
Article 1-01: Establishment of the Free Trade Area The Parties hereby establish a free trade area in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994) and Article V of the General Agreement on Trade in Services.
Article 1-02: Objectives 1. The objectives of this Agreement, developed specifically through its principles and rules, including those of national treatment, most favored nation treatment and transparency, are the following:
a. stimulate the expansion and diversification of trade between the Parties;
b. eliminate trade barriers and facilitate the circulation of goods and services between the Parties;
c. promote conditions of fair competition in trade between the Parties;
d. substantially increase investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;
and. protect and enforce, adequately and effectively, intellectual property rights in the territory of each Party;
F. establish guidelines for further cooperation between the Parties, as well as at the regional and multilateral level aimed at expanding and improving the benefits of this Agreement; Y
g. create effective procedures for the application and compliance of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the settlement of disputes.
2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with the applicable rules of international law.
Article 1-03: Relationship with other international treaties and agreements The Parties confirm the rights and obligations in force between them under the WTO Agreement and other treaties and agreements to which they are party. In case of inconsistency between the provisions of the treaties and agreements referred to in paragraph 1 and the provisions of this Agreement, the latter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 1-04: Observance of the Treaty Each Party shall ensure, in accordance with its constitutional norms, compliance with the provisions of this Treaty in its territory at the federal or central, state or regional, and municipal level, respectively, except in the cases in which this Agreement provides otherwise.
Article 1-05: Succession of treaties Any reference to any other international treaty or agreement shall be understood to be made in the same terms as a successor treaty or agreement to which the Parties are party.
Chapter II General Definitions
Article 2-01: Definitions of general application For purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise provided, the following shall be understood as :
customs duty : including, but not limited to, any import tax, duty or tribute and any charges of any kind levied in connection with the importation of goods, including any form of surcharge or additional charge on imports, except:
a. any charge equivalent to an internal tax established in accordance with Article III:2 of the GATT 1994, with respect to like goods, direct competitors or substitutes of the Party, or with respect to goods from which the whole or partially the imported good;
b. any countervailing duty that is applied in accordance with the internal laws of the Party and is not incompatible with the provisions of Chapter IX (Unfair International Trade Practices);
c. any duties or other charges related to importation, proportional to the cost of services rendered; Y
d. any premium offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system, regarding the administration of quantitative restrictions on imports or tariff-quota or preferential tariff quotas;
good of a Party : national products as understood in the GATT 1994, those goods that the Parties agree upon, and includes originating goods. A good of a Party may incorporate materials from other countries;
originating good : a good that complies with the rules of origin established in Chapter VI (Rules of Origin);
Customs Valuation Code : the Agreement Relating to the Application of Article VII of the General Agreement on Customs Tariffs and Trade of 1994, including its interpretative notes;
Commission : the Administrative Commission established in accordance with article 19-01;
countervailing duty: antidumping duty and countervailing duty or duty according to the legislation of each Party;
days : calendar or calendar days;
company : a legal person constituted or organized in accordance with the applicable legislation, whether or not for profit and private or governmental property, as well as other organizations or economic units that are constituted or, in any case, duly organized according to the legislation applicable, including branches, foundations, partnerships, trusts, shares, sole proprietorships, joint ventures or other associations;
State enterprise : an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party through equity participation;
enterprise of a Party : an enterprise incorporated or organized under the laws of a Party;
tariff fraction : the breakdown of a Harmonized System tariff classification code to more than six digits;
measure : any law, regulation, procedure, provision or administrative practice, among others;
national : a natural person who has the nationality of a Party under its applicable law. The term also extends to persons who, in accordance with the legislation of that Party, have the status of permanent residents in the territory of the same;
Party : any State for which this Agreement has entered into force;
Exporting Party : the Party from whose territory a good or service is exported;
Importing Party : the Party into whose territory a good or service is imported;
heading : a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the four-digit level;
person : a natural person or a company;
person of a Party : a national or company of a Party;
Tariff Reduction Program : the one established in article 3-04;
Secretariat : the Secretariat established in accordance with article 19-02;
Harmonized System : the Harmonized Commodity Designation and Coding System, including the General Classification Rules and their explanatory notes;
subheading : a Harmonized System tariff classification code at the six-digit level;
territory : for each Party, as defined in the annex to this article.
Annex to Article 2-01 Country Specific Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise provided, the following shall be understood as:
territory :
a. regarding Mexico:
i) the states of the Federation and the Federal District;
ii) islands, including reefs and cays in adjacent seas;
iii) the islands of Guadalupe and Revillagigedo, located in the Pacific Ocean;
iv) the continental platform and the submarine bases of the islands, cays and reefs;
v) the waters of the territorial seas, to the extent and terms established by international law, and internal maritime waters;
vi) the space located on the national territory, with the extension and modalities established by international law itself; Y
vii) any area beyond the territorial seas of Mexico within which Mexico may exercise rights over the seabed and subsoil and over the natural resources they contain, in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as with its internal legislation; Y
b. with respect to Nicaragua, the terrestrial, maritime and air space under its sovereignty, the marine and submarine zones in which the Republic of Nicaragua exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction, in accordance with its legislation and international law.
Chapter III National Treatment and Market Access for Goods
Section A Definitions and Scope of Application
Article 3-01 : Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
consumed :
a. actually consumed; either
b. processed or manufactured in a way that results in a substantial change in the value, form or use of a good or in the production of another good;
samples of no commercial value : commercial samples that are marked, broken, perforated, or otherwise treated in a way that renders them unfit for sale or for any use other than as appreciable samples; Y
performance requirement : the requirement of:
a. export a certain volume or percentage of goods or services;
b. replace imported goods or services with goods or services from the Party granting the exemption from customs duties;
c. that the person benefiting from the exemption from customs duties buys other goods or services in the territory of the Party that grants it, or gives preference to goods or services of national production;
d. that the person benefiting from the exemption from customs duties produces goods or provides services in the territory of the Party that grants it, with a given level or percentage of national content; either
and. relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports or with the amount of foreign currency input.
Article 3-02: Scope of application This chapter applies to trade in goods between the Parties, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.
S ection B National Treatment
A rticle 3-03 : National Treatment 1. Each Party shall accord national treatment to the goods of the other Party, in accordance with Article III of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article III of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 relating to national treatment mean, with respect to a state or municipality, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that state or municipality accords to any like, direct competitive, or substitute goods, as the case may be, of the Party of which they are members.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the measures listed in the annex to Articles 3-03 and 3-09.
Section C Customs Duties
Article 3-04: Tariff Elimination 1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may increase any existing customs duty, or adopt any new customs duty, on originating goods 1, 2,
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each Party shall progressively eliminate its customs duties on originating goods in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article.
3. At the request of any of them, the Parties will hold consultations to examine the possibility of accelerating the elimination of customs duties provided for in the Tariff Elimination Program. Once approved by the Parties, in accordance with their applicable legal procedures, the agreement on the accelerated elimination of the customs duty on a good that is reached between the Parties, shall prevail over any customs duty or period of relief indicated in accordance with the Program of Tariff Deduction for that good.
4. Unless otherwise provided, this Agreement incorporates the tariff preferences previously negotiated between the Parties, in accordance with the First Modifying Protocol of the Partial Scope Agreement signed between Mexico and Nicaragua, as reflected in the Tariff Elimination Program . As of the entry into force of this Agreement, the preferences previously negotiated or granted between the Parties within the framework of the First Modifying Protocol of the Partial Scope Agreement signed between Mexico and Nicaragua remain void.
5. Each Party may adopt or maintain measures on imports in order to allocate the quota of imports carried out under the volumes established through tariffs (tariff-quota) in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program, as long as these measures do not have restrictive commercial effects on imports, in addition to those derived from the imposition of the quota tariff.
6. Upon the written request of either Party, the Party applying or proposing to apply measures on imports in accordance with paragraph 5 shall hold consultations to review the administration of those measures.
Article 3-05: Restrictions on the refund of customs duties on exported goods and customs duty deferral programs 1. For the purposes of this article, the following shall be understood:
customs duties : the customs duties that would be applicable to a good that is imported for consumption in the customs territory of a Party if the good were not exported to the territory of another Party;
consumables : "consumables" as defined in Chapter VI (Rules of Origin);
identical or similar goods: goods that are the same in everything, including their physical characteristics, quality and commercial prestige, as well as goods that, although not the same in everything, have similar characteristics and composition, which allows them to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable; Y
material : "material" as defined in Chapter VI (Rules of Origin).
2. Neither Party may refund the amount of customs duties paid or waive or reduce the amount of customs duties due, in relation to a good imported into its territory in an amount that exceeds the total customs duties paid or due on that amount of that imported good, with due discount for waste, that is:
a. used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party; either
b. replaced by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
3. No Party, subject to export, may reimburse, exempt or reduce:
a. the compensatory quotas that are applied in accordance with the legislation of each Party;
b. the premiums that are offered or collected on imported goods, derived from any bidding system related to the application of quantitative restrictions on imports, tariff-quota, or preferential tariff quotas; either
c. customs duties, paid or owed, with respect to a good imported into its territory and replaced by an identical or similar good that is subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
4. Except as otherwise provided in this article, as of July 1, 2005 and in the circumstances indicated in paragraph 6, neither Party may refund the amount of customs duties paid, or waive or reduce the amount of customs duties owed, in relation to a good imported into its territory, provided that the good is:
a. used as a material in the production of an originating good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party; either
b. substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of an originating good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
5. customs duty deferral program and one of the conditions indicated in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 4 is met, the Party from whose territory the good was exported:
a. it will determine the amount of customs duties as if the exported good had been destined for internal consumption; Y
b. within 60 days from the date of export, it will collect the amount of customs duties as if the exported good had been destined for domestic consumption.
6. Paragraphs 4 and 5 apply:
a. from the moment Nicaragua applies to a non-Party country provisions similar to those contained in those paragraphs; either
b. to a good imported into the territory of one of the Parties that meets the conditions of subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 4. In this case, the refund of customs duties will be suspended for three years, when it is shown that the reimbursement, exemption, or reduction of customs duties simultaneously:
i) creates a significant distortion of the tariff treatment applied by the Party that grants the reimbursement, exemption or reduction of tariffs in favor of the export of goods from the territory of that Party; Y
ii) causes damage to the national production of identical or similar goods, or direct competitors of the other Party.
7. For the purposes of paragraph 6, there is a significant distortion of the tariff treatment applied by the Party that grants the refund, exemption or reduction of customs duties in favor of the export of goods from the territory of that Party, when:
a. the amount of customs duties reimbursed, exempted or reduced on goods imported into the territory of that Party, which meet the conditions indicated in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 4 and for which there is production in the territory of the Parties, exceeds 5 % of the total value of imports in a year of originating goods classified in a tariff fraction of the Party to whose territory those originating goods are exported; either
b. a Party refunds, exempts, or reduces customs duties on goods or materials originating from the territory of non-Party countries, on whose importation it maintains quantitative restrictions and those goods or materials are subsequently exported to the other Party, used in the production of goods subsequently exported to the other Party, or substituted by identical or similar materials used in the production of goods subsequently exported to the other Party.
8. For the purposes of paragraph 6, for the determination of damage:
a. Injury is understood as a significant impairment of national production; Y
b. Domestic production is understood to be the producer or producers of identical or similar goods, or direct competitors that operate within the territory of a Party and that constitute a significant proportion greater than 35% of the total national production of those goods.
9. Paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 do not apply to:
a. a good that is imported under bond or guarantee to be transported and exported to the territory of the other Party;
b. a good that is exported to the territory of the other Party in the same condition in which it was imported into the territory of the Party from which it is exported. Processes such as testing, cleaning, repackaging, inspection or preservation of the good in its same condition will not be considered as changes in the condition of a good. When a good has been mixed with fungible goods and exported in the same condition, its origin, for the purposes of this paragraph, may be determined based on the inventory methods established in Chapter VI (Rules of Origin);
c. a good imported into the territory of a Party that is subsequently deemed to be exported from its territory or used as a material in the production of another good that is subsequently deemed to be exported to the territory of the other Party, or is substituted for an identical or similar used good as a material in the production of another good that is later considered to be exported to the territory of the other Party, due to:
i) sending it to a store free of customs duties; either
ii) their shipment to stores on board ships or as supplies for ships or aircraft;
d. the reimbursement made by a Party of the customs duties paid on a specific good imported into its territory and subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party, when such reimbursement is granted because the good does not correspond to the samples or specifications of the object object, or due to the shipment of that good without the consent of the consignee; neither
and. an originating good imported into the territory of a Party that is subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party, or is used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party, or is substituted by an identical or similar good used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
10. The Party that reimburses, exempts or reduces customs duties will provide, at the request of the other Party, the information required to verify the existence of the conditions established in paragraph 6, including statistical information regarding the imports on which it grants refunds, exemptions or reductions of customs duties in relation to a good exported to the territory of another Party.
11. As a condition to exclude from the calculation of the percentage referred to in subparagraph a) of paragraph 9, refunds, exemptions or reductions of customs duties granted on a good that meets the conditions of subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 4, the Party that reimburses, exempts or reduces those customs duties will demonstrate that there is no production in the free trade area of a good identical or similar to that good.
12. For the purposes of paragraph 11, at the request of the Party that refunds, waives or reduces customs duties on a good, the other Party shall provide, to the extent possible, pertinent and available information on that good.
13. Each Party shall establish clear and strict procedures for the application of paragraphs 4 and 5, in accordance with the following:
a. the Party that decides to initiate an investigation to apply paragraphs 4 and 5 will publish the initiation of the investigation in the corresponding official dissemination bodies and will notify the exporting Party in writing the day after the publication;
b. For purposes of determining a significant distortion and damage in accordance with numerals i) and ii) of letter b) of paragraph 6, the competent authorities will evaluate all the factors of an objective and quantifiable nature;
c. To determine the application of paragraphs 4 and 5, a direct causal relationship between the reimbursement, exemption or reduction, and the distortion and damage to the national production of identical or similar goods, or direct competitors will also be demonstrated;
d. If, as a result of this investigation, the competent authority determines, based on objective evidence, that the assumptions set forth in this article are met, the importing Party may initiate consultations with the other Party;
and. the consultation procedure will not oblige the Parties to reveal the information that has been provided confidentially, the disclosure of which may impede compliance with the laws of the Party that regulate the matter or harm commercial interests;
F. The period for prior consultations will begin on the day following the receipt by the exporting Party of the notification requesting the initiation of consultations. The prior consultation period will be 45 days, unless the Parties agree on a shorter period;
g. The notification referred to in subparagraph f) will be made through the competent authority and will contain sufficient information to support the application of paragraphs 4 and 5, including:
i) the names and addresses of the national producers of identical or similar goods, or direct competitors representative of the national production, their participation in the national production of that good and the reasons that lead them to affirm that they are representative of that sector;
ii) a clear and complete description of the good subject to the procedure, the tariff subheading in which it is classified and the current tariff treatment, as well as the description of the identical or similar good, or direct competitor;
(iii) import data for each of the three most recent calendar years that provide the basis that the good is being imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute terms or relative to domestic production;
iv) the data on the total national production of the identical or similar good, or direct competitor corresponding to the last three most recent years; Y
v) the data that demonstrates the damage caused by the imports of the good in question, in accordance with subparagraphs b) and c);
h. the application of paragraphs 4 and 5 may only be adopted once the prior consultation period has concluded;
Yo. during the consultation period, the exporting Party will make all the observations it deems pertinent; Y
j. The exporting Party will apply paragraphs 4 and 5 at the end of the consultation period provided for in subparagraph f) if the existence of any assumption established in paragraph 6 is verified.
14. The Parties shall consult annually regarding the application of this Article.
Article 3-06: Temporary importation of goods 1. Each Party shall authorize temporary importation without payment of customs duties to:
a. professional equipment necessary for the exercise of the activity, trade or profession of a business person;
b. press equipment or for broadcasting radio or television signals and cinematographic equipment;
c. goods for sporting purposes or intended for exhibition or demonstration, including components, ancillary devices and accessories; Y
d. trade shows and advertising films,
that are imported from the territory of the other Party, regardless of their origin and regardless of whether similar goods, direct competitors or substitutes are available in the territory of the Party.
2. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation without payment of customs duty, of a good of the type indicated in subparagraphs a), b) or c) of paragraph 1 to any of the following conditions, without the possibility of adopting additional conditions:
a. that the good is imported by a national or resident of the other Party;
b. that the property is used exclusively by the visiting person, or under his personal supervision, in the performance of his activity, trade or profession;
c. that the good is not subject to sale, lease or assignment in any other way while it remains in its territory under the temporary importation regime;
d. that the good is accompanied by a bond or guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be owed, as the case may be, for the definitive entry or importation, or in another form of guarantee, refundable at the time of export of the good, except that no bond or guarantee may be required for customs duties on an originating good;
and. that the good is susceptible to identification by any reasonable means established by the customs authority;
F. that the good is exported upon the departure of that person within the term that corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation;
g. that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use;
h. that the good does not undergo any transformation or modification during the authorized import period, except for wear and tear due to the normal use of the good; and
Yo. that the good complies with the sanitary and phytosanitary measures adopted in accordance with chapter V (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and with the applicable standardization-related measures adopted in accordance with chapter XIV (Standardization-Related Measures).
3. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Parties may subject the temporary importation without payment of customs duty, of a good of the type indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 1, to any of the following conditions, without additional conditions may be adopted:
a. that the good is imported only for the purposes of placing orders for goods or services that are supplied from the territory of the other Party or from another country that is not a Party;
b. that the property is not subject to sale, lease or assignment in any other way, and is used only for demonstration or exhibition while it remains in its territory;
c. that the good is accompanied by a bond or guarantee that does not exceed 110% of the charges that would be owed, as the case may be, for the definitive entry or importation, or in another form of guarantee, refundable at the time of export of the good, except that no bond or guarantee may be required for customs duties on an originating good;
d. that the good is susceptible to identification by any reasonable means established by the customs authority;
and. that the good is exported within a period that reasonably corresponds to the purpose of the temporary importation;
F. that the good is imported in quantities not greater than what is reasonable according to the intended use;
g. that the good does not undergo any transformation or modification during the authorized import period, except for wear and tear due to the normal use of the good; Y
h. that the good complies with the sanitary and phytosanitary measures adopted in accordance with chapter V (Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures) and with the applicable standardization-related measures adopted in accordance with chapter XIV (Standardization-Related Measures).
4. When a good that is imported temporarily does not meet any of the conditions that a Party imposes in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, that Party may apply the customs duties and any other charges that would be due for the final entry or importation of the good. same.
Article 3-07: Duty-free import of samples with no commercial value Each Party shall authorize the duty-free import of samples with no commercial value from the territory of the other Party.
Article 3-08: Exemption from customs duties 1. No Party may adopt a new measure of exemption from customs duties when the exemption is conditioned, explicitly or implicitly, on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.
2. As of July 1, 2007, neither Party may condition, explicitly or implicitly, the validity of any customs duty exemption in force on the fulfillment of a performance requirement.
3. If a Party can demonstrate that an exemption or a combination of exemptions from customs duties that the other Party has granted to goods intended for commercial use by a designated person, has an adverse effect on:
a. your economy;
b. the business interests of a person of that Party; either
c. business interests of an enterprise owned or controlled by a person of that Party, whose production facilities are located in the territory of the Party granting the exemption,
the Party granting the exemption will cease to do so or make it available to any importer.
Section D Non -tariff measures
Article 3-09 : Import and Export Restrictions 1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither Party may adopt or maintain any prohibition or restriction on the importation of any good of or to the other Party. export or sale for export of any good destined for the territory of the other Party, except as provided in Article XI of the GATT 1994, including its interpretative notes. For this purpose, Article XI of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and are an integral part thereof.
2. The Parties understand that, in all circumstances where any other type of restriction is prohibited, the rights and obligations of the GATT 1994 incorporated in paragraph 1 prohibit export and import price requirements, except as permitted for the application of sanctions and commitments regarding countervailing duties.
3. In cases where a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the import or export of goods from or to a non-Party, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent it from:
a. limit or prohibit the importation of the goods of the country that is not a Party, from the territory of the other Party; either
b. require as a condition for the export of those goods from the Party to the territory of the other Party, that they not be re-exported to the country that is not a Party, directly or indirectly, without being consumed in the territory of the other Party.
4. In the event that a Party adopts or maintains a prohibition or restriction on the importation of a good from a non-Party, at the request of either Party, the Parties shall consult in order to avoid interference or undue distortion. in the price, marketing and distribution mechanisms in the other Party.
5. Paragraphs 1 through 4 do not apply to the measures set out in the annex to Articles 3-03 and 3-09.
Article 3-10: Export Taxes 1. Except as provided in this Article, neither Party shall adopt or maintain any tax, duty or charge on the export of any good to the territory of the other Party, unless such are adopted or maintained on said good when it is destined for internal consumption.
2. Each Party may maintain or adopt a tax, levy or other charge on the export of the basic foodstuffs listed in paragraph 3, on their ingredients, or on the goods from which such foodstuffs are derived, if such tax, lien or charge is used:
a. so that the benefits of an internal food assistance program that includes said foods are received only by national consumers; either
b. to ensure the availability of sufficient quantities of the basic food good for national consumers, or of sufficient quantities of its ingredients or of the goods from which said basic food goods are derived for a national processing industry, when the internal price of said basic food good is kept below the world price as part of a government stabilization program, provided that such taxes, levies, or charges:
i) do not have the effect of increasing the protection granted to said national industry; Y
ii) are sustained only for the period necessary to maintain the integrity of the stabilization plan.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the following shall be understood as basic food goods:
	•	
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, each of the Parties may adopt or maintain a tax, levy or charge on the export of any foodstuff to the territory of the other Party if such tax, levy or charge is applied temporarily for alleviate a critical shortage of that nutritional good. For purposes of this paragraph, temporarily means up to one year, or a longer period agreed by the Parties.
Article 3-11: Customs Processing Fees No Party shall increase or establish any customs fee for the service rendered by customs, on originating goods, and shall eliminate such duties on originating goods on July 1, 2005.
Article 3-12: Country of Origin Marking The annex to this article applies to measures related to country of origin marking.
Article 3-13: Distinctive Products The annex to this article applies to the products indicated in it.
Section E Publication and Notice
Article 3-14: Publication and notification 1. Each Party shall promptly publish and notify the laws, regulations, procedures, and administrative provisions of general application that it has put into effect and that refer to the classification, valuation, or customs appraisal of goods, customs duty rates, taxes or other charges or import or export measures, restrictions or prohibitions, or the transfer of payments related thereto, or the sale, distribution, transportation, insurance, storage, inspection, display, processing, the mixing or any other use of said goods, so that the governments and the merchants or interested persons of the other Party have knowledge of them.Each Party shall also publish agreements related to international trade policy that are in force between the government or a government agency of that Party and the government or a government agency of the other Party.
2. To the extent possible, each Party shall publish in advance any measure indicated in paragraph 1 that it proposes to adopt and shall provide interested persons a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures.
3. Neither Party shall apply before its official publication any measure of a general nature adopted by that Party that has the effect of increasing a customs duty or other charge on the importation of goods of the other Party, or that imposes a new or more onerous measure, restriction or prohibition for imports of goods from the other Party or for transfers of funds related to them.
4. The provisions of this Article do not oblige any Party to disclose information of a confidential nature, the disclosure of which may constitute an obstacle to compliance with the law, is contrary to the public interest, or harm the legitimate business interests of public or private companies.
5. Each Party will identify, in terms of the tariff fractions and the nomenclature that corresponds to them in accordance with their respective rates, the measures, restrictions or prohibitions on the import or export of goods for reasons of national security, public health, preservation of the flora or fauna, the environment, plant health, standards, labels, international commitments, public order requirements or any other regulation.
Section F Provisions on textile goods
Article3-15: Temporary flexibility levels for goods classified in chapters 61 and 62 of the Harmonized System 1. Each Party shall grant to goods classified in chapters 61 and 62 of the Harmonized System, produced in the territory of the other Party and imported into its territory in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2, the preferential tariff treatment established in the Tariff Elimination Program corresponding to originating goods, in accordance with the amounts and periods established below:
a. for the period from July 1, 1998 to June 30, 1999, 125,000 United States dollars (dollars);
b. for the period from July 1, 1999 to June 30, 2000, $145,000;
c. for the period from July 1, 2000 to June 30, 2001, $165,000;
d. for the period from July 1, 2001 to June 30, 2002, $170,000; Y
and. for the period from July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2003, $175,000.
2. For the purposes of this article, the goods classified in chapters 61 and 62 of the Harmonized System must meet the following requirements:
a. goods classified in chapter 61 of the Harmonized System, a change to headings 61.01 through 61.17 of any other chapter, provided that the good is cut (or knit to shape) and sewn, or is otherwise assembled in the territory of the Exporting Party; Y
b. goods classified in chapter 62 of the Harmonized System, a change to headings 62.01 through 62.17 of any other chapter, provided that the good is cut (or knit to shape) and sewn, or is otherwise assembled in the territory of the exporting party.
3. The total annual amounts established in paragraph 1 may not be assigned to the assets classified in a certain heading in an amount that exceeds 25% of the total annual amount.
4. As of July 1, 2003, each Party shall only grant preferential tariff treatment to originating goods classified in Chapters 61 and 62 of the Harmonized System.
5. Regarding the importation of goods that exceed the amounts determined in paragraph 1, each Party will only grant them the preferential tariff treatment established in the Tariff Elimination Program if they comply with the corresponding rule of origin established in the annex to article 6- 03.
Annex to Articles 3-03 and 3-09 Exceptions to Articles 3-03 and 3-09
Section A Measures of Mexico
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods under headings 63.09 and 63.10 of the General Import Tax Rate, based on the nomenclature of the Harmonized System.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 3-09, Mexico may adopt or maintain prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of used goods described in the following headings, subheadings and fractions of the Harmonized System: (Descriptions are provided for reference purposes)
Annex to Article 3-04: Tariff Elimination Program
1. Except as otherwise provided in each Party's tariff staging schedule, the following tariff staging categories apply to the elimination of customs duties by each Party under Article 3-04:
a. customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category A in a Party's staging list shall be completely eliminated so that those goods shall be free of customs duty as of July 1, 1998;
b. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of tariff reduction category B in Mexico's tariff reduction list will be eliminated in 5 equal annual stages as of July 1, 1998, and these goods will be free of customs duties as of July 1, 1998. July 1, 2002;
c. Customs duties on the goods included in the tariff fractions of tariff reduction category B in Nicaragua's tariff reduction list will be eliminated in 3 equal annual stages as of July 1, 2000, so that these goods will be free of customs duties to beginning July 1, 2002;
d. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of tariff reduction category C in Mexico's tariff reduction list will be eliminated in 10 equal annual stages as of July 1, 1998, and these goods will be free of customs duties as of July 1, 1998. July 1, 2007;
and. Customs duties on the goods included in the tariff fractions of tariff reduction category C in Nicaragua's tariff reduction list will be eliminated in 8 equal annual stages as of July 1, 2000, so that these goods will be free of customs duties to as of July 1, 2007;
F. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff headings of staging category C15 in Mexico's staging list will be eliminated in 15 equal annual stages as of July 1, 1998, and these goods will be free of customs duty as of July 1, 1998. July 1, 2012;
g. Customs duties on goods included in the tariff items of staging category C15 in Nicaragua's staging list will be eliminated in 13 equal annual stages starting on July 1, 2000, so that these goods will be free of customs duties to as of July 1, 2012;
h. On an originating good included in the tariff fractions identified with the code "DES NIC", Nicaragua will apply the lower of the following customs tariffs:
i) the most favored nation customs tariff of Nicaragua; Y
ii) the customs duty applied by Mexico to the same good. from the date on which Mexico completely eliminates its customs duties, in accordance with the Tariff Elimination program, Nicaragua will also completely eliminate them; Y
Yo. Mexico will apply the provisions of Annex 2 to Article 4-04 to goods originating in Nicaragua included in the tariff items of the "TA" category.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 3-04, a Party may adopt or maintain customs duties in accordance with its rights and obligations under the GATT 1994 on originating goods included in a tariff item indicated with the code "EXCL" in the tariff reduction list of each Party.
3. The base customs duty rate and the staging category for determining the transition customs duties at each stage of reduction for a tariff item are indicated for that tariff item in each Party's staging list. In the case of Mexico, they are indicated in the "base rate" and "veldes" columns, respectively, and in the case of Nicaragua, they are indicated in the "TB2000" and "veldes" columns, respectively.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, Nicaragua may apply the component of the customs tariff that appears in the "ATP" column in its tariff reduction list to the originating goods included in the corresponding tariff fraction, and will eliminate it for originating goods as of January 1, 1999, except for the products specified in paragraph 5.
5. The ATP applicable to the originating goods listed below will be eliminated according to the following tax relief schedule: ATP applicable as of:
6. The component of the customs duty that appears in the "ATP" column in the Nicaraguan tariff reduction list, applicable to originating goods, shall not exceed the lesser of:
a. the component of the customs duty established in accordance with paragraph 4; Y
b. the customs tariff applicable to member countries of the General Treaty of Central American Economic Integration.
7. For purposes of the elimination of customs duties in accordance with article 3-04, the transition rates will be rounded to one decimal, using the nearest tenth of a percentage point higher or lower. If the tariff rate is expressed in monetary units, at least to the nearest .001 lower or higher than the official monetary unit of the Party.
Section A Schedule of Tariff Reductions of Mexico (Attached in a separate volume)
Section B Nicaragua's Tariff Reduction Schedule (Attached in a separate volume)
Annex to Article 3-12 Country of Origin Marking
1. For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
final buyer : the last person who, in the territory of the importing Party, acquires it in the form in which it is imported. This buyer is not necessarily the final user of the good;
container : including but not limited to a container, packaging, packaging, or wrapper;
common container : the container in which the good will usually arrive at the final purchaser;
legible : capable of being read easily;
Sufficient permanence : that the mark will remain on the good until it reaches the final purchaser, unless it is intentionally removed;
customs value : the value of a good for the purpose of imposing customs duties on an imported good in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code; Y
visible : that can be seen with the ordinary handling of the good or container.
2. Each Party may require that a good from the other Party imported into its territory bear a country of origin mark that indicates the name of the country to the final buyer of the good.
3. Each Party may require, among its general consumer information measures, that an imported good bear the country of origin mark in the manner prescribed for goods of the importing Party.
4. By adopting, maintaining, and applying any country of origin marking measure, each Party shall minimize the difficulties, costs, and inconvenience that such measure may cause to the trade and industry of the other Party.
5. Each Party:
a. will accept any reasonable method of marking a good of the other Party, such as the use of adhesive or pressure labels, tags or paint, which ensures that the mark is visible, legible and of sufficient permanence;
b. shall exempt from the origin marking requirement a good of the other Party that:
i) is not capable of being marked;
ii) it cannot be marked before being exported to the territory of the other Party without damaging it;
iii) cannot be marked except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, so as to discourage its export to the territory of the other Party;
iv) cannot be marked without material impairment of its operation or substantial deterioration of its appearance;
v) is in a container marked in such a way that the origin of the good is reasonably indicated to the final buyer;
vi) is raw material;
vii) is to be produced in the territory of the importing Party, by or on behalf of the importer, in such a way that the good becomes a good of the importing Party;
viii) due to its nature or the circumstances of its importation, the final buyer can reasonably know its country of origin, even if it is not marked;
ix) it has been produced more than 20 years before it was imported;
x) has been imported without the required marking and cannot be marked afterwards except at a cost that is substantial in relation to its customs value, provided that the omission of marking was not for the purpose of circumventing the country of origin marking requirements ;
xi) is in transit, in guarantee or at the disposal of the customs authority, for purposes of temporary importation without payment of customs duties; be an original work of art; either
xii) has been imported for the importer's use and not to be sold in the form in which it was imported.
6. With the exception of the goods described in numerals vi), vii), viii), ix), xi), and xii) of subparagraph b) of paragraph 5, a Party may provide that when a good is exempt from the requirement of country of origin marking, in accordance with subparagraph b) of paragraph 5, the common outer container is marked so as to indicate the country of origin of the merchandise it contains.
7. Each of the Parties shall provide that:
a. a common container that is imported empty, disposable or not, will not require the marking of its country of origin, but the container in which it is imported may be required to be marked with the country of origin of its content; Y
b. a full common container, disposable or not:
i) will not require the marking of its country of origin, but
ii) may be required to be marked with the name of the country of origin of its contents, unless its contents are already marked and the container can be easily opened for inspection or the marking of the contents is clearly visible through the container.
8. Whenever administratively and legally feasible, each Party shall allow the importer to mark a good of the other Party after importing it, but before releasing it from the control or custody of customs authorities, unless the importer has committed repeated violations of the Party's country of origin marking requirements and has been previously notified in writing that the good must be marked prior to importation.
9. Each Party shall provide that, except for importers who have been notified in accordance with paragraph 8, no special assessment or penalty shall be imposed for failure to comply with that Party's country of origin marking requirements, unless that the goods are withdrawn from the control or custody of the customs authorities without having been adequately marked or misleading marks have been affixed to them.
10 The Parties shall cooperate and consult with each other on matters related to this Annex, including additional exemptions from the country of origin marking requirement.
Annex to Article 3-13 Badges 3
Nicaragua will recognize tequila and mezcal as distinctive products of Mexico. Consequently, Nicaragua will not allow the sale of any product such as tequila or mezcal, unless they have been produced in Mexico in accordance with the laws and regulations of Mexico for those products.
Chapter IV Agricultural Sector
A rticle 4-01 : Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
agricultural product : a product described in any of the following chapters, headings or subheadings of the Harmonized System:
(Descriptions are provided for reference purposes)
a. Chapters 1 to 24 (except fish and fish products); Y
b.
export subsidies :
a. the granting, by governments or public bodies, to a company, a branch of production, producers of an agricultural product, a cooperative or other association of such producers, or a marketing council, of direct subsidies, with inclusion of payments in kind, subject to export performance;
b. the sale or placement for export by governments or public agencies of non-commercial stocks of agricultural products, at a price less than the comparable price charged to buyers in the domestic market for a similar product;
c. payments for exports of agricultural products financed by virtue of government measures, whether or not they involve a debit in the public accounts, including payments financed from revenues from a levy imposed on the agricultural product in question or on an agricultural product of the that the exported product is obtained;
d. the provision of subsidies to reduce the costs of marketing agricultural exports (except readily available export promotion and advisory services), including handling, processing and other processing costs, and the costs of international transport and freight;
and. internal transportation and freight costs for export shipments, established or imposed by governments on more favorable terms than for internal shipments; Y
F. subsidies for agricultural products subject to their incorporation into exported products; Y
over-quota duty rate: the duty rate applied to quantities in excess of the amount specified in a quota-duty.
Article 4-02: Scope of application 1. This section applies to measures related to agricultural trade adopted or maintained by any Party.
2. In the event of a contradiction between this chapter and any other provision of this Agreement, this chapter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.
Article 4-03: International Obligations A Party, before adopting a measure pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement on goods that is based on Article XX h) of the GATT 1994 and that may affect trade in an agricultural product between the Parties, shall consult with the other Party to avoid the nullification or impairment of a concession granted by that Party in the Tariff Elimination Program of this Agreement.
Article 4-04: Market Access 1. The Parties agree to facilitate access to their respective markets by reducing or eliminating barriers to trade in agricultural products, and undertake not to establish new barriers to trade between them.
Quantitative restrictions and customs duties
2. The Parties waive the rights granted by Article XI:2 c) of the GATT 1994 and those same rights incorporated in Article 3-09, with respect to any measure adopted or maintained on the importation of agricultural products.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, with respect to the products contained in Annex 1 to this article, either Party may maintain or adopt customs duties on the importation of said products, in accordance with their rights and obligations derived from the Agreement. about the WTO.
4. Once a year from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall examine, through the Committee on Agricultural Trade established in Article 4-08, the possibility of gradually eliminating customs duties on imports of agricultural products contained in annex 1 to this article.
5. The access of the products contained in annex 2 to this article, will be governed in accordance with the provisions of that annex.
6. A Party may not apply to agricultural products of the other Party a tariff rate on the surplus of the quota, which exceeds the provisions of the Tariff Elimination Program agreed between the Parties.
Restrictions on the refund of customs duties on products exported in identical or similar conditions.
7. As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, neither Party may refund the amount of customs duties paid, nor exempt or reduce the amount of customs duties owed, in relation to any agricultural product imported into its territory that be:
a. substituted by an identical or similar agricultural product subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party; either
b. substituted by an identical or similar product used as a material in the production of another good subsequently exported to the territory of the other Party.
Article 4-05: Domestic Support 1. The Parties recognize that domestic support measures may be of vital importance for their agricultural sectors, but may also distort trade and affect production. In addition, they recognize that commitments on the reduction of internal support may arise in the multilateral agricultural negotiations within the framework of the WTO. Thus, when a Party decides to support its agricultural producers, it should strive to move towards domestic support policies that:
a. have minimal or no distorting effects on trade or production; either
b. are exempt from any commitment to reduce domestic support that could be negotiated under the WTO.
2. The Parties also acknowledge that any of them may modify their domestic support measures, including those that may be subject to reduction commitments, in accordance with their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement.
Article 4-06: Export subsidies 1. The Parties share the objective of achieving the multilateral elimination of export subsidies for agricultural products and, in this sense, they will cooperate in the effort to reach an agreement within the framework of the WTO .
2. Subject to Chapter IX (Unfair International Trade Practices), as of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may not increase subsidies above 7% of the FOB export value.
3. From the moment the tariffs on originating agricultural products reach zero under the Tariff Elimination Program, and in no case after July 1, 2007, the Parties may not maintain export subsidies on agricultural products in their reciprocal trade.
4. Notwithstanding the foregoing, as of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may not maintain in their reciprocal trade export subsidies on agricultural products included in Article 5 of Decree Number 37-91 of Nicaragua and those that are subject to tariffs-quota according to the Tariff Elimination Program.
Article 4-07: Agricultural technical and marketing standards 1. Trade in agricultural products between the Parties shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter XIV (Measures Related to Standardization).
2. The Parties establish a Technical Standards and Agricultural Marketing Committee, made up of representatives of each of them, which will meet annually or as agreed. The committee will review the operation of agricultural grading and quality standards that affect trade between the Parties, and will resolve issues that may arise in connection with the operation of the standards. This committee will report its activities to the Agricultural Trade Committee, established pursuant to section 4-08.
3. A Party shall grant agricultural products imported from the other Party a treatment no less favorable than that granted to its agricultural products in the application of technical standards or agricultural marketing in aspects of packaging, grade, quality and size.
Article 4-08: Committee on Agricultural Trade 1. The Parties hereby establish a Committee on Agricultural Trade, made up of representatives of each of them.
2. The functions of the committee will include:
a. monitoring and fostering cooperation to apply and administer this chapter;
b. the establishment of a forum for the Parties to consult on aspects related to this chapter, to be held at least once a year and as agreed by the Parties;
c. submitting an annual report to the Commission on the implementation of this chapter; Y
d. analyze in a particular and expeditious manner possible mechanisms to include in the Tariff Elimination Program the tariff products included in subheadings 0901.21, 0901.22 and 0901.90 (roasted coffee) and present them to the Commission for its consideration.
Annex 1 to Article 4-04 Exclusions
The products listed in the Tariff Reduction Program in whose "reduction speed" column the EXCL category appears, will be excluded from the reduction.
Annex 2 to Article 4-04 Trade in Sugar
1. The Parties agree to establish a Sugar Analysis Committee made up of representatives of each of them.
2. The participation that would correspond to Nicaragua within the customs tariff-free quota type scheme for sugar that Mexico would implement in the event of requiring sugar in a particular year, will be 20% during the first four years of validity of this Agreement. The committee will define participation for subsequent years.
3. In the event that Mexico does not require sugar in a particular year, the preferential sugar quota that Mexico grants to Nicaragua will be zero. Therefore, for that year, there will be no concession of preferential access for Nicaragua.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 4-04, above the free quota of customs duties that Mexico could grant to Nicaragua, Mexico may adopt or maintain customs duties on Nicaraguan sugar that originates in accordance with its rights and obligations. derived from the WTO Agreement.
5. For the purposes of this annex, sugar shall be understood as: for imports into Mexico, the following subheadings or tariff fractions described in the Mexican General Import Tax Tariff: 1701.11.01, 1701.11.99, 1701.12.01, 1701.12. 99, 1701.91 (except those containing flavorings), 1701.99.01 and 1701.99.99.
Chapter V Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Article 5-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
food additive : any substance that by itself is not normally consumed as food, nor is it used as a basic ingredient in food, whether or not it has nutritional value, and whose addition to food in its production, manufacturing, processing, preparation, treatment phase , packaging, packaging, transport or storage, results directly or indirectly, by itself or its by-products, a component of the food or affects its characteristics. This definition does not include contaminants or substances added to food to maintain or improve nutritional qualities;
food : any processed, semi-finished or raw substance intended for human consumption, including beverages, chewing gum and any other substances used in their manufacture, preparation or treatment, as well as balanced substances intended for animal consumption (feed) ; but does not include cosmetics, tobacco, or substances used solely as medicines;
animal : any vertebrate or invertebrate species, including aquatic and wild fauna;
harmonization : the establishment, recognition and application of common sanitary and phytosanitary measures by the Parties;
good : food, animals, vegetables, their products and by-products;
contaminant : any substance or living organism not intentionally added to food, which is present in such food as a result of production (including operations carried out in agriculture, animal husbandry and veterinary medicine), manufacturing, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transportation or storage of such food or as a result of environmental contamination;
disease : infection, clinical or not, caused by one or several etiological agents of the diseases listed in the International Animal Health Code of the International Office of Epizootics;
risk assessment :
a. the probability of entry, establishment and spread of a disease or pest and the possible biological, agronomic and economic consequences; either
b. the likelihood of detrimental effects to human, animal or plant life or health from the presence of food additives, contaminants, toxins or disease-causing organisms in a good;
food safety : the quality that ensures that food does not present any risk to human or animal health;
scientific information : data or information derived from the use of scientific principles and methods;
sanitary or phytosanitary measure: a measure that a Party establishes, adopts, maintains or applies in its territory to:
a. protect life, human and animal health, as well as plant health from the risks arising from the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease;
b. protect life, human and animal health, as well as plant health from risks resulting from the presence of a food additive, contaminant, toxin or pathogenic organism in a good;
c. protect human life and health from the risks originating from an organism that causes a pest or disease carried by an animal, a plant or a derivative thereof; either
d. prevent or limit other damage from the introduction, establishment and spread of a pest or disease.
Sanitary and phytosanitary measures comprise all relevant laws, regulations, requirements and procedures, including criteria relating to the final good; the processing or production methods directly related to the good; testing, inspection, certification or approval procedures; the relevant statistical methods; sampling procedures; risk assessment methods; packaging and labeling requirements directly related to food safety; and quarantine regimes, such as relevant requirements associated with the transport of animals or plants, or with material necessary for their survival during transport;
adequate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection : the level of protection to life, human and animal health, as well as plant health, that a Party considers adequate;
international standards, guidelines or recommendations:
a. in relation to food safety, those of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, including those related to the decomposition of products, prepared by the Codex Alimentarius Committee on Fish and Fishery Products; with food additives, contaminants, hygiene practices and methods of analysis and sampling;
b. in relation to animal health and zoonoses, those elaborated under the auspices of the International Office of Epizootics;
c. in relation to plant health, those prepared under the auspices of the Secretariat of the International Convention for the Protection of Plants; either
d. those established by other international organizations, agreed by the Parties.
pest : a species, race or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent harmful or potentially harmful to plants, animals or their products;
pesticide: a substance intended to prevent, destroy, attract, repel or control any pest, including unwanted species of plants or animals, during the production, storage, transport, distribution and processing of food, plants and their products or animal feed, or that can be administered to animals to combat ectoparasites. Also includes substances intended for use as plant growth regulators, defoliants, desiccants, agents to reduce fruit density or sprout inhibitors and substances applied to crops before or after harvest to protect the product against deterioration during storage and transport. The term does not normally include fertilizers, nutrients of vegetable or animal origin,
approval procedure – a procedure for registration, certification, notification or any other mandatory administrative procedure to approve the use of a food additive or establish a tolerance of a contaminant for defined purposes or under agreed conditions in a food, drink or feed, prior to allow their use or commercialization when any of them contains the food additive or contaminant;
control or inspection procedure: a procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine compliance with a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, including sampling, testing, inspection, verification, monitoring, auditing, conformity assessment, accreditation, or other procedures that they involve the physical examination of a good, of the packaging of the good, or of the equipment or facilities directly related to the production, commercialization or use of a good, but that does not involve an approval procedure;
pesticide residue : a substance present in food, plants and their products, or animal feed as a result of the use of a pesticide. The term includes any derivative of a pesticide, such as conversion products, metabolites and reaction products, and impurities considered to be of toxicological importance.
transport : the means of mobilization, the form of packaging and the modality of transport, established in a sanitary or phytosanitary measure;
plant : living plants and parts thereof, including seeds and germplasm;
area of low pest or disease prevalence : an area designated by competent authorities, which may include the whole of a country, part of a country, or all or parts of several countries, in which a particular pest or disease no longer occurs that to a limited degree, and that it is subject to effective surveillance and control measures of the pest or disease or its eradication; Y
pest- or disease-free zone : an area designated by competent authorities, which may include the whole of a country, part of a country, or all or parts of several countries, in which a particular pest or disease does not exist. A pest- or disease-free area may surround, be surrounded by, or be adjacent to an area - either within part of a country or in a geographic region that may include all or parts of several countries - where it is known that a particular pest or disease exists but is subject to regional control measures, such as the establishment of protection, surveillance, and buffer zones that isolate or eradicate the pest or disease in question.
Article 5-02: Scope of application In order to establish a framework of disciplines and rules that guide the development, adoption and compliance of sanitary and phytosanitary measures, the provisions of this chapter apply to any such measure that may directly or indirectly affect trade between the Parties.
Article 5-03: Main rights and obligations Adoption of sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
1. Each Party may establish, adopt, maintain or apply any sanitary or phytosanitary measure, including those related to food safety and the importation of any good from the territory of the other Party, when it does not comply with the applicable requirements, or do not satisfy the approval procedures, as well as those that represent a higher level of protection than that which would be achieved by means of measures based on an international standard, guideline or recommendation, provided that they are supported by scientific principles.
Scientific principles .
2. Each Party shall ensure that any sanitary or phytosanitary measure that it establishes, adopts, maintains or applies:
a. is based on scientific principles, taking into account, where appropriate, both relevant factors and different geographical and technological conditions;
b. be maintained only when there is a scientific basis to support it; Y
c. is based on a risk assessment appropriate to the circumstances.
Non-discriminatory treatment.
3. Each Party shall ensure that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure that it establishes, adopts, maintains or applies does not arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminate between its goods and similar goods of the other Party, or between goods of the other Party and similar goods of another Party. country, when similar or identical sanitary or phytosanitary conditions exist.
Covert restrictions and unnecessary obstacles.
4. None of the Parties shall establish, adopt, maintain or apply sanitary and phytosanitary measures that constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties, or that have the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles thereto. In this sense, they will ensure that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures are put into practice to the degree necessary to achieve their adequate level of protection, taking into account technical and economic feasibility and scientific principles.
Right to set the level of protection.
5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each Party may establish its appropriate levels of sanitary or phytosanitary protection, in accordance with the provisions of Article 5-06.
Support in other organizations.
6. Each Party shall ensure that any body it relies on for the development or application of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure acts in a manner consistent with this Chapter.
Article 5-04: International standards and standardization bodies. 1. Each Party shall use international standards, guidelines or recommendations as a reference framework for its sanitary and phytosanitary measures, except when they do not constitute an effective or adequate means to protect life, human and animal health, as well as plant health. , due to factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature or for scientifically justified reasons or because the adequate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection is not obtained.
2. A Party's sanitary or phytosanitary measure that conforms to an international standard shall be presumed to be consistent with paragraphs 1 through 5 of Article 5-03.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party may establish, adopt, maintain or apply stricter measures than those contemplated in international standards, guidelines or recommendations, provided that they are supported by scientific principles in order to achieve the appropriate levels of sanitary and phytosanitary protection.
4. When a Party has reason to believe that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the other Party affects or may adversely affect its exports, and that measure is not based on relevant international standards, guidelines or recommendations, it may request to be informed of the reasons for the measure, and the other Party will do so in writing within a period not exceeding 30 days.
5. Each Party shall participate, to the greatest extent possible, in relevant international standard-setting organizations, in particular the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the International Office of Epizootics and the International Convention for the Protection of Plants, for the purpose of promoting the development and periodic review of international standards, guidelines and recommendations.
Article 5-05: Equivalence. 1. Without reducing the level of protection of life, human and animal health, as well as plant health established in their legislation and in order to facilitate trade in goods, the Parties will make equivalent, to the greatest extent possible, their respective sanitary or phytosanitary measures, taking into account international standardization guidelines and recommendations.
2. The importing Party will accept a sanitary or phytosanitary measure established, adopted, maintained or applied by the exporting Party as equivalent to its own, when it objectively demonstrates with scientific information and risk assessment methods based on international standards agreed upon by them, that such measure achieves the appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection required by the importing Party.
3. Each Party will accept the results of the sanitary and phytosanitary control procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, as long as satisfactory guarantees are offered that the good complies with the sanitary or phytosanitary measures established, adopted , maintained or applied in the territory of that Party.
4. In accordance with paragraph 3, the importing Party that requests it shall be provided with access to carry out the relevant control or inspection procedures.
5. When developing a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, each Party shall consider the relevant, current or proposed sanitary or phytosanitary measures of the other Party, with the objective of harmonizing them.
6. At the request of one of them, the Parties will enter into consultations aimed at recognizing the equivalence of specific sanitary or phytosanitary measures, based on international standards, guidelines or recommendations.
Article 5-06: Risk assessment and appropriate level of sanitary and phytosanitary protection 1. The Parties shall ensure that their sanitary and phytosanitary measures are based on an assessment, appropriate to the circumstances, of the existing risks to life, health human and animal, as well as for the preservation of plant health, taking into account the risk assessment techniques developed by the competent standardization organizations agreed by the Parties.
2. When carrying out a risk assessment on a good, including the risks for food additives and contaminants, the Parties shall take into account the following factors:
a. available scientific and technical information;
b. the existence of pests and diseases that need to be taken into account, including the existence of areas free or of low prevalence of pests and diseases recognized by the Parties;
c. the epidemiology of risky diseases and pests;
d. the critical control points in the production, handling, packaging, packing and transportation processes;
and. the ecological conditions and other environmental conditions that must be considered;
F. the relevant methods of inspection, sampling and testing; Y
g. quarantine measures and applicable treatments that satisfy the importing country in terms of risk mitigation.
3. In addition to the provisions of paragraph 2, when establishing the appropriate level of sanitary and phytosanitary protection, the Parties shall take into account the risk linked to the introduction, establishment and spread of a pest or disease; and when assessing the risk they will also take into account, when relevant, the following economic factors:
a. the loss of production or sales in the event of the entry, establishment or spread of a pest or disease;
b. the costs of controlling or eradicating the pest or disease in its territory; Y
c. the cost-effectiveness of other possible methods to limit the risk.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 and subparagraph c) of paragraph 2 of Article 5-03, when a Party carries out a risk assessment and concludes that the scientific knowledge or other available information is insufficient to complete the evaluation, it may provisionally adopt a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, provided that it is based on the pertinent information available. Once that Party has sufficient information to complete the risk assessment, the Parties will agree on a time frame for the risk assessment to be completed and, where appropriate, modify the provisional sanitary or phytosanitary measure.
Article 5-07: Adaptation to regional conditions and recognition of free zones and zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases 1. Each Party shall adapt its sanitary or phytosanitary measures related to the introduction, establishment or spread of a pest or disease, to the sanitary or phytosanitary characteristics of the area where a good, subject to such a measure, is produced and to the area, in its territory, to which the good is destined, taking into account any pertinent conditions, including those related to cargo and transportation between those zones. When evaluating the sanitary or phytosanitary characteristics of an area, the Parties shall take into account, among others, the level of prevalence of specific diseases or pests, the existence of eradication or control programs, and the criteria or guidelines developed by the competent organizations. and agreed by the Parties.
2. The Parties shall recognize, in particular, the concepts of free zones and zones of low prevalence of pests or diseases. The determination of such zones will be based on factors such as geographic location, ecosystems, epidemiological surveillance and the effectiveness of sanitary or phytosanitary controls.
3. The Party that declares a zone free of a specific pest or disease in its territory must demonstrate said condition to the other Party with scientific information and grant the assurance that it will remain as such, based on the protection measures adopted by the Party. the authorities responsible for sanitary and phytosanitary services.
4. The Party interested in obtaining recognition of a zone free of any pest or disease must make the request and provide the corresponding scientific and technical information to the other Party.
5 The Party that receives the request for the recognition indicated in paragraph 4, will pronounce itself within a term agreed by the Parties, for which it may carry out verifications in the territory of the exporting Party for inspection, tests and other procedures. In case of non-acceptance, it will indicate in writing the scientific and technical foundation of its decision.
6. The Parties will establish agreements on specific requirements whose fulfillment allows a good produced in an area of low prevalence of pests or diseases to be imported if it achieves the appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection.
Article 5-08: Control, inspection and approval procedures 1. Each Party shall initiate and conclude any control or inspection procedure in the most expeditious manner possible and shall notify whoever requires it of the expected duration of the process.
2. Each Party shall ensure that its responsible authority:
a. upon receipt of an application, promptly review the documentation for completeness and accurately and completely inform the applicant of any deficiencies;
b. as soon as possible, provide the applicant with the accurate and complete results of the procedure so that the applicant can take any necessary corrective action;
c. when the application has deficiencies, follow the procedure as far as possible, if requested by the applicant, according to the established deadlines and report, at the request of the applicant, about the status of the application and the reasons for any delay;
d. Limit the information that the applicant must present to what is necessary to carry out the procedure;
and. grants a confidential or reserved nature to the information derived from the conduct of procedures for an asset of the other Party;
F. protects the legitimate business interests of the applicant in accordance with the legislation in force in each Party;
g. limit any requirements regarding individual specimens or samples of a property to what is necessary;
h. for carrying out the procedure, does not collect a right on an asset of the other Party, in excess of the collection on its assets;
Yo. adequately select the location of the facilities where the procedure is carried out, as well as the samples of goods, so as not to cause unnecessary inconvenience to an applicant or his representative;
j. have a mechanism in place to review complaints related to the operation of the procedure and to take corrective action when a complaint is substantiated; Y
k. When the specifications of a good are modified after its control and inspection, based on the applicable regulation, the procedure prescribed for the modified good is limited to what is necessary to determine if there is due certainty that the good continues to comply with the regulations of in question
3. Each Party shall apply to its approval procedures the relevant provisions of paragraph 2.
4. When the importing Party requires to carry out a control or inspection procedure at the production stage, the exporting Party shall adopt, at the request of the importing Party, the reasonable measures available to it to facilitate access to its territory and provide assistance necessary to the importing Party for the execution of the control or inspection procedure.
5. To ensure food safety, each Party may establish in its approval procedures and in accordance with its current regulations, authorization requirements for the use of a food additive or the establishment of a tolerance level for a contaminant in the themselves, before granting access to their market. When that Party so requires, it may adopt a relevant international standard, guideline or recommendation, as a basis for granting access to these goods, until a final determination is made.
Article 5-09: Notification, publication and provision of information 1. Each Party, when proposing the adoption or modification of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure in its territory, and whenever this may have an effect on the trade of the other Party:
a. publish a notice and give the other Party written notice, at least 60 days in advance, of its intention to adopt or modify that measure, other than a law, and publish and provide the other Party with the full text of the proposed measure; Likewise, when possible, it will identify the provisions that deviate substantially from the pertinent international norms, guidelines or recommendations, in a way that allows interested persons to familiarize themselves with the proposal;
b. it will identify the goods to which that measure will be applied, and will include a description of the objective and the reasons for it; Y
c. provide a copy of the proposed measure to any interested person who so requests and, without discrimination, allow the other Party and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, discuss and take into account the results of such discussions.
2. When a Party considers it necessary to address an emerging problem related to sanitary or phytosanitary protection, it may omit any of the steps established in paragraph 1, provided that, once a sanitary or phytosanitary measure has been adopted:
a. immediately notify the other Party, in accordance with the requirements established in subparagraph b) of paragraph 1, including a brief description of the emergency; Y
b. provide a copy of that measure to the other Party or interested persons who so request and, without discrimination, allow the other Party and interested persons to submit comments in writing and, upon request, discuss and take into account the results of such discussions.
3. Each Party, except when necessary to deal with an emerging problem indicated in paragraph 2, shall determine a reasonable period between the publication of a sanitary or phytosanitary measure and the date of Entry into force thereof, in order to allow time for the people concerned to adapt to that measure.
4. When an importing Party denies entry into its territory to a good of the exporting Party, because it does not comply with a sanitary or phytosanitary measure, it shall notify it in writing within a period not exceeding seven days, an explanation, in the that identifies the corresponding measure, as well as the reasons why the good does not comply with that measure.
5. Each Party shall designate the authority responsible for the implementation in its territory of the notification provisions of this article, within a period not exceeding 30 days after the entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 5-10: Information Centers 1. Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one information center within its territory capable of answering all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing the relevant documentation regarding:
a. any sanitary or phytosanitary measure proposed, adopted or maintained in its territory, including control or inspection procedures, approval procedures, production and quarantine regimes, and procedures relating to pesticide tolerances;
b. the risk assessment processes and the factors it takes into consideration when conducting that assessment and establishing its appropriate level of sanitary or phytosanitary protection; Y
c. membership and participation in international and regional sanitary and phytosanitary bodies and systems, and in bilateral and multilateral agreements within the scope of this chapter, as well as in the provisions of those bodies, systems and agreements, and the location of notices published in accordance with this chapter, or where such information can be obtained.
2. When a Party designates more than one information center, it shall notify the other Party about the scope of responsibilities of each of said centers.
3. Each Party shall ensure that, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the other Party or interested persons request copies of documents, they are provided at the same price as for internal sale, plus the cost of shipping.
Article 5-11: Limitations on the provision of information In addition to the provisions of Article 21-03, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to oblige a Party to provide any confidential information the disclosure of which may harm the legitimate business interests of an enterprise. .
Article 5-12: Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures 1. The Parties hereby establish the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, made up of representatives of each of them, with responsibilities for sanitary and phytosanitary matters. The term for its installation will not be greater than 90 days from the Entry into force of this Agreement.
The committee will follow up on the application of the provisions of this chapter, the achievement of its objectives and will issue expedited recommendations on specific sanitary and phytosanitary problems.
2. The committee:
a. it will establish the modalities that it deems appropriate for the coordination and solution of the matters that are referred to it;
b. Facilitate agricultural trade between the Parties by promoting the improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary conditions in the territory of the Parties:
c. promote the activities indicated by the Parties, in accordance with articles 5-04, 5-05, 5-06, 5-07 and 5-15;
d. will facilitate consultations on specific issues in sanitary and phytosanitary measures;
and. it will establish working groups on animal health, plant health and food safety, and will determine their mandates, objectives and lines of action; Y
F. It will meet once a year, unless otherwise agreed and will report annually to the Commission on the application of this chapter.
Article 5-13: Technical Cooperation 1. The Parties:
a. facilitate the provision of technical advice, information and assistance, under mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen their sanitary and phytosanitary measures, as well as their related activities, including research, process technology, infrastructure and the establishment of national regulatory bodies. Such assistance may include credits, donations, and funds for the acquisition of technical skills, training, and equipment that facilitate adjustment and compliance with a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of a Party; Y
b. They will provide information on their technical assistance programs related to sanitary or phytosanitary measures in areas of particular interest.
2. Expenses derived from technical assistance activities will be subject to the availability of funds and priorities in the matter for each Party. The expenses derived from the control or inspection and approval procedures will be borne by the interested parties.
Article 5-14: Technical consultations 1. A Party may request consultations with the other Party on any matter related to this Chapter.
2. When one of the Parties requests consultations concerning the application of this Chapter with respect to a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the other Party and so notifies the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures may facilitate the consultations. In the event that it does not consider the matter itself, it will refer it to an ad-hoc working group or other forum, for non-binding technical advice or recommendation.
3. Each Party may use the good offices of relevant international standard-setting organizations, including those referred to in Article 5-04, for advice and assistance on sanitary and phytosanitary matters within the framework of their respective mandates.
Article 5-15: Settlement of disputes 1. When a Party considers that a sanitary or phytosanitary measure of the other Party is interpreted or applied inconsistently with the provisions of this Chapter, it shall have the obligation to demonstrate the inconsistency.
2. When the Parties have resorted to consultations in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 5-14, these shall constitute those provided for in Article 20-05, if so agreed by the Parties.
Chapter VI Rules of Origin
Article 6-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
good : a merchandise, product, article or matter;
fungible goods : goods that are interchangeable for commercial purposes, whose properties are essentially identical, and it is impractical to differentiate between them by simple visual examination;
identical or similar goods: "identical merchandise" and "similar merchandise", respectively, as defined in the Customs Valuation Code;
goods wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties :
a. minerals extracted in the territory of one or both Parties;
b. vegetables harvested in the territory of one or both Parties;
c. live animals, born and raised in the territory of one or both Parties;
d. goods obtained from hunting or fishing in the territory of one or both Parties;
and. fish, crustaceans and other species obtained from the sea by vessels registered or registered by a Party and flying the flag of that Party;
F. goods produced on board factory ships from the goods identified in subparagraph e), provided that those factory ships are registered or registered by any Party and carry the flag of that Party;
g.. property obtained by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed or subsoil outside territorial waters, provided that the Party has rights to exploit that seabed or subsoil;
h. waste and scrap derived from:
i) production in the territory of one or both Parties; either
ii) used goods, collected in the territory of one or both Parties, provided that such goods serve only for the recovery of raw materials; and
Yo. goods produced in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from the goods mentioned in subparagraphs a) to h) or their derivatives, at any stage of production;
shipping containers and packaging materials : goods that are used to protect a good during transportation, other than retail packaging and materials;
shipping and repackaging costs: the costs incurred in repackaging and transporting a good outside the territory where the producer or exporter of the good is located;
Sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service costs: The following costs related to sales promotion, marketing and after-sale service:
a. sales promotion and marketing; advertising in broadcast media; advertising and market research; promotional and demonstration materials; exhibited goods; sales promotion conferences; trade fairs and conventions; banners; marketing exhibitions; free samples; sales, marketing and after-sales service publications such as merchandise brochures, catalogues, technical publications, price lists, service manuals and sales support information; establishment and protection of logos and trademarks; sponsorships; restocking charges for wholesale and retail sales; and representation expenses;
b. marketing, sales or asset incentives; and discounts to wholesalers, retailers and consumers;
c. for sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel: wages and salaries, sales commissions; bonuses; medical, insurance and pension benefits; travel, lodging and subsistence expenses; and membership and professional fees;
d. recruitment and training of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service personnel; and training for the client's employees after the sale;
and. insurance premiums for civil liability derived from the property;
F. office supplies for sales promotion, marketing and after sales services;
g. telephone, mail, and other means of communication for sales promotion, marketing, and after-sales services;
h. rents and depreciation of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales service offices, as well as distribution centers;
Yo. property insurance premiums, taxes, utility costs, and repair and maintenance costs for offices, as well as distribution centers; Y
j. producer payments to others for warranty repairs;
net cost: total cost less the costs of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales services; royalties; shipping and repackaging; as well as non-admissible interest costs, in accordance with the provisions of the annex to article 6-04;
non-allowable interest costs : the interest that a producer has paid on its financial obligations that exceeds 10 percentage points over the highest interest rate of the debt obligations issued by the federal or central government, as the case may be, of the Party where the producer is located, in accordance with the provisions of the annex to article 6-04;
total cost : the sum of the following elements in accordance with the provisions of the annex to article 6-04:
a. the costs or value of direct manufacturing materials used in the production of the good;
b. the costs of direct labor used in the production of the good; Y
c. An amount for the direct and indirect costs and expenses of manufacturing the good, reasonably assigned to it, except for the following concepts:
i) the costs and expenses of a service provided by the producer of a good to another person, when the service is not related to the good;
ii) the costs and losses resulting from the sale of a part of the company of the producer of the good, which constitutes a discontinued operation;
iii) costs related to the cumulative effect of changes in the application of generally accepted accounting principles;
iv) costs or losses resulting from the sale of a producer's capital good;
v) costs and expenses related to acts of God or force majeure; Y
vi) the profits earned by the producer of the good, regardless of whether they were retained by that producer or paid to others as dividends and the taxes paid on those profits, including taxes on capital gains;
direct manufacturing costs and expenses : those incurred in a period, directly related to the good, other than the costs or the value of direct materials and direct labor costs;
factory overhead costs and expenses : those incurred in a period, other than direct manufacturing costs and expenses, direct labor costs, and direct material costs or value;
FOB .: free on board;
place where the producer is located : in relation to a good, the production plant of that good;
material : a good used in the production of another good;
self-made material – a material produced by the producer of a good and used in the production of that good;
fungible materials : materials that are interchangeable for commercial purposes and whose properties are essentially identical;
indirect material – a material used in the production, testing, or inspection of a good, but not physically incorporated into the good; or a material that is used in the maintenance of buildings or in the operation of equipment related to the production of a good, including:
a. fuel and power;
b. tools, dies and molds;
c. spare parts or spare parts and materials used in the maintenance of equipment and buildings;
d. lubricants, greases, compound materials, and other materials used in production or to operate equipment or buildings;
and. gloves, glasses, footwear, clothing, equipment and safety accessories;
F. equipment, devices and accessories used for the verification or inspection of the goods;
g. catalysts and solvents; either
h. any other material that is not incorporated into the good, but whose use in the production of the good can reasonably be shown to be a part of that production;
intermediate material : a self-produced material designated under article 6-07;
related person : a person who is related to another person, as follows:
a. one of them holds positions of responsibility or direction in a company owned by the other;
b. are legally recognized as business associates;
c. are in an employer-employee relationship;
d. a person has, directly or indirectly, the ownership, control or possession of 25% or more of the shares or securities outstanding and with the right to vote of both;
and. one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;
F. both persons are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;
g. together directly or indirectly control a third person; either
h. are from the same family (children, siblings, parents, grandparents or spouses);
generally accepted accounting principles : the recognized consensus to the substantial support authorized in the territory of a Party, regarding the recording of income, expenses, costs, assets and liabilities; disclosure of information; and preparation of financial statements. These standards can be broad guidelines of general application, as well as practical rules and detailed procedures;
production : the growing, raising, extracting, harvesting, fishing, hunting, manufacturing, processing, or assembling of a good;
producer : a person who grows, raises, mines, harvests, fishes, hunts, manufactures, processes, or assembles a good;
royalties : payments made for the exploitation of intellectual property rights;
used : used or consumed in the production of goods;
transaction value of a good : the price actually paid or payable for a good related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the good is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good; Y
transaction value of a material : the price actually paid or payable for a material related to the transaction of the producer of the good in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, adjusted in accordance with the principles of article 8.1, 8.3 and 8.4 of the same, without considering that the material is sold for export. For purposes of this definition, the seller referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the supplier of the material and the buyer referred to in the Customs Valuation Code will be the producer of the good.
Article 6-02: Instruments of application For purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
a. the tariff classification basis is the Harmonized System;
b. the determination of the transaction value of a good or a material will be made in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code; Y
c. all costs referred to in this chapter shall be recorded and maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable in the territory of the Party where the good is produced.
Article 6-03: Originating goods 1. A good will be originating when:
a. is wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one or both Parties, as defined in Article 6-01;
b. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties exclusively from materials that qualify as originating in accordance with this Chapter;
c. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in the annex to this article, and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter ;
d. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties from non-originating materials that meet a change in tariff classification and other requirements, and the good meets a regional value content, as specified in the annex to this article, and with the other applicable provisions of this chapter;
and. is produced in the territory of one or both Parties and complies with a regional value content, as specified in the annex to this article, and complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter; either
F. except for goods included in chapters 61 to 63 of the Harmonized System, the good is produced in the territory of one or both Parties, but one or more of the non-originating materials used in the production of the good do not comply with a change of classification tariff because:
i) the good has been imported into the territory of a Party without assembly or disassembly, but has been classified as an assembled good in accordance with rule 2 a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System; either
(ii) the heading for the good is the same for both the good and its parts and that heading is not divided into subheadings or the subheading is the same for both the good and its parts, provided that the regional value content of the good , determined in accordance with article 6-04, is not less than, unless otherwise provided in articles 6-15 or 6-20, 50% when the transaction value method is used or 41.66% when use the net cost method, and the good complies with the other applicable provisions of this chapter.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, the production of a good from non-originating materials that comply with a change in tariff classification and other requirements, as specified in the annex to this article, must be made entirely in the territory of a or both Parties and any regional value content of a good must be fully satisfied in the territory of one or both Parties.
Article 6-04: Regional Value Content 1. Except as provided in paragraph 5, each Party shall provide that the regional value content of a good shall be calculated, at the option of the exporter or producer of the good, in accordance with the method of transaction value provided in paragraph 2 or with the net cost method provided in paragraph 4.
2. To calculate the regional content value of a good based on the transaction value method, the following formula will be applied:
VT - VMN VCR= ----------------- x 100 VT
where: RVC: regional value content expressed as a percentage. VT: transaction value of a good adjusted on the FOB basis, except as provided in paragraph 3. VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good, determined in accordance with the provisions of article 6 -05.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, when the producer of the good does not export it directly, the transaction value shall be adjusted up to the point at which the buyer receives the good within the territory where that producer is located.
4. To calculate the regional content value of a good based on the net cost method, the following formula will be applied:
CN - VMN VCR= ----------------- x 100 CN
where: RVC: regional value content expressed as a percentage. CN: net cost of the good. VNM: value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good, determined in accordance with the provisions of article 6-05.
5. Each Party shall provide that an exporter or producer calculate the regional value content of a good exclusively based on the net cost method provided in paragraph 4, when:
a. there is no transaction value because the property is not the object of a sale;
b. the transaction value of the asset cannot be determined because there are restrictions on the assignment or use of the asset by the buyer, with the exception of those that:
i) imposed or required by the law or the authorities of the Party in which the buyer of the good is located;
ii) limit the geographic territory where the good can be resold; either
iii) do not significantly affect the value of the property;
c. the sale or price depends on some condition or consideration whose value cannot be determined in relation to the good;
d. reverts directly or indirectly to the seller any part of the proceeds of the resale or of any subsequent assignment or use of the good by the buyer, unless the due adjustment can be made in accordance with the provisions of article 8 of the Customs Valuation Code;
and. the buyer and seller are related persons and the relationship between them influences the price, except as provided in article 1.2 of the Customs Valuation Code;
F. the good is sold by the producer to a related person and the volume of sales, in units of quantity of identical or similar goods, sold to related persons, during a period of six months immediately preceding the month in which the producer sold that good , exceeds 85% of the total sales of the producer of those goods during that period;
g. the exporter or producer chooses to accumulate the regional value content of the good in accordance with article 6-08;
h. the good:
i) is a motor vehicle included in heading 87.01 or 87.02, subheadings 8703.21 through 8703.90 or heading 87.04, 87.05 or 87.06; either
ii) is identified in Annex 1 to Article 6-15 or in Annex 2 to Article 6-15 and is for use in motor vehicles included in heading 87.01 or 87.02, subheadings 8703.21 to 8703.90 or heading 87.04, 87.05 or 87.06; either
Yo. It is an intermediate material that is subject to a regional value content.
Article 6-05: Value of materials 1. The value of a material:
a. will be the transaction value of the material; either
b. In the event that there is no transaction value or that the transaction value of the material cannot be determined in accordance with the principles of article 1 of the Customs Valuation Code, it will be calculated in accordance with the principles of articles 2 to 7 of that code. .
2. When they are not considered in literals a) or b) of paragraph 1, the value of a material will include:
a. freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred in transporting the material to the port of importation in the Party where the producer of the good is located, except as provided in paragraph 3; Y
b. the cost of scrap and scrap resulting from the use of the material in the production of the good, less any recovery of these costs, provided that the recovery does not exceed 30% of the value of the material, determined in accordance with paragraph 1.
3. When the producer of the good acquires the non-originating material within the territory of the Party where it is located, the value of the material will not include freight, insurance, packaging costs and all other costs incurred for transportation. of the material from the supplier's warehouse to the producer's location.
4. For purposes of calculating the regional value content pursuant to section 6-04, except as provided in section 2 of section 6-15, for a motor vehicle identified in section 3 of section 6-15, or a component identified in Annex 2 to Article 6-15, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of a good shall not include the value of non-originating materials used by:
a. another producer in the production of an originating material that is acquired and used by the producer of the good in the production of that good; either
b. the producer of the good in the production of an originating intermediate material.
Article 6-06: De minimis 1. A good shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating materials used in the production of the good that do not comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to Article 6-03 does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the asset, adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 6-04 or, in the cases referred to in subparagraphs a) to e) of paragraph 5 of the Article 6-04, if the value of all non-originating materials referred to above does not exceed 7% of the total cost of the good.
2. When the same good is subject to a regional value content, the value of those non-originating materials shall be taken into account in the calculation of the regional value content of the good and the good must satisfy the other applicable requirements of this chapter.
3. A good that is subject to a regional value content established in the annex to article 6-03 will not have to satisfy it, if the value of all non-originating materials does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the good, adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 6-04, or in the cases referred to in subparagraphs a) to e) of paragraph 5 of article 6-04, if the value of all materials non-originating goods referred to above does not exceed 7% of the total cost of the good.
4. Paragraph 1 does not apply to:
a. goods included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System; neither
b. a non-originating material that is used in the production of goods covered by chapters 01 through 27 of the Harmonized System, unless the non-originating material falls under a different subheading than the good for which origin is being determined, so accordance with this article.
5. A good included in chapters 50 to 63 of the Harmonized System, which is not originating because the fibers and yarns used in the production of the material that determines the tariff classification of that good, do not comply with the change in tariff classification provided in the annex to article 6-03, it will, however, be considered as originating if the total weight of those fibers and yarns of that material does not exceed 7% of the total weight of that material.
Article 6-07: Intermediate materials 1. For purposes of calculating the regional value content, in accordance with article 6-04, the producer of a good may designate as intermediate material, except for the components listed in annex 2 to article 6 -15 and goods included in heading 87.06, intended for use in motor vehicles included in paragraph 3 of article 6-15, any self-manufactured material used in the production of the good, provided that such material complies with the provisions of Article 6-15. article 6-03.
2. When the intermediate material is subject to a regional value content in accordance with the annex to article 6-03, it shall be calculated based on the net cost method established in article 6-04.
3. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of the good, the value of the intermediate material will be the total cost that can be reasonably assigned to that intermediate material in accordance with the provisions of the annex to article 6-04.
4. If a material designated as an intermediate material is subject to a regional value content, no other self-produced material subject to a regional value content used in the production of that intermediate material may, in turn, be designated by the producer as intermediate material.
5. When a good referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 6-15 is designated as an intermediate material, that designation shall apply only to the calculation of the net cost of that good, and the value of non-originating materials shall be determined in accordance with the established in paragraph 2 of article 6-15.
Article 6-08: Accumulation For purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, an exporter or producer may accumulate its production with that of one or more producers, in the territory of one or both Parties, of materials that are incorporated into the good, so that the production of the materials is considered as carried out by that exporter or producer, provided that the provisions of article 6-03 are complied with.
Article 6-09: Goods and fungible materials 1. For the purposes of establishing whether a good is originating, when originating and non-originating fungible materials that are physically mixed or combined in inventory are used in its production, the origin of the materials may be determined. using one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3.
2. When originating and non-originating fungible goods are physically mixed or combined in inventory, and before their export they do not undergo any production process or any other operation in the territory of the Party in which they were physically mixed or combined, other than unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep the goods in good condition or transport them to the territory of the other Party, the origin of the good may be determined based on one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3.
3. The inventory management methods applicable to materials or fungible goods will be the following:
a. "FIFO" (first in, first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were first received in inventory is considered as the origin, in the same number of units of materials or consumables that first come out of inventory;
b. "LUEP" (last in-first out) is the inventory management method by which the origin of the number of units of materials or consumables that were received last in inventory is considered as the origin, in the same number units, materials or consumables that first come out of inventory; either
c. "averages" is the method of managing inventories by which, except as provided in paragraph 4, the determination as to whether the materials or consumables are originating will be made through the application of the following formula:
TMO PMN= ----------------- x 100 TMOYN
where: PMO: average originating materials or consumables. TMO: total units of originating materials or consumables that are part of the inventory prior to departure. TMOYN: total sum of units of originating and non-originating materials or consumables that are part of the pre-departure inventory.
4. In the event that the good is subject to a regional value content, the determination of non-originating fungible materials will be made through the application of the following formula:
TMN PMN= ----------------- x 100 TMOYN
where: PMN: average of non-originating materials. TMN: total value of non-originating fungible materials that are part of the inventory prior to departure. TMOYN: total value of originating and non-originating fungible materials that are part of the pre-departure inventory.
5. Once one of the inventory management methods established in paragraph 3 has been selected, it must be used throughout the fiscal year or period.
Article 6-10: Sets or assortments 1. The sets or assortments of goods that are classified according to the provisions of rule 3 of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System, as well as the goods whose description according to the nomenclature of the Harmonized System specifically that of a set or assortment, will qualify as originating, provided that each of the goods contained in the set or assortment complies with the rule of origin that has been established for each of the goods in this chapter.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, a set or assortment of goods shall be considered originating if the value of all non-originating goods used in the formation of the set or assortment does not exceed 7% of the transaction value of the set or assortment, adjusted on the basis indicated in paragraph 2 or 3, as the case may be, of article 6-04, or in the cases referred to in subparagraphs a) to e) of paragraph 5 of article 6-04, if the value of all non-originating goods referred to above does not exceed 7% of the total cost of the kit or assortment.
3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in the annex to article 6-03.
Article 6-11: Indirect materials Indirect materials will be considered as originating without taking into account the place of their production, and the value of these materials will correspond to their costs that are reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.
Article 6-12: Accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools 1. The accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools delivered with the good as part of the usual accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools of the good will not be taken into account to determine if all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 6-03, provided that:
a. the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are not invoiced separately from the good, regardless of whether they are broken down or detailed separately in the invoice itself; Y
b. the quantity and value of said accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools are the usual ones for the good.
2. When the good is subject to a regional value content, the value of the accessories, spare parts or spare parts and tools will be taken into account as originating or non-originating materials, as the case may be, when calculating the regional value content of the good. .
Article 6-13: Containers and packaging materials for retail sale 1. Containers and packaging materials in which a good is presented for retail sale, when they are classified with the good they contain, will not be taken into account. to decide if all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification established in the annex to article 6-03.
2. When the good is subject to a regional value content, the value of the containers and packaging materials for retail sale will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good. .
Article 6-14: Shipping containers and packaging materials 1. Containers and packaging materials for transporting the good will not be taken into account for the purposes of establishing whether all non-originating materials used in the production of the good comply with the change corresponding tariff classification established in the annex to article 6-03.
2. When the good is subject to a regional value content, the value of the packaging materials for transporting the good will be considered as originating or non-originating, as the case may be, to calculate the regional value content of the good and the value of these materials will correspond to their costs that are reported in the accounting records of the producer of the good.
Article 6-15: Assets of the automotive industry 1. For the purposes of this article, it shall be understood as:
frame – the bottom plate of a motor vehicle;
motor vehicle class : any of the following categories of motor vehicles:
a. motor vehicles included in subheading 8701.20, Mexican tariff item 8702.10.03 or 8702.90.04 or, in the case of Nicaragua, in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 16 people or more, or in subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90 or heading 87.05 or 87.06;
b. motor vehicles included in subheadings 8701.10 or 8701.30 through 8701.90;
c. motor vehicles included in Mexican tariff item 8702.10.01, 8702.10.02, 8702.90.01, 8702.90.02 or 8702.90.03 or, in the case of Nicaragua, in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for transportation of fifteen persons or less, or in subheading 8704.21 or 8704.31; either
d. motor vehicles included in subheadings 8703.21 through 8703.90;
motor vehicle assembler : a producer of motor vehicles and any related persons or joint ventures in which the producer participates;
original equipment : material that is incorporated into a motor vehicle prior to the first transfer of title to or consignment of the motor vehicle to a person other than a motor vehicle assembler. That material is:
a. a good included in annex 1 to this article; either
b. an assembly of automotive components, an automotive component or a material listed in annex 2 to this article;
model line – a group of motor vehicles having the same platform or model name;
model name : the word or group of words, letter or letters, number or numbers, or similar designation assigned to a motor vehicle by a marketing division of a motor vehicle assembler for:
a. differentiate the motor vehicle from other motor vehicles using the same bed design;
b. associate the motor vehicle with other motor vehicles using a different platform design; either
c. indicate a platform layout;
bed – The primary assembly of a load-carrying structural assembly of a motor vehicle that determines the basic size of that vehicle and forms the structural base that supports the powertrain and serves as a junction for the motor vehicle in various types of frames, such as for assembly of bodywork, dimensional frame and unitary bodywork;
motor vehicle : a good included in heading 87.01, 87.02, 87.03, 87.04, 87.05 or 87.06.
2. For purposes of calculating the regional content value, in accordance with the net cost method established in article 6-04, for:
a. goods that are motor vehicles included in Mexican tariff item 8702.10.01, 8702.10.02, 8702.90.01, 8702.90.02 or 8702.90.03 or, in the case of Nicaragua, in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are projected motor vehicles for the carriage of fifteen persons or less, or in subheadings 8703.21 through 8703.90, 8704.21 or 8704.31; either
b. goods included in annex 1 to this article, when they are subject to a regional value content and are intended to be used as original equipment in the production of goods that are motor vehicles included in the Mexican tariff fraction 8702.10.01, 8702.10.02, 8702.90.01, 8702.90.02 or 8702.90.03 or, in the case of Nicaragua, in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed to transport fifteen people or less, or in subheadings 8703.21 to 8703.90, 8704.21 or 8704.31;
the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of those goods shall be the sum of the values of non-originating materials, determined in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 6-05, imported from countries other than Party, included in annex 1 to this article and that are used in the production of those goods or in the production of any material used in the production of those goods.
3. For purposes of calculating the regional content value, in accordance with the net cost method established in article 6-04, for goods that are motor vehicles included in heading 87.01, Mexican tariff item 8702.10.03 or 8702.90. 04 or, in the case of Nicaragua, in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed for the transport of 16 people or more, or in subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90 or heading 87.05 or 87.06, or for a component identified in annex 2 to this article to be used as original equipment in the production of motor vehicles described in this paragraph, the value of non-originating materials used by the producer in the production of the good will be the sum of :
a. for each material used by the producer of the good and listed in annex 2 to this article, whether or not it is produced by that producer, at its choice, and determined in accordance with article 6-05 or paragraph 3 of article 6- 07, either of the following two values:
i) the value of the non-originating material; either
(ii) the value of non-originating materials used in the production of that material; Y
b) the value of any other non-originating material used by the producer of the good, which is not included in Annex 2 to this Article, determined in accordance with Article 6-05 or paragraph 3 of Article 6-07.
4. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of a motor vehicle identified in paragraph 2 or 3, the producer may average the calculation in its fiscal year or period using any of the following categories, either taking all vehicles as a base motor vehicles of that category or only motor vehicles of that category that are exported to the territory of the other Party:
a. the same model line in motor vehicles of the same class of vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party;
b. the same class of motor vehicles produced at the same plant in the territory of a Party; either
c. the same model line in motor vehicles produced in the territory of a Party.
5. For purposes of calculating the regional content value of one or all of the goods included in a tariff classification listed in annex 1 to this article or of a component or material indicated in annex 2 to this article, produced in the same plant, the producer of the good may:
a. average your calculation:
i) in the fiscal year or period of the producer of the motor vehicle to whom the good is sold;
ii) in any quarterly or monthly period; either
iii) in its own financial year or fiscal period, if the good is sold as a spare part;
b. calculate the average referred to in subparagraph a) separately for any or all of the goods sold to one or more motor vehicle producers; either
c. with respect to any calculation made pursuant to this paragraph, calculate separately the regional value content of the goods that are exported to the territory of the other Party.
6. Notwithstanding what is established in the annex to article 6-03, the regional value content shall be:
a. for goods that are motor vehicles included in heading 87.01, the Mexican tariff item 8702.10.03 or 8702.90.04 or, in the case of Nicaragua, in subheading 8702.10 or 8702.90, when they are motor vehicles designed to transport 16 people or more, or in subheading 8704.10, 8704.22, 8704.23, 8704.32 or 8704.90 or heading 87.05 or 87.06, 35%, under the net cost method, for a producer's fiscal year or period beginning on the nearest date to July 1, 1998 through the fiscal year or period ending on the nearest date to July 1, 2000; Y
b. for the goods indicated in annex 1 to this article, subject to a regional value content and intended for use in motor vehicles included in paragraphs 2 and 3, except for goods included in heading 84.07, 84.08 or subheading 8708.40 , when they are intended for use in motor vehicles included in paragraphs 2 and 3, in which case the regional content defined in footnotes numbers 4 and 32 of section B of the annex to article 6-03 shall apply and except for heading 87.06, in which case the provisions of subparagraph a) shall apply:
i) 40%, according to the net cost method, for the fiscal year or period of a producer that begins on the date closest to July 1, 1998 until the fiscal year or period that ends on the date closest to July 1, 1998. July 2003; Y
ii) 50%, under the net cost method, for a producer's fiscal year or period beginning on the closest date to July 1, 2003 through a producer's fiscal year or period ending on the nearest date as of July 1, 2008.
Article 6-16: Operations and practices that do not confer origin 1. A good shall not be considered as originating only because:
a. dilution in water or in another substance that does not materially alter the characteristics of the good;
b. simple operations intended to ensure the preservation of goods during transport or storage, such as aeration, refrigeration, extraction of damaged parts, drying or addition of substances;
c. dusting, screening, classification, selection, washing or cutting;
d. packaging, repackaging, or packaging for retail sale;
and. the gathering of goods to form sets or assortments;
F. the application of trademarks, labels or similar distinctive signs;
g. cleaning, including removal of rust, grease, paint or other coatings; Y
h. the simple assembly of parts and components that are classified as a good in accordance with rule 2 a) of the General Rules for the Interpretation of the Harmonized System. The foregoing shall not apply to goods that have been assembled and subsequently disassembled for the convenience of packaging, handling, or transportation.
2. No pricing activity or practice, for which it can be demonstrated, based on sufficient evidence, that its objective is to evade compliance with the provisions of this chapter, confers origin to a good.
3. The provisions of this article shall prevail over the specific rules established in the annex to article 6-03.
Article 6-17: Transhipment and direct dispatch
1. A good will not be considered as originating, even when it has been produced in accordance with the requirements of article 6-03, if after that production the good undergoes a subsequent process or is the object of any other operation outside the territories of the Parties, except for unloading, reloading or any other movement necessary to keep it in good condition or to transport it to the territory of the other Party.
2. A good shall not lose its originating status when, while in transit through the territory of one or more non-Party countries, with or without transshipment or temporary storage, under the supervision of the competent customs authority in those countries:
a. the transit is justified for geographical reasons or for considerations related to transportation requirements;
b. is not intended for trade, use or employment in the transit country(ies); Y
c. during its transport and storage it is not subjected to operations other than packaging, packaging, loading, unloading or handling to ensure its conservation.
Article 6-18: Consultations and modifications 1. The Parties establish the Rules of Origin Committee, made up of representatives of each of them, which will meet at least twice a year, as well as at the request of any Party.
2. It will correspond to the Committee:
a. ensure the effective implementation and administration of this chapter;
b. reach agreements on the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter;
c. review annually, in relation to non-allowable interest costs, the percentage points over the highest interest rate of debt obligations issued by the federal or central government, as the case may be; Y
d. attend to any other matter agreed upon by the Parties.
3. The Parties shall consult regularly and cooperate to ensure that this Chapter is applied effectively, uniformly, and in accordance with the spirit and objectives of this Agreement.
4. Any Party that considers that this chapter needs to be modified due to changes in the development of production processes or other matters, may submit to the Committee a proposal for its consideration and the reasons and studies that support it. The Committee will submit a report to the Commission for it to make the pertinent recommendations to the Parties.
Article 6-19: Interpretation For purposes of this chapter, when applying the Customs Valuation Code to determine the origin of a good:
a. the principles of that code will be applied to internal transactions, with the modifications required by the circumstances, as they would be applied to international ones; Y
b. the provisions of this chapter shall prevail over those of that code in that in which they are incompatible.
Article 6-20: Transitional provisions on regional value content 1. For purposes of calculating the regional value content of a good that is subject to this requirement, a good produced in the territory of one or both Parties must comply with a value of regional content not less than:
a. 45% under the transaction value method or 37.5% under the net cost method, from July 1, 1998 to June 30, 2001;
b. 46% under the transaction value method or 38.5% under the net cost method, from July 1, 2001 to June 30, 2002; Y
c. 47.5% under the transaction value method or 40% under the net cost method, from July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2003.
2. As of July 1, 2003, the percentage of regional content will be established in the annex to article 6-03.
3. The provisions contained in this article shall not be applicable for purposes of calculating the regional content value of the goods indicated in article 6-15.
Annex to Article 6-04 Calculation of Net Cost
Section A Definitions
For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
allocation base – any of the following allocation bases used by the producer to calculate the percentage of cost in relation to the good:
a. the sum of the direct labor costs and the direct material costs or value of the good;
b. the sum of direct labor costs, direct material costs or value, and direct costs and expenses of manufacturing the good;
c. direct labor costs or hours;
d. units produced;
and. machine hours;
F. amount of sales;
g. plant area; either
h. any other bases that are considered reasonable and quantifiable;
non-allowable costs : the costs of sales promotion, marketing and after-sales services; royalties; shipping and repackaging; as well as non-admissible interest costs; Y
for internal management purposes – an allocation procedure used for tax filing, financial statements or reports, internal control, financial planning, decision making, pricing, cost recovery, cost control management, or performance measurement.
Section B Calculation of Net Cost 
1. The net cost will be calculated according to the following formula:
CN = CT - CNA
where: CN: net cost. CT: total cost. CNA: non-eligible costs.
2. For purposes of determining the total cost:
a. the producer of the good may average the total cost of the good and other identical or similar goods produced in a single plant by that producer:
i) in a month; either
ii) during any period within that producer's fiscal year or period greater than one month;
b. For the purposes of literal a), the producer of the good will consider all the units of the good produced during the chosen period. That producer may not vary the period once chosen;
c. when the producer of a good, to calculate the total cost in relation to the good, uses a method of allocation of costs and expenses for internal administration purposes in order to allocate the direct material costs to the good; direct labor costs; or direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, or part thereof, and that method reasonably reflects direct material costs; direct labor costs; or direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses incurred in the production of the good, that method shall be considered a reasonable cost and expense allocation method and may be used to allocate costs to the good;
d. The producer of the good may determine a reasonable amount for costs and expenses that have not been allocated to the good, as follows:
i) for the costs or value of direct materials and direct labor costs, based on any method that reasonably reflects the direct material and direct labor costs used in the production of the good; Y
ii) in relation to the direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses, the producer of the good may choose one or more allocation bases that reflect a relationship between the direct and indirect manufacturing costs and expenses and the good, in accordance with the provisions of the literals f) and g);
and. the producer of the good may choose any method of reasonable allocation of costs and expenses, which he will use throughout his financial year or fiscal period;
F. In relation to each base chosen, the producer of the good may calculate a percentage of the costs for each good produced, in accordance with the following formula:
BA PC= ----------------- x 100 BTA
where: PC: percentage of the costs or expenses in relation to the good. BA: allocation base for the good. BTA: total allocation base for all goods produced by the producer of the good;
g. The costs or expenses for which an allocation base is chosen are allocated to a good according to the following formula:
CAB = CA x PC
where: CAB: costs or expenses assigned to the good. CA: costs or expenses that will be assigned. PC: percentage of the cost or expense in relation to the good;
h. In determining the net cost, when non-allowable costs are included in the total cost assigned to the good, the same percentage of the costs or expenses used to allocate those costs to the good will be used to determine the amount of non-allowable excluded costs. that will be subtracted from the total assigned cost; and
Yo. No cost or expense allocated under any reasonable cost allocation method used for internal administration purposes will be deemed reasonably allocated when it can be shown, based on sufficient evidence, that its purpose is to evade compliance with the provisions of This chapter.
3. For purposes of determining non-admissible interest costs, the producer of the good:
a. For the calculation of non-admissible interest, only loans contracted with a fixed or variable interest rate higher than the highest interest rate of the debt obligations issued by the federal or central government, as the case may be, plus ten points will be considered. percentage;
b. will calculate the interest rate accrued in the period chosen by the producer in accordance with literal a) of paragraph 2, by applying the following formula:
IPP TID= ----------------- x 100 MPP
where: TID: interest rate accrued in the period. IPP: amount of interest accrued in the period. MPP: amount of loans that accrue interest in the period.
For the purposes of this literal, the amount of the loans that accrue interest and the amount of the interest accrued will be those that correspond to the loans in accordance with the provisions of literal a) and, in the event that the interest accrued does not correspond to the entire calculation period of the total cost chosen by the producer, only the proportional part of the amount of the loan will be considered with respect to the period in which the interest accrued;
c. will calculate, using the following formula, the non-admissible interest rate, based on the determination of the accrued interest rate established in literal a):
TIN = TID - (TOG + 10)
where: TIN: non-admissible interest rate. TID: interest rate accrued in the period. TOG: interest rate of debt obligations issued by the federal or central government, as the case may be;
d. will calculate, using the following formula, the non-admissible interest costs:
CIN= TIN x MPP
where: CIN: non-allowable interest costs. TIN: non-admissible interest rate. MPP: amount of loans that accrue interest in the period. For purposes of this literal, the amount of the loans that accrue interest in the period will be determined in accordance with the provisions of literal b).
4. When the producer of a good has calculated the regional value content of the good according to the net cost method on the basis of estimated costs, including standard costs, budget projections or other similar procedures, before or during the period chosen in accordance with literal a) of paragraph 2, the producer will make the calculation based on the real costs incurred during that period with respect to the production of the good.
Annex to Article 6-03 Specific Rules of Origin
Section A General Interpretive Note
1. For the purposes of this annex, it shall be understood as:
section : a section of the Harmonized System; Y
chapter : a chapter of the Harmonized System.
2. The specific rule or set of rules that applies to a heading, subheading, or tariff item is set forth next to the heading, subheading, or tariff item.
3. The rule applicable to a tariff item will have priority over the rule applicable to the heading or subheading that includes the tariff item.
4. A change of classification requirement applies only to non-originating materials.
5. Any reference to weight in the rules for goods included in chapters 01 to 24 of the Harmonized System means net weight, unless otherwise specified in the Harmonized System.
6. When a specific rule is defined at the tariff fraction level, it will be subject to the provisions of the appendix to this annex.
Section B Specific Rules of Origin
Annex 2 to Article 6-15 List of Components and Materials for the Application of paragraph 3 of Article 6-15
1. Component: Engines covered by heading 84.07 or 84.08 The materials listed are the goods covered by heading 84.09, subheadings 8413.30, 8413.60, 8413.70, 8414.10, 8421.21, 8421.23, 8421.29, 8421.83 and 942 and heading 842.84.
2. Component: Gearboxes (transmissions) covered by subheading 8708.40 The materials listed are the goods covered by headings 84.83 and 87.08.
Chapter VII Customs Procedures
Article 7-01: Definitions 1. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
competent authority : the authority which, under the laws of each Party, is responsible for the administration of its customs and tax laws and regulations;
identical goods : "identical goods", as defined in the Customs Valuation Code;
origin determination resolution : a resolution issued as a result of a verification conducted pursuant to Article 7-07, which establishes whether a good qualifies as originating; Y
preferential tariff treatment : the application of the tariff rate corresponding to an originating good in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program.
2. The definitions established in Chapter VI (Rules of Origin) are incorporated into this chapter.
Article 7-02: Declaration and certification of origin 1. For the purposes of this chapter, before the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall develop a single format for the certificate and declaration of origin.
2. The certificate of origin referred to in paragraph 1 shall serve to certify that a good that is exported from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating.
3. Each Party shall provide that its exporters complete and sign a certificate of origin in respect of the export of a good for which an importer may claim preferential tariff treatment.
4. Each Party shall provide that:
a. when an exporter is not the producer of the good, complete and sign the certificate of origin based on the declaration of origin referred to in paragraph 1; Y
b. the declaration of origin that covers the exported good is completed and signed by the producer of the good and voluntarily provided to the exporter.
5. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin filled out and signed by the exporter, cover:
a. a single importation of one or more goods; either
b. several imports of identical goods to be carried out within a period established by the exporter in the certificate of origin, which shall not exceed the period established in paragraph 6.
6. Each Party shall provide that the certificate of origin be accepted by the competent authority of the importing Party for one year from the date of its signature.
Article 7-03: Obligations regarding imports
1. Each Party shall require the importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party, that:
a. declare in writing, in the import document provided for in its legislation, based on a valid certificate of origin, that the good qualifies as originating;
b. have the certificate of origin in their possession at the time of making that declaration;
c. provide a copy of the certificate of origin when requested by your competent authority; Y
d. Submit a corrected declaration and pay the corresponding duties, when you have reason to believe that the certificate of origin on which your import declaration is based contains incorrect information. When the importer submits the aforementioned declaration before the authorities begin a review, he will not be penalized.
2. Each Party shall provide that, when its importer does not comply with any of the requirements established in paragraph 1, preferential tariff treatment shall be denied to the good imported from the territory of the other Party for which preference has been requested.
3. Each Party shall provide that, when preferential tariff treatment has not been requested for a good imported into its territory that it has qualified as originating, the importer of the good may request the refund of the tariffs paid in excess, in accordance with the legislation of each Party. Party, for not having granted preferential tariff treatment to the good, provided that the request is accompanied by:
a. a written statement, in which he states that the good qualified as originating at the time of importation;
b. a copy of the certificate of origin; Y
c. any other documentation related to the importation of the goods as required by the competent authority.
Article 7-04: Obligations regarding exports
1. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer, who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin, deliver a copy of the certificate or declaration of origin to its competent authority upon request.
2. Each Party shall provide that its exporter or producer who has completed and signed a certificate or declaration of origin and has reason to believe that said certificate or declaration contains incorrect information, notify, without delay and in writing, any change that could affect the accuracy or validity of the certificate or declaration of origin to all persons to whom the certificate or declaration has been delivered, as well as, in accordance with its legislation, to its competent authority, in which case you may not be penalized for having presented a certification or declaration incorrect.
3. The competent authority of the exporting Party shall notify the competent authority of the importing Party of the notification of the exporter or producer referred to in paragraph 2.
4. Each Party shall provide that the false certification or declaration of origin made by its exporter or producer, in the sense that a good to be exported to the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating, has the same legal consequences, with the modifications required by circumstances, than those that would apply to your importer who makes false declarations or manifestations in contravention of their customs laws and regulations.
Article 7-05: Exceptions
Provided that it is not part of two or more imports that are made or planned with the purpose of evading compliance with the certification requirements of articles 7-02 and 7-03, the certificate of origin will not be required for the importation of goods in the following cases:
a. the importation for commercial purposes of goods whose customs value does not exceed one thousand dollars of the United States of America (dollars) or its equivalent in national currency, but it may be required that the invoice contain a declaration by the importer or exporter that the good qualifies as originating;
b. the importation for non-commercial purposes of goods whose customs value does not exceed one thousand dollars or its equivalent in national currency; Y
c. the importation of a good for which the importing Party has waived the requirement to present the certificate of origin.
Article 7-06: Accounting records Each Party shall provide that:
a. its exporter or producer who completes and signs a certificate or declaration of origin retains, for a minimum of five years after the date of signing such certificate or declaration, all records and documents relating to the origin of the good, including those referring to:
i) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of the good that is exported from its territory;
ii) the acquisition, costs, value and payment of all materials used in the production of the good that is exported from its territory; Y
iii) the production of the good in the form in which it is exported from its territory;
b. For the purposes of the verification procedure established in Article 7-07, the exporter or producer provides the competent authority of the importing Party with the records and documents referred to in subparagraph a). When the records and documents are not in the possession of the exporter or the producer, the exporter or producer may request the records and documents from the producer or supplier of the materials so that they are delivered through him to the competent authority that performs the verification; Y
c. an importer requesting preferential tariff treatment for a good that is imported into its territory of the other Party, keep, for a minimum of five years from the date of importation, the certificate of origin and all other documentation related to importation required by the importing Party.
Article 7-07: Procedures to verify origin
1. The importing Party may request information regarding the origin of a good from the exporting Party through its competent authority.
2. To determine if a good that is imported into its territory from the territory of the other Party qualifies as originating, each Party may, through its competent authority, verify the origin of the good by:
a. written questionnaires addressed to exporters or producers in the territory of the other Party; either
b. verification visits to an exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, with the purpose of examining the records and documents that prove compliance with the rules of origin in accordance with Article 7-06, and inspecting the facilities used in the production of the good and, where appropriate, those used in the production of the materials.
3. The provisions of paragraph 2 shall be without prejudice to the review that the importing Party may carry out on its own importers, exporters or producers.
4. The exporter or producer who receives a questionnaire in accordance with subparagraph a) of paragraph 2, will respond and return the questionnaire within a period of no more than 30 days, counted from the date it was received. During this term, the exporter or producer may request an extension in writing to the importing Party, which, if applicable, may not exceed 30 days. This request will not result in the denial of preferential tariff treatment.
5. In the event that the exporter or producer does not respond or return a questionnaire within the corresponding term, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment prior to a resolution under the terms of paragraph 11.
6. Before carrying out a verification visit in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph b) of paragraph 2, the importing Party shall be obliged, through its competent authority, to notify in writing its intention to carry out the visit. The notification shall be sent to the exporter or producer to be visited, to the competent authority of the Party in whose territory the visit will take place and, if requested by the latter, to the embassy of this Party in the territory of the Party importer. The competent authority of the importing Party shall request the written consent of the exporter or the producer whom he intends to visit.
7. The notification referred to in paragraph 6 will contain:
a. the identification of the competent authority making the notification;
b. the name of the exporter or producer to be visited;
c. the date and place of the proposed verification visit;
d. the object and scope of the proposed verification visit, making specific mention of the period and of the good or goods subject to verification to which the certificate(s) of origin refer;
and. the names, personal data and positions of the officials who will carry out the verification visit; Y
F. the legal basis for the verification visit.
8. Any modification to the information referred to in subparagraph e) of paragraph 7, shall be notified in writing to the exporter or producer and to the competent authority of the exporting Party before the verification visit. Any modification of the information referred to in subparagraphs a), b), c), d) and f) of paragraph 7, will be notified in the terms of paragraph 6.
9. If within 30 days of receipt of notification of the proposed verification visit pursuant to paragraph 6, the exporter or producer does not provide its written consent for the verification visit, the importing Party may deny preferential tariff treatment. to the asset or assets that would have been the object of the verification visit.
10. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority receives a notification pursuant to paragraph 6, it may, within fifteen days of the date of receipt of the notification, postpone the proposed verification visit for a period not to exceed 60 days. , from the date the notification was received, or for a longer term agreed by the Parties.
11. A Party may not deny preferential tariff treatment based solely on the postponement of the verification visit, as provided in paragraph 10.
12. Each Party shall allow the exporter or producer, whose good or goods are the subject of a verification visit, to designate two observers to be present during the visit, provided that they intervene solely in that capacity. If there is no appointment of observers by the exporter or producer, this omission will not result in the postponement of the visit.
13. Within 120 days following the conclusion of the verification, the competent authority will provide a written resolution to the exporter or producer whose good or goods have been subject to verification, in which it is determined whether or not the good qualifies as original, which will include the findings of fact and the legal basis for the determination.
14. When the verification carried out by a Party establishes that the exporter or producer has falsely or unfoundedly certified or declared more than once that a good qualifies as originating, the importing Party may suspend preferential tariff treatment to the identical goods that that person exports or produces, until the same proves that it complies with the provisions of Chapter VI (Rules of Origin).
15. Each Party will maintain the confidentiality of the information collected in the origin verification process, in accordance with the provisions of its legislation.
Article 7-08: Review and challenge
1. Each Party shall grant the same rights to review and challenge origin determination resolutions and advance rulings provided for its importers, to exporters or producers of the other Party that:
a. fill out and sign a certificate or a declaration of origin, which covers an asset that has been the subject of a determination of origin resolution; either
b. have received an advance ruling in accordance with article 7-10.
2. The rights referred to in paragraph 1 include access to at least one instance of administrative review, independent of the official or agency responsible for the resolution or opinion subject to review, and access to a instance of judicial review or quasi -judicial of the resolution or decision made in the last instance of administrative review, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 7-09: Sanctions Each Party shall establish or maintain criminal, civil or administrative sanctions for violations of its laws and regulations related to the provisions of this chapter.
Article 7-10: Advance rulings 1. Each Party shall provide that, through its competent authority, advance written rulings be granted expeditiously, prior to the importation of a good into its territory. The advance rulings will be issued to the importer or to the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, based on the facts and circumstances stated by them, in relation to the origin of the goods.
2. Advance rulings will deal with:
a. if the non-originating materials used in the production of a good comply with the corresponding change in tariff classification indicated in the annex to article 6-03;
b. if the good complies with the regional content value established in Chapter VI (Rules of Origin);
c. if the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party, in accordance with the principles of the Customs Valuation Code, to calculate the transaction value of the good or of the materials used in the production of a good, with respect to the which an advance ruling is requested, is adequate to determine if the good complies with the regional content value in accordance with Chapter VI (Rules of Origin);
d. if the method applied by the exporter or producer in the territory of the other Party for the reasonable allocation of costs, in accordance with the annex to Article 6-04, is adequate to determine if the good complies with the regional value content in accordance with Chapter VI (Rules of origin);
and. if the country of origin marking made or proposed for a good satisfies the provisions of article 3-12;
F. if the good qualifies as originating in accordance with Chapter VI (Rules of Origin); Y
g. Other matters that the Parties agree.
3. Each Party shall adopt or maintain procedures for the issuance of advance rulings prior to their publication, which include:
a. the information that is reasonably required to process the request;
b. The power of its competent authority to request, at any time, additional information from the person requesting the advance ruling during the application evaluation process;
c. a period of 120 days, for the competent authority to issue the anticipated ruling, once it has obtained all the necessary information from the person requesting it; Y
d. the obligation to issue in a complete, well-founded and motivated manner to the applicant, the anticipated ruling.
4. Each Party shall apply advance rulings to imports into its territory, from the date of issuance of the ruling, or from a later date indicated therein, unless the advance ruling is modified or revoked in accordance with the established in paragraph 6.
5. Each Party shall grant to any person who requests an advance ruling, the same treatment, the same interpretation and application of the provisions of Chapter VI (Rules of Origin) referring to the determination of origin, that it has granted to any other person to the that has issued an advance ruling, when the facts and circumstances are identical in all substantial aspects.
6. The advance ruling may be modified or revoked by the competent authority in the following cases:
a. when it was founded on some error:
i) in fact;
ii) in the tariff classification of the good or materials; either
iii) relative to the compliance of the good with the regional content value;
b. when it is not in accordance with an interpretation agreed between the Parties or a modification with respect to Article 3-12 or Chapter VI (Rules of Origin);
c. when the circumstances or facts that support it change; either
d. in order to comply with an administrative or judicial decision.
7. Each Party shall provide that any modification or revocation of an advance ruling takes effect on the date it is issued or on a later date established therein, and may not be applied to imports of a good made before those dates, unless unless the person to whom it has been issued has not acted in accordance with its terms and conditions.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 7, the Party that issues the advance ruling will postpone the date of Entry into force of the modification or revocation for a period not to exceed 90 days, when the person to whom it has been issued the advance ruling has been based on that good faith ruling.
9. Each Party shall provide that, when considering the regional value content of a good for which an advance ruling has been issued, its competent authority shall assess whether:
a. the exporter or producer complies with the terms and conditions of the advance ruling;
b. the exporter's or producer's operations are consistent with the circumstances and substantial facts that support that finding; Y
c. the supporting data and calculations used in applying the method to calculate value or allocate costs are correct in all material respects.
10. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority determines that any of the requirements set forth in paragraph 9 has not been met, the competent authority may modify or revoke the advance ruling, as the circumstances warrant.
11. Each Party shall provide that, when its competent authority decides that the advance ruling has been based on incorrect information, the person to whom it was issued shall not be penalized, if he or she demonstrates that he or she acted with reasonable care and in good faith in stating the facts and circumstances that led to the advance ruling.
12. Each Party shall provide that, when an advance ruling is issued to a person who has falsely stated or omitted material circumstances or facts on which the advance ruling is based, or has not acted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the advance ruling, the authority authority that issues the anticipated ruling can apply the measures that the circumstances warrant.
13. The validity of an advance ruling will be subject to the permanent obligation of the owner thereof to inform the competent authority of any substantial change in the facts or circumstances on which it was based to issue that ruling.
14. Each Party will maintain the confidentiality of the information collected in the process of issuing advance rulings, in accordance with the provisions of its legislation.
Article 7-11: Customs Procedures Committee
1. The Parties establish the Customs Procedures Committee made up of representatives of each of them, which will meet at least twice a year, as well as at the request of any of the Parties.
2. It will correspond to the Committee:
a. try to reach agreements on:
i) the interpretation, application and administration of this chapter;
ii) tariff classification and valuation issues related to origin determination resolutions;
iii) the procedures for requesting, approving, issuing, modifying, revoking and applying advance rulings;
iv) modifications to the certificate or declaration of origin referred to in article 7-02; Y
v) any other matter referred by a Party; Y
b. examine the proposals for administrative or operational changes in customs matters that may affect the flow of trade between the Parties.
3. The Parties shall establish and implement, through their respective laws and regulations, the criteria that, in terms of interpretation, application and administration, are agreed upon by this Committee.
Chapter VIII Safeguards
Article 8-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
threat of serious injury : the clear imminence of serious injury, for which all pertinent factors of an objective and quantifiable nature that are related to the situation of a domestic industry will be taken into consideration, paying special attention to those indicated in article 8-10. The determination of the existence of a threat of serious injury will be based on facts and not on presumptions, conjectures or remote possibilities;
investigating authority : "investigating authority", as defined in Chapter IX (Unfair International Trade Practices);
directly competitive good : that which, not being identical or similar to the one being compared, is essentially equivalent for commercial purposes, because it is dedicated to the same use and is interchangeable with it;
similar good : one that, although it does not coincide in all its characteristics with the good with which it is compared, has similar characteristics and composition, which allows it to fulfill the same functions and be commercially interchangeable with the one that is being compared;
serious injury : a general and significant impairment to a domestic industry;
bilateral measures : safeguard measures in accordance with articles 8-03, 8-04 and other applicable provisions of this chapter;
global measures : emergency measures on the importation of goods under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards;
tariff reduction period: the reduction period, applicable to each good, according to the provisions of the Tariff Reduction Program; Y
domestic industry : the group of producers of similar or directly competitive products that operate within the territory of a Party.
Article 8-02: Safeguards regime
The Parties may apply to imports of goods, carried out in accordance with this Agreement, a safeguards regime whose application will be based on clear, objective, strict criteria and with a defined temporality. The safeguards regime provides for measures of a bilateral or global nature.
Section A Bilateral measures
Article 8-03 : Conditions of application If, as a result of the application of the Tariff Elimination Program, the importation of one of the Parties of one or several originating goods is carried out in quantities, rhythm and under conditions such that, by themselves , are the substantial cause of serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry of similar or directly competitive goods, the importing Party may adopt bilateral measures, which shall be applied in accordance with the following rules:
a. when it is strictly necessary to offset the serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by imports from the other Party of one or more originating goods, a Party may adopt bilateral measures within the period of tariff reduction;
b. Bilateral measures will be temporary and exclusively of a tariff nature. The tariff determined in no case may exceed the level that is lower between the most favored nation tariff for that good at the time the bilateral measure is adopted and the most favored nation tariff corresponding to that good the day before the entry into force of the Tariff Elimination Program;
c. Bilateral measures may be applied for a period of up to one year and may be extended only once, up to an equal and consecutive term, as long as it is shown that the same conditions that motivated them persist;
d. In justified cases, the validity of a bilateral measure may be maintained for a third year when the Party that applies it determines that:
i) the affected domestic industry has carried out competitive adjustments; Y
ii) requires a second year of extension. In these cases, it will be essential that the increase in the tariff in the first year of application of the bilateral measure be substantially reduced at the start of the second year of extension; Y
and. Upon termination of the bilateral measure, the rate or tariff will be the one that corresponds to the good object of the bilateral measure on that date in accordance with the Tariff Elimination Program.
Article 8-04: Compensation for bilateral measures
1. The Party that intends to apply a bilateral measure shall grant the affected Party mutually agreed compensation, which shall consist of additional tariff concessions, whose effects on the trade of the exporting country are equivalent to the impact of the adopted bilateral measure.
2. The Parties will agree on the terms of the compensation referred to in paragraph 1 at the prior consultation stage established in Article 8-14.
3. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation, the Party proposing to take the bilateral measure shall be empowered to do so, and the exporting Party may impose tariff measures that have trade effects equivalent to those of the bilateral measure taken.
Section B Overall measures
Article 8-05 : Rights under the WTO The Parties maintain their rights and obligations under Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Safeguards, except those referring to compensation or retaliation and exclusion of a global measure, in as long as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this section, in relation to any global measure adopted by a Party.
Article 8-06: Criteria for the adoption of a global measure 1. When a Party decides to adopt a global measure, it may only apply it to the other Party when the imports of a good from the latter, considered individually, represent a substantial part of the imports total and contribute significantly to serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry of the importing Party.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the following criteria shall be taken into account:
a. Normally, imports of a good from the other Party will not be considered substantial if the latter is not included among the main suppliers, whose joint exports represent 80% of the total imports of the similar or directly competitive good of the importing country; Y
b. imports from the other Party shall not normally be considered to contribute significantly to the serious injury or threat of serious injury if their growth rate during the period in which the injurious increase occurred is substantially less than the rate of growth of total imports of the like or directly competitive good of the Party proposing to adopt the global measure, from all sources, during the same period.
Article 8-07: Compensation for global measures 1. The Party that intends to apply a global measure shall grant the affected Party mutually agreed compensation, which will consist of additional concessions, whose effects on the trade of the exporting country are equivalent to the impact of the measure. overall adopted.
2. The Parties will agree on the terms of the compensation referred to in paragraph 1 at the prior consultation stage established in Article 8-14.
3. If the Parties are unable to agree on compensation, the Party proposing to adopt the global measure shall be empowered to do so, and the exporting Party may impose measures that have trade effects equivalent to those of the global measure adopted.
Section C Procedure
Article 8-08: Adoption procedure The Party that intends to adopt a bilateral or global measure in accordance with this chapter, shall comply with the procedure set forth in this section.
Article 8-09: Investigation 1. To determine the origin of the application of a safeguard measure, the investigative authority of the importing Party will carry out an investigation, which may be initiated ex officio or at the request of a party.
2. An investigation that could lead to the adoption of a bilateral measure shall not be initiated if the investigating authority has not determined that the request is supported by domestic producers whose joint production represents at least 35% of the total production. of the similar or directly competitive good.
3. The purpose of the investigation will be:
a. assess the volume and conditions under which imports of the good in question are made;
b. verify the existence of serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry; Y
c. verify the existence of a direct causal relationship between the increase in imports of the good and the serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry.
4. The application of safeguard measures shall be made in accordance with the provisions contained in the legislation of each Party.
Article 8-10: Determination of serious damage or threat of serious damage For the purposes of verifying the existence of serious damage or threat of serious damage, the investigating authority will evaluate the objective and quantifiable factors that are related to the branch of national production affected, in particular the rate and amount of the increase in imports of the good in question, in absolute and relative terms; the part of the internal market absorbed by the increase in imports; changes in the level of sales, internal prices, production, productivity, use of installed capacity, profits, losses, and employment.
Article 8-11: Effect of other factors If there are other factors, other than the increase in imports of an originating good, or of a good from the other Party, as the case may be, that simultaneously harm the domestic industry, the serious injury or threat of serious injury caused by these factors cannot be attributed to the referred imports.
Article 8-12: Publication and notification The Parties will publish the resolutions referred to in this chapter, in accordance with the annex to this article and will notify the exporting Party in writing the day after their publication.
Article 8-13: Content of the notification When initiating an investigation, the investigating authority will make the notification referred to in article 8-12, which will contain sufficient information to support and motivate the initiation of the same, including:
a. the available name and address of national producers of similar or directly competitive goods representative of national production; their participation in the national production of those goods and the reasons why they are considered representative of that sector;
b. the clear and complete description of the goods subject to the investigation, the tariff fractions in which they are classified and the current tariff treatment, as well as the identification of similar or directly competitive goods;
c. import data for each of the three years prior to the initiation of the investigation that provide the basis that the good is being imported in increasing quantities, either in absolute terms or relative to the total domestic production of the goods similar or directly competitive;
d. the data on the total national production of similar or directly competitive goods, corresponding to the three years prior to the initiation of the proceeding;
and. data showing that imports cause serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry in question, listing and description of the causes of serious injury or threat of serious injury, and a summary of the grounds for alleging that the increase in the imports of these goods, in relative or absolute terms to the national production of similar or directly competitive goods, is the cause of it;
F. where appropriate, the criteria and objective information that demonstrate that the assumptions for the application of a global measure to the other Party established in this chapter are met; Y
g. the duration of the safeguard measure that is intended to be adopted.
Article 8-14: Prior consultations 1. The Party that initiates a procedure in accordance with this chapter shall notify the other Party in writing under the terms of Articles 8-12 and 8-13 and shall request, at the same time, that the of prior consultations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. The importing Party shall provide adequate opportunities for prior consultations to take place. The prior consultation period will begin on the day after receipt by the exporting Party of the notification containing the request to hold these consultations.
3. The prior consultation period will be 30 business days, unless the Parties agree on another term. Safeguard measures may only be adopted once the prior consultation period has concluded.
Article 8-15: Confidential information 1. The consultation procedure will not oblige the Parties to reveal information that has been provided in confidence, the disclosure of which may violate their laws that regulate the matter or harm legitimate commercial interests.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the importing Party that intends to apply the measure shall provide a non-confidential summary of the information of a confidential nature.
Article 8-16: Observations by the exporting Party During the prior consultation period, the exporting Party shall formulate the observations it deems pertinent, in particular, on the appropriateness of invoking the safeguard and the proposed safeguard measures.
Article 8-17: Extension If the importing Party determines that the reasons that gave rise to the application of the safeguard measure subsist, it shall notify the exporting Party of its intention to extend it, at least 60 days prior to the expiration of its validity. . The extension procedure will be carried out in accordance with the provisions established in this chapter for the adoption of safeguard measures.
Annex to Article 8-12
The Parties shall make the publications referred to in this chapter in the following dissemination bodies:
a. Mexico, in the Official Gazette of the Federation; Y
b. Nicaragua, in a newspaper with national circulation, without prejudice to its subsequent publication in La Gaceta, Official Gazette.
Chapter IX Unfair International Trade Practices
Article 9-01 : Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
WTO agreements : the Agreement on the Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures;
competent authority : the one indicated by each Party in annex 1 to this article;
investigating authority : the one indicated by each Party in annex 2 to this article;
injury : a material injury caused to a domestic industry, a threat of material injury to a domestic industry, or a significant delay in the creation of this industry;
FOB : "FOB", as defined in Chapter VI (Rules of Origin);
interested parties : the producers, importers and exporters of the good subject to investigation, as well as national or foreign persons who have a direct interest in the investigation in question and includes the government of the Party, whose good is subject to an investigation . This interest must be expressed in writing;
serious prejudice : "serious prejudice" as defined in the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures;
resolution to initiate the investigation : the resolution of the competent authority that formally declares the initiation of the investigation;
preliminary resolution : the resolution of the competent authority that decides whether or not to impose a provisional countervailing duty; Y
final resolution : the resolution of the competent authority that decides whether or not to impose definitive countervailing duties.
Article 9-02: General Provisions The Parties reject any unfair international trade practice (unfair practice) that contravenes the provisions of this chapter.
Article 9-03: Export subsidies 1. As from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may not increase subsidies above 7% of the FOB export value.
2. From the moment the tariffs on originating agricultural products reach zero under the Tariff Elimination Program, and in no case after July 1, 2007, the Parties may not maintain export subsidies on agricultural products in their reciprocal trade.
3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, as of the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties may not maintain in their reciprocal trade export subsidies on agricultural products included in article 5 of Decree on Export Promotion Number 37-91 of Nicaragua and those that are subject to tariffs-quota according to the Tariff Elimination Program.
Article 9-04: Rights and obligations of the interested parties Each Party will ensure that the interested parties in the administrative investigation have the same rights and obligations, which will be respected and observed, both during the procedure and in the administrative and contentious instances. that are instituted against the final resolutions.
Article 9-05: Countervailing Duties The importing Party, in accordance with its national legislation, this Agreement and the WTO agreements, may establish and apply countervailing duties, when its investigating authority, through an objective examination based on positive evidence:
a. determine the existence of imports:
i) in dumped conditions; either
ii) goods that have received export subsidies;
b. check the existence of:
i) damage; either
ii) serious damage; Y
c) verify that the damage or serious prejudice, as the case may be, is a direct consequence of imports of identical or similar goods from the other Party, under conditions of dumping or subsidies.
Article 9-06: Sending copies The parties interested in the investigation, at their own costs, must send the other interested parties copies of the public version of each of the reports, documents and means of proof that they present to the investigating authority in the course of the investigation.
Article 9-07: Publication 1. The Parties shall publish the resolutions referred to in this chapter, in accordance with the annex to this article.
2. The resolutions object of publication will be the following:
a. those of initiation of the investigation, preliminary and definitive;
b. those who declare the investigation concluded:
i) due to commitments with the exporting Party or with the exporters, as the case may be; Y
ii) due to commitments derived from the holding of conciliation hearings.
Article 9-08: Content of the resolutions The resolutions to start the investigation, preliminary and final, will contain, at least, the following:
a. identification of the investigating authority, as well as the place and date on which the resolution is issued;
b. the name or company name and address of the applicant, as well as of the other national producers of the identical or similar goods;
c. the indication of the imported good subject to the procedure and its tariff classification;
d. the elements and evidence used to determine the existence of the dumping margin or the amount of the subsidy; damage or serious harm and its causal relationship;
and. the factual and legal considerations that led the competent authority to initiate an investigation or to impose a compensatory duty; Y
F. the legal arguments, data, facts or circumstances that support and motivate the resolution in question.
Article 9-09: Notifications and deadlines 1. Each Party shall notify the resolutions on the matter and directly to its importers and exporters of the other Party of which it is aware, to the competent authority, to the diplomatic mission of the Party accredited exporter in the Party conducting the investigation and, where appropriate, to the government of the exporting Party. Likewise, the Parties undertake to carry out the actions aimed at identifying and locating the interested parties in the procedure in order to guarantee the equality of the parties and due process.
2. Once the importing Party has verified that there is sufficient evidence to justify the initiation of the investigation, it shall notify the exporting Party before issuing the resolution to initiate the investigation.
3. Notification of the resolution to initiate the investigation will be made within five business days following its publication.
4. The notification of the resolution to initiate the investigation will contain, at least, the following information:
a. the terms and place for the presentation of allegations, evidence and other documents; Y
b. the name, address, and telephone number of the office where information may be obtained, inquiries made, and the case file inspected.
5. With the notification, the exporters will be sent a copy of:
a. the respective publication referred to in paragraph 3;
b. the written complaint and the public version of its annexes; Y
c. the corresponding questionnaires.
6. The importing Party will grant all interested parties of which it is aware, a term of not less than 30 business days, counted from the day after the publication of the resolution to initiate the investigation, in order for them to appear to state what that suits your right. The period of 30 business days, upon request of the interested party, justified in writing, may be extended for a maximum of an equal period.
Article 9-10: Deadlines for provisional measures Neither Party shall impose a provisional countervailing duty until after 60 business days have elapsed from the date of publication of the resolution to initiate the investigation.
Article 9-11: Adoption and publication of the preliminary resolution 1. Within a period of 130 business days from the publication of the resolution to initiate the investigation, the competent authority will issue a preliminary resolution. This resolution will determine whether or not to continue with the investigation and, where appropriate, to impose or not provisional measures. The resolution must be reasoned, based on the evidence contained in the administrative file and published in accordance with article 9-07.
2. Provisional countervailing duties shall take the form of a guarantee, in accordance with the legislation of each Party. The amount of the guarantee must be equal to the amount of the provisional compensatory quota.
Article 9-12: Content of the preliminary resolution The corresponding preliminary resolution will contain, in addition to the data indicated in article 9-08 that correspond to it, the following:
a. the normal value, the export price, the dumping margin or, where appropriate, the amount of the subsidy and its impact on the export price obtained by the investigating authority, as well as a description of the methodology followed to determine them;
b. a description of:
i) damage; either
ii) serious damage, and the explanation of the analysis of each of the factors that have been taken into account;
c. a description of the determination of causation; Y
d. where applicable, the amount of the provisional compensatory quota, which must be guaranteed.
Article 9-13: Conciliation hearings During the course of the investigation, any interested party may request the investigating authority to hold conciliation hearings in order to reach a satisfactory solution.
Article 9-14: Information meetings 1. The investigating authority of the importing Party, upon written request of the interested parties, will hold information meetings in order to disclose the pertinent information on the content of the preliminary and final rulings . .
2. The requests referred to in paragraph 1 must be submitted within five business days following the publication of the respective resolution. In both cases, the investigating authority will hold the meeting within a period of 15 business days from the filing of the request.
3. The meeting shall be held at the headquarters of the investigating authority of the importing Party.
4. In the information meetings referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the interested parties will have the right to review the reports or technical reports, the methodology, the calculation sheets and, in general, any element on which the decision has been based. corresponding resolution.
Article 9-15: Public hearings 1. Likewise, the investigating authority will hold, upon written request from any of the interested parties, public hearings in which the interested parties may appear and question their counterparts regarding the information or evidence that the investigating authority deems appropriate. . Also, the interested parties will be given the opportunity to present arguments after the public hearing, even if the testing period has ended. The allegations will consist of the written presentation of conclusions regarding the information and arguments provided in the course of the investigation. The notification to the interested parties to hold the public hearing must be made at least 15 business days before the date of the hearing.
2. The public hearing shall be held at the headquarters of the investigating authority of the importing Party.
Article 9-16: Obligation to terminate an investigation 1. The importing Party shall terminate an investigation:
a. with respect to an interested party, when its competent authority determines that:
i) the dumping margin or the amount of the subsidy is de minimis; either
ii) there is insufficient evidence of dumping, subsidy, injury, serious injury, or causal relationship; either
b. when its competent authority determines that the volume of the dumped or subsidized imports, or the injury, is negligible.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, it will be considered that:
a. the dumping margin is de minimis when it is less than 2% expressed as a percentage of the export price;
b. the amount of the subsidy is de minimis when it is less than 1% ad valorem; Y
c. the volume of the dumped or subsidized imports, or the injury, is negligible if it represents less than 3% of the importing Party's total imports of the identical or similar goods.
Article 9-17: Validity of the compensatory quotas 1. A definitive compensatory quota will be eliminated automatically when five years have elapsed, counted from the day following the publication of the definitive resolution, none of the interested parties has requested its revision, nor has the competent authority initiated it ex officio.
2. When a Party initiates an ex officio review, it must immediately inform the other Party.
Article 9-18: Reimbursement or reimbursement If a compensatory quota is determined in a final resolution lower than that provisionally determined, the competent authority of the importing Party shall notify the corresponding authorities so that they return the amounts paid in excess within a maximum period of 60 business days, counted from the day after the publication of the final resolution, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 9-19: Clarifications Once a compensatory, provisional or definitive quota has been imposed, the interested parties may request, in writing, the investigating authority to determine if an asset is subject to the imposed measure, or to clarify any aspect of the corresponding resolution. .
Article 9-20: Review 1. The final compensatory duties may be reviewed annually, upon written request from any of the interested parties, and at any time, in the case of being ex officio, by the competent authority before a change of circumstances. According to the result of the review, the countervailing duties may be ratified, modified or eliminated.
2. In the final countervailing duty review procedure, the substantive and procedural provisions set forth in this chapter shall be observed.
3. The review procedure may be requested, in writing, by the interested parties who have participated in the procedure that gave rise to the final compensatory duty or by any producer, importer or exporter who, without having participated in said procedure, proves their legal interest in writing before the investigating authority.
Article 9-21: Access to the file The interested parties will have access, at the headquarters of the investigating authority, to the administrative file of the procedure in question.
Article 9-22: Access to other files The investigating authority of each Party will allow interested parties, in the course of an investigation, access to public information contained in the administrative files of any other investigation, after 60 business days have elapsed. counted from the day after the publication of the final resolution.
Article 9-23: Access to confidential information 1. The investigating authority of each Party will allow, in accordance with its legislation, access to confidential information when there is reciprocity in the other Party regarding access to such information.
2. Confidential information will only be available to the legal representatives of the interested parties accredited before the investigating authority in the administrative investigation. Said information will be for strictly personal use and will not be transferable for any reason.
3. In the event that this information is disclosed or used for personal benefit, the legal representative will be entitled to the corresponding criminal, civil and administrative sanctions under the terms of the legislation of each Party.
Article 9-24: Amendments to national legislation 1. When a Party decides to amend, add or abrogate its legal provisions regarding unfair practices, it shall notify the other Party in writing, immediately after its publication.
2. The reforms, additions or abrogations will be compatible with the international regulations mentioned in article 9-05.
3. The Party that considers that the reforms, additions or abrogations are in violation of the provisions of this chapter, may resort to the dispute resolution mechanism of Chapter XX (Dispute Resolution).
Annex 1 to Article 9-01 Competent Authority
a. for Mexico: the Secretariat of Commerce and Industrial Development (SECOFI), or its successor; Y
b. for Nicaragua: the Ministry of Economy and Development (MEDE), or its successor.
Annex 2 to Article 9-01 Investigating Authority
It is the national authority in charge of conducting investigations into unfair international trade practices:
a. for Mexico: the International Trade Practices Unit of SECOFI, or its successor; Y
b. for Nicaragua: the General Directorate of Economic Integration of the MEDE or, where appropriate, the directorate that is responsible for matters of Central American economic integration or the technical unit that is responsible for the investigation of unfair trade practices, or its successor.
Annex to Article 9-07 Publication
The Parties shall publish the resolutions referred to in this chapter, as follows:
a. Mexico, in the Official Gazette of the Federation;
b. Nicaragua, in a newspaper with national circulation, without prejudice to its subsequent publication in La Gaceta, Official Gazette.
Chapter X General Principles on Trade in Services
Article 10-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
trade in services : the supply of a service:
a. from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;
b. in the territory of one Party to a consumer of the other Party;
c. through the presence of companies providing services of one Party in the territory of the other Party; Y
d. by natural persons of a Party in the territory of the other Party;
service provider of a Party : a person of a Party who intends to provide or provides a service;
quantitative restriction : a non-discriminatory measure that imposes limitations on:
a. the number of service providers, whether through a quota, monopoly or an economic necessity test or by any other quantitative means; either
b. the operations of any service provider, whether through a fee or an economic need test, or by any other quantitative means; Y
professional services : services that require specialized higher education or equivalent training or experience for their provision, and the exercise of which is authorized or restricted by a Party, but does not include services provided by persons practicing a trade or those provided to crew members of merchant ships and aircraft.
Article 10-02: Scope of application 1. This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains on trade in services carried out by service providers of the other Party, including those related to:
a. the production, distribution, marketing, sale and provision of a service;
b. the purchase, use or payment of a service;
c. access to, and use of, distribution and transportation systems in connection with the provision of a service;
d. access to public telecommunications networks and services, and their use;
and. the presence in its territory of a service provider of the other Party; Y
F. the granting of a bond or other form of financial guarantee, as a condition for the provision of a service.
2. The reference to federal, state or regional governments includes non-governmental organizations that exercise regulatory, administrative or other governmental powers that have been delegated by those governments.
3. This chapter does not apply to:
a. air services, including national and international air transportation, with and without a fixed itinerary, as well as auxiliary activities in support of air services, except:
i) aircraft repair and maintenance services during the period in which an aircraft is withdrawn from service;
ii) specialized air services; Y
iii) computerized reservation systems;
b. subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a State enterprise, including government-supported loans, guarantees and insurance;
c. government services or functions, such as law enforcement, rehabilitation services, income security or insurance, social security or insurance, social welfare, public education, public training, health and care for children; neither
d. financial services.
4. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a. impose on a Party any obligation with respect to a national of the other Party who intends to enter its labor market or who has permanent employment in its territory, nor to confer any right on that national, with respect to such access or employment; neither
b. impose an obligation or grant any right, to a Party, with respect to public sector purchases made by a Party or State enterprise.
5. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the measures related to the services contemplated in the annexes, only to the extent and terms stipulated in those annexes.
Article 10-03: Most-Favoured - Nation Treatment 1. Each Party shall accord to services and service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that accorded, in like circumstances, to services and service providers of any another country whether or not it is a Party.
2. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to prevent a Party from conferring or granting advantages to adjacent countries for the purpose of facilitating exchanges, limited to contiguous border areas, of services that are produced and consumed locally.
Article 10-04: National Treatment 1. Each Party shall grant to the services and service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that granted, in similar circumstances, to its services or service providers.
2. Treatment accorded by a Party pursuant to paragraph 1 means, with respect to a state or region, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment that state or region accords, in similar circumstances, to service providers of the Party to which they belong.
Article 10-05: Non-mandatory local presence Neither Party shall require a service provider of the other Party to establish or maintain a representative office or other type of company, or to reside in its territory as a condition for the provision of a service.
Article 10-06: Consolidation of measures 1. No Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of its existing measures with respect to Articles 10-03, 10-04 and 10-05. Any amendment to any of these measures will not decrease the degree of compliance of the measure as it was in effect immediately prior to the amendment.
2. Within a period of no more than one year from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall register in their list of the annex to this article the federal or central measures that do not conform to articles 10-03, 10-04 and 10 -05.
3. For state or regional measures that do not conform to articles 10-03, 10-04 and 10-05, the term to register them on the list in the annex to this article will be no more than two years from the entry into force. of this Treaty.
4. The Parties do not have the obligation to register municipal measures.
Article 10-07: Transparency 1. In addition to the provisions of Article 18-02, each Party shall publish promptly and, except in emergency situations, no later than the date of their entry into force, all laws, regulations and pertinent administrative guidelines and other decisions, resolutions or measures of general application that refer to or affect the operation of this chapter, and have been put into effect by institutions of any level of government or by a non-governmental regulatory entity. Likewise, international agreements that refer to or affect trade in services and to which a Party to this Agreement is a signatory will be published.
2. When the publication of the information referred to in paragraph 1 is not feasible or practical, it will be made available to the public in another way.
3. Each Party shall promptly inform the other Party, at least annually, of the establishment of new laws, regulations or administrative guidelines that significantly affect the trade in services covered by its specific commitments under this Chapter, or of the modifications that it introduces. in the existing ones.
4. Each Party shall respond promptly to all specific information requests made by the other Party regarding all of its measures referred to in paragraph 1. The other Party shall establish one or more information centers tasked with providing upon request by the other Party , specific information on measures referred to in paragraph 1, as well as those that are subject to the notification obligation provided for in paragraph 3. To the extent possible, each Party shall provide the other Party and interested persons with the opportunity reasonable time to comment on the proposed measures.
Article 10-08: Quantitative Restrictions 1. Periodically, at least once every two years, the Parties shall endeavor to negotiate to liberalize or eliminate:
a. existing quantitative restrictions that you maintain:
i) a Party at the federal or central level, as indicated in its list in the annex to this article; in accordance with paragraph 2; Y
(ii) a state or region, as indicated by a Party in its schedule in the annex to this article, in accordance with paragraph 2; Y
b. quantitative restrictions adopted by a Party after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Each Party will have one year from the date of entry into force of this Agreement to indicate in its list in the annex to this article the quantitative restrictions that a state or region maintains, not including those of municipal governments.
3. Each Party shall notify the other Party of any quantitative restriction that it adopts after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, except those of municipal governments, and shall indicate the restriction in its schedule in the annex to this article.
Article 10-09: Future liberalization 1. The Commission will convene future negotiations through which the Parties will deepen the liberalization achieved in the different service sectors, in order to achieve the elimination of the remaining restrictions registered in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of article 10-06.
2. The elimination of barriers to land transport flows between the Parties shall be subject to the provisions of the annex to this article.
Article 10-10: Liberalization of non-discriminatory measures Each Party shall indicate in its schedule in the annex to this article its commitments to liberalize quantitative restrictions, licensing requirements, and other non-discriminatory measures.
Article 10-11: Procedures The Commission shall establish procedures for:
a. that a Party notify the other Party and include in its relevant list:
i) federal or central measures in accordance with paragraph 2 of article 10-06 and its amendments;
ii) State or regional measures, in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 10-06 and its amendments;
iii) non-discriminatory quantitative restrictions, in accordance with Article 10-08;
iv) measures pursuant to Article 10-10; Y
b. holding future negotiations, in accordance with Article 10-09.
Article 10-12: Limitations on the provision of information In addition to the provisions of Article 21-03, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose an obligation on a Party to provide any confidential information the disclosure of which may harm legitimate business interests. of a public or private company.
Article 10-13: Granting of licenses and certificates 1. In order to guarantee that any measure that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to the requirements and procedures for the granting of licenses or certifications to the nationals of the other Party does not constitute a unnecessary barrier to trade, each Party shall endeavor to ensure that such measures:
a. are based on objective and transparent criteria, such as the capacity and aptitude to provide a service;
b. are not more burdensome than necessary to ensure the quality of a service; Y
c. do not constitute a disguised restriction on the cross-border provision of a service.
2. When a Party recognizes, unilaterally or by agreement with another country, education, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of the other Party or of any country that is not a Party:
a. nothing in Article 10-03 shall be construed to require that Party to recognize education, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of the other Party; Y
b. the Party shall provide the other Party with adequate opportunity to demonstrate that education, licenses or certificates obtained in the territory of that other Party shall also be recognized, or to negotiate or enter into an arrangement or agreement having equivalent effect.
3. Each Party, within a period of two years from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, shall eliminate any requirement of nationality or permanent residence that it maintains for the granting of licenses or certificates to providers of professional services of the other part. Where a Party fails to comply with this obligation with respect to a particular sector, the other Party may, in the same sector and for as long as the non-compliant Party maintains its requirement, maintain, as the sole remedy, an equivalent requirement indicated in your list from the annex to article 10-06 or restore:
a. any such federal or central requirements that it has eliminated pursuant to this article; either
b. by notification to the Party in breach, any such requirements at the state or regional level that would have been in effect on the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
4. The annex to this article establishes procedures for the recognition of education, experience, standards and requirements that govern professional service providers.
Article 10-14: Denial of benefits A Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of the other Party, prior notification and consultation, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not conducts significant business activities in the territory of any Party, and is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party.
Article 10-15: Exceptions In addition to the provisions of Article 21-01, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or applying measures necessary for the implementation of rules and regulations of international agreements, to which the Party is a party for the conservation of the environment, provided that such measures are not applied in a way that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade in services between the Parties .
Article 10-16: Future work 1. The Commission will determine the procedures for establishing the necessary disciplines related to:
a. urgent safeguard measures;
b. subsidies that distort trade in services; Y
c. monopoly service providers.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the work of the relevant international organizations will be taken into account.
Article 10-17: Relationship with multilateral agreements on services 1. The Parties undertake to apply to each other the provisions on services contained in the multilateral agreements to which they are parties.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, in the event of any inconsistency between those agreements and that Agreement, the Agreement shall prevail over the other to the extent of the inconsistency.
Article 10-18: Technical cooperation The Parties shall establish, no later than one year after the entry into force of this Agreement, a system to provide service providers with information regarding their markets in relation to:
a. the commercial and technical aspects of the provision of services;
b. the possibility of obtaining technology in terms of services; Y
c. all those aspects that the Commission identifies regarding services.
Annex to Article 10-13 Professional Services
1. Definitions For the purposes of this annex, professional practice shall mean the habitual performance of any professional act or the provision of any service specific to each profession that requires government authorization.
2. Objective The purpose of this annex is to establish the rules to be observed by the Parties to reduce and gradually eliminate, in their territory, the barriers to the provision of professional services.
3. Scope of application This annex will apply to all measures related to the criteria for the granting and mutual recognition of certificates and licenses for professional practice.
4. Development of professional standards and criteria
a. The Parties acknowledge that the process of granting and mutual recognition of certificates and licenses for professional practice in their territory will be based on raising the quality of professional services, through the establishment of standards and criteria for the granting of certificates. and licences, while protecting consumers and safeguarding the public interest.
b. The Parties will encourage, among others, the relevant bodies, the competent government agencies and professional associations and colleges to:
i) develop such criteria and standards; Y
ii) formulate and submit recommendations on mutual recognition to the Parties.
c. The elaboration of criteria and norms referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, may consider the following elements: education, exams, experience, conduct and ethics, professional development and updating, renewal or updating of certificates and licenses, field of action, knowledge local, and consumer protection.
d. In order to put into practice the provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3, the Parties undertake to provide the detailed and necessary information for the granting and mutual recognition of licenses and certificates, including that corresponding to: academic courses, guides and study materials, rights , exam dates, schedules, locations, affiliation to professional societies or colleges. This information includes federal, central, state, regional legislation, administrative guidelines and measures of general application and those developed by governmental and non-governmental organizations.
5. Review
a. Based on the review of the recommendations received by the Parties, and if they are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement, each Party shall encourage the competent authority to adopt those recommendations.
b. The Parties shall periodically review, at least once every three years, the application of the provisions of this annex.
Annex to Article 10-09 Elimination of Barriers to Land Transportation Flows
The Parties will develop a work program in order to eliminate barriers to land transport flows between their territories. The work program will consider, among others, the work that both Parties have developed in terms of land transportation, as well as the agreements or conventions that the Parties have signed with other countries.
Chapter XI Telecommunications
Article 11-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as: intracorporate communications: the telecommunications through which a company communicates:
a. internally, with its subsidiaries, branches and affiliates, or these among themselves; either
b. in a non-commercial way, with people of fundamental importance for the economic activity of the company, and who maintain a continuous contractual relationship with it,
but does not include telecommunications services provided to persons other than those described in this definition;
technically qualified entity : an entity defined by the corresponding law of each Party as the one in charge of carrying out laboratory tests. These entities must be accredited by the competent authorities of each Party.
authorized equipment : terminal or other equipment that has been approved for connection to the public telecommunications network in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures of a Party;
terminal equipment : a digital or analog device capable of processing, receiving, switching, signaling or transmitting signals through electromagnetic means and which is connected to the public telecommunications network, by means of radio or cable connections, at a terminal point;
standardization- related measure: "standardization-related measure" as defined in Chapter XIV (Standardization-Related Measures);
conformity assessment procedure : "conformity assessment procedure", as defined in chapter XIV of (Standardization Related Measures);
protocol – a set of rules and formats that govern the exchange of information between two peer entities, for the purposes of signal or data information transfer;
network end point : the final demarcation of the public telecommunications network at the user's premises;
private network – the telecommunications network used exclusively for internal company communications;
public telecommunications network : the public telecommunications infrastructure that enables telecommunications between defined endpoints of the network;
broadcasting services : services for the transmission of radio and television programs over the air;
enhanced or value-added services: telecommunications services that employ computer processing systems that:
a. act on the format, content, code, protocol or similar aspects of the user's transmitted information;
b. that provide the client with additional, different or restructured information; either
c. they involve user interaction with stored information.
public telecommunications service: a telecommunications service that is explicitly or de facto required by a Party to be offered to the general public, including telegraph, telephone, telex, and data transmission and generally involves real-time transmission of customer-supplied information between two or more points, with no "point-to-point" change in the form or content of the user information;
cross subsidy : the economic transfer to the production costs of one service, at the expense of another service.
fixed rate : pricing based on a fixed amount per period, regardless of the amount of usage; Y
Telecommunications : The transmission and reception of signals by any electromagnetic means.
Article 11-02: Scope of application 1. Recognizing the double role of telecommunications services, as a specific sector of economic activity and as a means of providing services for other economic activities, this chapter applies to:
a. the measures that a Party adopts or maintains, related to the provision of public telecommunications services;
b. the measures that a Party adopts or maintains, related to the continuous access of networks or public telecommunications services and their continuous use by persons of the other Party, including their access and use when operating private networks to carry out intra-corporate communications;
c. the measures adopted or maintained by a Party on the provision of enhanced or value-added services by persons of the other Party in the territory of the first or across its borders; Y
d. measures related to standardization regarding the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment to public telecommunications networks.
2. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
a. compel a Party to authorize a person of the other Party to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply telecommunications networks or services;
b. compel a Party or that it, in turn, require any person to establish, build, acquire, lease, operate or supply public telecommunications networks or services that are not offered to the general public;
c. prevent a Party from prohibiting persons who operate private networks from using such networks to provide public telecommunications networks or services to third parties; neither
d. oblige a Party to require any person who broadcasts or distributes radio or television programs by cable to offer their broadcasting or cable facilities as a public telecommunications network.
Article 11-03: Access to and use of public telecommunications networks and services 1. Each Party shall guarantee that any person of the other Party has access to and can make use of any public telecommunications network or service, including private leased circuits , offered in your territory or cross-border on reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and conditions, for the conduct of your business, as specified in paragraphs 2 to 8.
2. Subject to the provisions of subparagraph c) of paragraph 2 of Article 11-02 and paragraphs 7 and 8, each Party shall ensure that the persons of the other Party are allowed:
a. purchase or lease and connect the terminal equipment or other equipment that interfaces with the public telecommunications network;
b. interconnect private circuits, leased or owned, with public telecommunications networks in the territory of that Party or across its borders, including access by direct dialing to and by its users or customers, or with circuits leased or owned by another person, in terms and conditions mutually accepted by such persons;
c. perform switching, signaling and processing functions subject to the legislation in force in each Party, and
d. use the operating protocols they choose.
3. Each Party shall ensure that:
a. the setting of prices for public telecommunications services reflects the economic costs directly related to the provision of said services that are approved by the competent authority; Y
b. private leased circuits are available on the basis of an established fixed rate.
4. Nothing in paragraph 3 shall be construed to prevent cross-subsidization between public telecommunications services.
5. Each Party shall guarantee that persons of the other Party may use public telecommunications networks or services to transmit information in its territory or across its borders, including for intra-corporate communications, and for access to information contained in databases or stored in any other machine-readable form in the territory of any Party.
6. Each Party may adopt any necessary measure to ensure the confidentiality and security of messages and the protection of the privacy of subscribers to public telecommunications networks or services.
7. Each Party, in accordance with its legislation, shall guarantee that no more conditions are imposed on access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services, than those necessary to:
a. safeguard the responsibilities of the public service, of the providers of public telecommunications networks or services, in particular their ability to make their networks or services available to the general public; either
b. protect the technical integrity of public telecommunications networks or services.
8. As long as the conditions for access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services comply with the guidelines established in paragraph 7, said conditions may include:
a. restrictions on the resale or sharing of such services;
b. requirements to use certain technical interfaces, including interface protocols, for interconnection with the aforementioned networks or services;
c. restrictions on the interconnection of private circuits, leased or owned, with the aforementioned networks or services, or with circuits leased or owned by another person, when these are used to supply public telecommunications networks or services; Y
d. procedures for granting licenses, permits, registrations or notifications that, if adopted or maintained, are transparent and whose application process is resolved expeditiously.
Article 11-04: Conditions for the provision of enhanced or value-added services
1. Each Party shall ensure that:
a. any procedure that it adopts or maintains to grant licenses, permits, registrations or notifications regarding the provision of these services is transparent and non-discriminatory and that the requests are processed in an expeditious manner; Y
b. the information required is in accordance with the requirements and procedures established in the respective law and regulations of each Party in which the technical and financial capacity to provide the service is required.
2. No Party shall require a provider of these services:
a. lend them to the general public;
b. justify your rates according to your costs;
c. record a fee;
d. interconnect your networks with any particular client or network; either
and. satisfy any particular technical standard or regulation, for an interconnection other than the interconnection with a public telecommunications network.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph c) of paragraph 2, each Party may require the registration of a fee to:
a. a service provider, in order to correct a practice of this provider that the Party, in accordance with its legislation, has considered, in a particular case, as anti-competitive; either
b. a monopoly, to which the provisions of Article 11-06 apply.
Article 11-05: Standardization - related measures 1. Each Party shall ensure that its standardization-related measures that refer to the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment to public telecommunications networks, including those measures that refer to the use of test and measurement equipment for the conformity assessment procedure, are adopted or maintained only to the extent necessary to:
a. avoid technical damage to public telecommunications networks;
b. avoid technical interference with public telecommunications services or their deterioration;
c. avoid electromagnetic interference and ensure compatibility with other uses of the electromagnetic spectrum;
d. prevent billing equipment from malfunctioning; either
and. guarantee the security of the user and their access to public telecommunications networks or services.
2. Each Party may establish the approval requirement for the connection of terminal equipment or other equipment that is not authorized to the public telecommunications network, provided that the approval criteria are compatible with the provisions of paragraph 1.
3. Each Party shall ensure that the end points of public telecommunications networks are defined on a reasonable and transparent basis.
4. Once the equipment used as a protection device for public telecommunications networks is authorized, based on the criteria established in paragraph 1, no Party shall require additional authorization for the equipment connected on the consumer side.
5. Each Party:
a. it will ensure that its conformity assessment procedures are transparent and non-discriminatory and that applications submitted for this purpose are processed expeditiously;
b. will allow any technically qualified entity to perform the required test on the terminal equipment or other equipment to be connected to the public telecommunications network, in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures of the Party, subject to the right of the Party to review the accuracy and completeness of test results; Y
c. shall ensure that the measures it adopts or maintains to authorize persons acting as agents of telecommunications equipment suppliers before the competent bodies for conformity assessment of the Party are not discriminatory.
6. No later than one year after the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall adopt, among its conformity assessment procedures, the necessary provisions to accept the results of tests carried out by laboratories located in the territory of the other. Party, based on its established rules and procedures.
7. The Subcommittee on Measures Related to the Standardization of Telecommunications, established in accordance with paragraph 5 of article 14-17, will have the functions indicated in the annex to this article, in addition to those provided by the Committee on Measures Related to Standardization. .
Article 11-06: Monopolies 1. When a Party maintains or establishes a monopoly to provide public telecommunications networks and services, and the monopoly competes, directly or through a subsidiary, in the provision of enhanced or value-added services or other goods or services related to telecommunications, the Party shall ensure that the monopoly does not use its monopoly position to engage in anti-competitive practices in those markets, either directly or through dealings with its subsidiaries, in such a way as to disadvantageously affect to a person of the other Party. Such practices may include cross-subsidies, predatory conduct, and discriminatory access to public telecommunications networks and services.
2. Each Party shall introduce or maintain effective measures to prevent the anticompetitive conduct referred to in paragraph 1, such as:
a. accounting requirements;
b. structural separation requirements;
c. rules to ensure that the monopoly allows its competitors access to its networks or its telecommunications services and the use thereof, under terms and conditions no less favorable than those granted to itself or its subsidiaries; either
d. rules to ensure timely disclosure of technical changes to public telecommunications networks and their interfaces.
Article 11-07: Relationship with international organizations and agreements 1. The Parties will do their best to stimulate the role of organizations at the regional and subregional level and encourage them as forums to promote the development of telecommunications in the region.
2. The Parties, recognizing the importance of international standards to achieve global compatibility and interoperability of telecommunications networks or services, undertake to promote such standards through the work of competent international organizations, such as the International Telecommunication Union and the International Organization for Standardization.
Article 11-08: Technical cooperation and other consultations 1. In order to stimulate the development of the infrastructure of interoperable telecommunications services, the Parties shall cooperate in the exchange of technical information, in the development of intergovernmental training programs, as well as in other related activities. In compliance with this obligation, the Parties will place special emphasis on existing coordination and exchange programs.
2. The Parties shall consult with each other to determine the possibility of further liberalizing trade in all telecommunications services.
Article 11-09: Transparency Each Party shall make available to the public the measures relating to access to and use of public telecommunications networks or services, including measures relating to:
a. fees and other terms and conditions of service;
b. specifications of the technical interfaces with said services and networks;
c. information on the bodies responsible for the preparation and adoption of measures related to standardization that affect said access and use;
d. conditions applicable to the connection of terminal equipment or of another kind, to the public telecommunications network; Y
and. any notice, permit, registration or license requirements.
Article 11-10: Relationship with other chapters In the event of a contradiction between a provision of this chapter and one of another chapter, the former shall prevail to the extent of incompatibility.
Annex to Article 11-05 Subcommittee on Measures Related to Telecommunications Standardization
1. The Subcommittee on Measures Related to the Standardization of Telecommunications, will develop, within one year from the entry into force of this Agreement, a work program, including a calendar, to make the standardization measures compatible with respect to the equipment authorized.
2. The subcommittee may address other issues related to standards regarding telecommunications equipment or services and any other issues it deems appropriate.
3. The subcommittee shall take into account relevant work carried out by the Parties in other forums, as well as that of non-governmental standard-setting entities.
Chapter XII Temporary Entry of Business Persons
Article 12-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
temporary entry : the entry of a business person of one Party into the territory of the other Party, without the intention of establishing permanent residence;
business person : the national of a Party who is engaged in trade in goods or provision of services, or in investment activities;
national : a national, but does not include permanent residents; Y
in force : the binding quality of the legislative precepts of the Parties at the time of entry into force of this Agreement.
Article 12-02: General principles The provisions of this chapter reflect the preferential commercial relationship between the Parties, the convenience of facilitating the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity, and the need to establish transparent criteria and procedures for this purpose. Likewise, they reflect the need to guarantee the security of the borders and to protect the work of their nationals and permanent employment in their respective territories.
Article 12-03: General obligations 1. Each Party will apply the measures related to this chapter in accordance with the previous article, in particular, it will apply them expeditiously to avoid undue delays or damages, in the trade of goods and services, or in investment activities covered by this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall endeavor to develop and adopt common criteria, definitions and interpretations for the application of this Chapter.
Article 12-04: Temporary entry authorization 1. In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including those contained in the annex to this article, each Party shall authorize temporary entry to business persons who comply with the other applicable measures, relating to public health and safety, as well as those relating to national security.
2. A Party may deny the issuance of a migration document that authorizes employment to a business person, when their temporary entry adversely affects:
a. the solution of any labor conflict that exists in the place where they are employed or will be employed; either
b. the employment of any person involved in that conflict.
3. When a Party denies the issuance of an immigration document authorizing employment, in accordance with paragraph 2, that Party:
a. inform the affected business person in writing of the reasons for the refusal; Y
b. promptly notify the Party whose national is refused entry in writing of the reasons for the refusal.
4. Each Party shall limit the amount of the fees caused by the processing of applications for temporary entry to the approximate cost of the processing services provided.
Article 12-05: Availability of Information 1. In addition to the provisions of Article 18-02, each Party:
a. provide the other Party with the materials that allow it to know the measures related to this chapter; Y
b. no later than twelve months after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, prepare, publish and make available to interested parties, both in its territory and in that of the other Party, a consolidated document with material that explains the requirements for temporary entry pursuant to this chapter, so that business persons of the other Party may become acquainted with them.
2. Each Party shall collect, maintain and make available to the other Party, in accordance with its legislation, information related to the granting of temporary entry authorizations, in accordance with this chapter, to persons of the other Party who have been issued immigration documentation. This collection will include specific information for each occupation, profession or activity.
Article 12-06: Temporary Entry Committee 1. The Parties establish a Temporary Entry Committee, made up of representatives of each of them, including migration officials.
2. The committee will meet at least once every 12 months to review:
a. the application and administration of this chapter;
b. the elaboration of measures that further facilitate the temporary entry of business persons in accordance with the principle of reciprocity;
c. exemption from labor certification tests or procedures of similar effect, for the spouse of the person who has been authorized temporary entry for more than one year in accordance with sections B or C of the annex to article 12-04; Y
d. proposals for modifications or additions to this chapter.
Article 12-07: Settlement of disputes 1. The Parties may not initiate the procedures provided for in Article 20-06, with respect to a refusal to authorize temporary entry in accordance with this chapter, nor with respect to any particular case included in paragraph 1. of article 12-03, except that:
a. the matter refers to a recurring practice; Y
b. the affected business person has exhausted the administrative remedies available to him or her with respect to that particular matter.
2. The remedies mentioned in subparagraph b) of paragraph 1 will be considered exhausted when the competent authority has not issued a final resolution in 12 months, counted from the beginning of the administrative procedure, and the resolution has not been delayed for reasons attributable to the affected business person.
Article 12-08: Relationship with other chapters Except as provided in this chapter and in chapters I (Initial Provisions), II (General Definitions), XVIII (Transparency), XX (Dispute Resolution) and XXII (Final Provisions), none provision of this Agreement shall impose any obligation on the Parties with respect to their immigration measures.
Annex to Article 12-04 Temporary Entry of Business Persons
Section A Business Visitors
1. Each Party shall authorize the temporary entry of the business person who, at the prior request of a company of the other Party registered in the Bilateral Register of Companies referred to in paragraph 7, intends to carry out any activity mentioned in the appendix 1 to this annex, without requiring employment authorization, provided that, in addition to complying with current immigration measures, applicable to temporary entry, you display:
a. proof of nationality of a Party;
b. documentation proving the prior request of a company established in the territory of a Party;
c. documentation that proves that you will undertake such activities and indicates the purpose of your entry; Y
d. proof of the international character of the proposed business activity and that the person does not intend to enter the local labor market.
2. Each Party shall stipulate that a business person may meet the requirements indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 1 when it demonstrates that:
a. the main source of remuneration for that activity is located outside the territory of the Party authorizing temporary entry; Y
b. the main place of business and where most of the profits are obtained are outside this territory.
3. Each Party will normally accept an oral statement as to the principal place of business and place of profit. When the Party requires additional verification, a letter from the employer registered in the Bilateral Registry of Companies stating these circumstances will normally be considered sufficient proof.
4. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry to the business person who intends to carry out an activity other than those indicated in appendix 1 to this annex, in terms no less favorable than those provided for in the current provisions indicated in appendix 2 to this annex, provided that said business person also complies with current immigration provisions, applicable to temporary entry.
5. Neither Party may:
a. Require as a condition to authorize temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1 or 3, prior approval procedures, petitions, labor certification tests, or other procedures of similar effect; neither
b. impose or maintain any numerical restriction on temporary entry in accordance with paragraph 1 or 4.
6. Notwithstanding paragraph 5, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document. Before a Party imposes the visa requirement, it shall consult with the other Party, in order to avoid the application of the requirement. When a visa requirement exists in one Party, at the request of the other Party, they will consult with a view to eliminating it.
7. For the purposes of this section, the Parties shall establish and keep updated the Bilateral Registry of Companies - Visitors.
Section B Traders and Investors
1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and provide the corresponding documentation to the business person who intends to:
a. carry out a large commercial exchange of goods or services, mainly between the territory of the Party of which he is a national and the territory of the Party to which he requests entry; either
b. establish, develop, manage or provide key technical advice or services, in supervisory, executive or essential skill roles, to carry out or manage an investment in which the business person or his company has engaged, or is in the process of to commit a significant amount of capital, provided that the person also complies with current immigration measures, applicable to temporary entry.
2. Neither Party may:
a. require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect, as a condition for authorizing temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither
b. impose or maintain any numerical restriction in relation to temporary entry pursuant to paragraph 1.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, a Party may examine, at a peremptory time, the investment proposal of a business person to assess whether the investment complies with the applicable legal provisions.
4. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document.
Section C Personnel transfers within a company
1. Each Party shall authorize temporary entry and issue supporting documentation to the business person employed by a company of the other Party registered in the Bilateral Register of Companies, referred to in paragraph 4, who intends to perform managerial, executive or other functions. involve specialized knowledge, in that company or in one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, as long as it complies with current immigration measures applicable to temporary entry. The Party may require that the person have been employed by the company continuously for one year within the three years immediately preceding the date of filing the application.
2. Neither Party may:
a. require proof of labor certification or other procedures of similar effect as a condition for granting temporary entry under paragraph 1; neither
b. impose or maintain any numerical restriction in relation to temporary entry under paragraph 1.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, a Party may require a business person applying for temporary entry under this section to obtain, prior to entry, a visa or equivalent document. Before a Party imposes the visa requirement, it shall consult with the other Party, in order to avoid the application of the requirement. When a visa requirement exists in one Party, at the request of the other, they will consult with a view to eliminating it.
4. For the purposes of this section, the Parties shall establish and keep updated the Bilateral Registry of Companies - Personnel Transfers within the Company.
Appendix 1 to the Annex to Article 12-04 Business Visitors
I. Definitions For the purposes of the appendix to section A, it shall be understood as:
tourist bus operator : the natural person required for the operation of the vehicle during the tourist trip including the relief personnel who accompany or join him later; Y
transport operator : the natural person, other than a tour bus operator, required for the operation of the vehicle during the trip, including relief personnel who accompany or join him/her later.
II. research and design
- Technical, scientific and statistician researchers who carry out research independently or for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
III. Cultivation, manufacturing and production
- Owners of harvesting machines who supervise a group of operators admitted in accordance with the applicable provisions.
- Purchasing and production personnel, at a managerial level, who carry out commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
IV. Commercialization
- Market researchers and analysts who carry out research or analysis independently or for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
- Trade fair and promotional staff who attend trade conventions.
V. Sales 1
- Representatives and sales agents who place orders or negotiate contracts for goods and services for a company located in the territory of the other Party, but who do not deliver the goods or provide the services.
- Buyers who make acquisitions for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
SAW. Distribution
- Transport operators that carry out loading and transport operations of goods or passengers to the territory of a Party from the territory of the other Party, without carrying out loading or unloading operations, in the territory of the Party to which entry is requested, of goods that are in that territory or of passengers that board in it.
- Customs agents that provide advisory services with the purpose of facilitating the import or export of goods.
VII. After sales services
- Installation, repair, maintenance and supervisory personnel who have the specialized technical knowledge essential to fulfill the seller's contractual obligation and who provide services, or train workers to provide those services, pursuant to a warranty or other contract of services related to the sale of commercial or industrial equipment or machinery, including computer programs purchased from a company located outside the territory of the other Party, during the term of the warranty or service contract.
VIII. General services
- Managerial and supervisory personnel involved in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
- Financial services personnel (insurance agents, bank personnel or investment brokers) that intervene in commercial operations for a company located in the territory of the other Party.
- Public relations and advertising personnel who provide advice to clients or who attend or participate in conventions.
- Tourism personnel (excursion and travel agents, tourist guides or travel operators) who attend or participate in conventions or conduct any excursion that has started in the territory of the other Party.
- Tour bus operators entering the territory of a Party:
a. with a group of passengers on a tour bus trip that started in the territory of the other Party and is going to return to it;
b. who is going to pick up a group of passengers on a tour bus trip that ends, and takes place, for the most part in the territory of the other Party; either
c. with a group of passengers on a tourist bus trip, whose destination is in the territory of the other Party, and who returns without passengers or with the group.
- Translators or interpreters who provide services as employees of a company located in the territory of the other Party.
Appendix 2 to the Annex of Article 12-04 Current Immigration Provisions
1. In the case of Mexico, Chapter III of the General Population Law, 1974, with its reforms.
2. In the case of Nicaragua, the Migration Law, Law number 153, Gaceta No.80, April 30, 1993 and the Immigration Law, Law number 154, Gaceta No.81, May 3, 1993.
Chapter XIII Financial Services
Article 13-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
public entity : a central bank, or monetary authority of a Party, or any financial institution of a public nature owned or controlled by a Party;
financial institution : a company or financial intermediary that is authorized to do business and is regulated or supervised as a financial institution under the laws of the Party in whose territory it is located; financial institution of the other Party: a financial institution, constituted in accordance with the laws of each Party, located in the territory of a Party that is controlled by persons of the other Party;
investment :
a. a company;
b. company actions;
c. debt instruments of a company:
i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; either
ii) when the original maturity date of the debt instrument is at least three years, but does not include a debt instrument of a State enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;
d. a loan to a company:
i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; either
ii) when the original maturity date of the loan is at least three years, but does not include a loan to a State enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;
and. a share in a business, which allows the owner to share in the income or profits of the business;
F. a participation in a company, which grants the owner the right to participate in the social assets of that company in a liquidation, provided that this does not derive from an obligation or a loan excluded according to literals c) and d);
g. real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining economic benefit or for other business purposes;
h. benefits from allocating capital or other resources for the development of an economic activity in the territory of the other Party, among others, in accordance with:
i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of the other Party, including concessions, construction and turnkey contracts; either
ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company; and
Yo. a loan granted to a financial institution or a debt security issued by a financial institution that is treated as capital for regulatory purposes by the Party in whose territory the financial institution is located; will not be understood by investment:
j. pecuniary claims that do not entail the types of rights provided in the literals of the definition of investment derived exclusively from:
i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of one Party to a company in the territory of the other Party; either
ii) the granting of credit in relation to a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, except for a loan covered by the provisions of subparagraph d);
k. any other pecuniary claim that does not entail the types of rights provided in the literals of the definition of investment;
investment of an investor of a Party : the investment owned by, or under the direct or indirect control of, an investor of a Party;
investor of a Party : a Party, a State enterprise of the Party, or a person of that Party that intends to make, makes or has made an investment;
disputing investor : a person who files a claim under the terms of the provisions of article 13-20;
new financial service : a financial service not provided in the territory of a Party that is provided in the territory of the other Party, including any new form of distribution of a financial service, or sale of a financial product that is not sold in the territory of the Party Part;
self-regulatory body : a non-governmental entity, including any stock or futures exchange or market, clearing house, or any other association or organization that exercises its own or delegated regulatory or supervisory authority over financial service providers or institutions financial;
person of a Party : a national or company of a Party and, for greater certainty, does not include a branch of a company of a non-Party country;
cross-border provision of financial services or cross-border trade in financial services : the provision of a financial service:
a. from the territory of one Party to the territory of the other Party;
b. in the territory of a Party, by a person of that Party to a person of the other Party; either
c. by a person of a Party in the territory of the other Party;
financial service provider of a Party : a person of a Party who is engaged in the business of providing a financial service in the territory of the other Party;
cross-border financial service provider of a Party : a person of a Party who is engaged in the business of providing financial services in its territory and who intends to perform or performs the cross-border provision of financial services; Y
financial service : a service of a financial nature, including insurance, reinsurance, and any related or auxiliary service to a service of a financial nature.
Article 13-02: Scope of application
1. This Chapter refers to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
a. Financial institutions of the other Party;
b. investors of a Party and investments of those investors in financial institutions in the territory of the other Party; Y
c. cross-border trade in financial services.
2. Nothing in the provisions of this chapter shall be construed in the sense of preventing a Party, or its public entities, from conducting or providing exclusively in its territory:
a. activities or services that are part of public retirement plans or public social security systems;
b. the use of financial resources owned by the Party; either
c. other activities or services on behalf of the Party or its public entities or with its guarantee.
3. The Parties undertake to liberalize each other, progressively and gradually, any financial restriction or reserve with the purpose of making the economic complementation between them effective.
4. The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over those of other chapters, except in cases where express reference is made to those chapters.
Article 13-03: Self-regulatory bodies When a Party requires that a financial institution or a cross-border financial service provider of the other Party be a member of, participate in, or have access to a self-regulatory body to offer a financial service in or to its territory, the Party shall do everything in its power to ensure that that body complies with the obligations of this chapter.
Article 13-04: Right of Establishment 1. The Parties recognize the principle that investors of one Party, engaged in the business of providing financial services in their territory, should be permitted to establish a financial institution in the territory of the other Party. , through any of the modalities of establishment and operation that it allows.
2. Each Party may impose, at the time of establishment, terms and conditions that are consistent with Article 13-06.
Article 13-05: Cross- border trade 1. Neither Party shall increase the restrictions of its measures related to cross-border trade in financial services carried out by cross-border financial service providers of the other Party, on the date of Entry into Force of this Agreement.
2. Each Party shall permit persons located in its territory and its nationals, wherever located, to purchase financial services from cross-border financial service providers of the other Party located in the territory of that other Party. This does not oblige a Party to allow these providers to do business or advertise in its territory. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party may define what is considered to be "doing business" and "advertising" for purposes of this obligation.
3. Without prejudice to other means of prudential regulation of cross-border trade in financial services, either Party may require the registration of cross-border financial service providers of the other Party and of financial instruments.
Article 13-06: National Treatment 1. Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that which it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own investors, with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, conduct, operation , sale, as well as other forms of alienation of financial institutions and investments in financial institutions on its territory.
2. Each Party shall accord to financial institutions of the other Party and to investments of investors of the other Party in financial institutions treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in similar circumstances, to its own financial institutions and to investments of its investors in financial institutions themselves, regarding the establishment, acquisition, expansion, administration, management, operation, sale, and other forms of disposal of financial institutions and investments.
3. When a Party allows the cross-border provision of a financial service in accordance with Article 13-05, it shall grant to cross-border financial service providers of the other Party treatment no less favorable than that it grants, in similar circumstances, to its own service providers. financial, regarding the provision of such service.
4. The treatment that a Party accords to financial institutions and cross-border financial service providers of the other Party, whether identical or different from that accorded to its own institutions or service providers in similar circumstances, is consistent with paragraphs 1 through 3, if it offers equal opportunities to compete.
5. Treatment by a Party does not provide equal opportunity to compete if, in similar circumstances, it disadvantages financial institutions and cross-border financial service providers of the other Party in their ability to provide financial services, compared to the ability of the Party's own financial institutions and financial service providers to provide those services.
Article 13-07: Most- Favoured - Nation Treatment Each Party shall grant to investors of the other Party, financial institutions of the other Party, investors' investments in financial institutions, and cross-border financial service providers of the other Party , treatment no less favorable than that accorded, in similar circumstances, to investors, financial institutions, investors' investments in financial institutions, and cross-border financial service providers of the other Party or of another country that does not be part.
Article 13-08: Recognition and harmonization 1. When applying the measures included in this Chapter, each Party may recognize the prudential measures of the other Party or of a country that is not a Party. Such recognition may be:
a. unilaterally awarded;
b. achieved through harmonization or other means; either
c. granted based on an agreement with the other Party or with a non-Party country.
2. The Party granting recognition of prudential measures in accordance with paragraph 1 shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party to demonstrate that there are circumstances whereby equivalent regulations exist or will exist, supervision and enforcement of the regulation and, if applicable, appropriate, procedures for sharing information between the Parties.
3. Where a Party grants prudential measures recognition in accordance with paragraph 1 and the circumstances set forth in paragraph 2 exist, that Party shall provide appropriate opportunities for the other Party to negotiate accession to the agreement, or to negotiate a similar agreement.
Article 13-09: Exceptions
1. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to adopt or maintain reasonable measures for prudential reasons, such as:
a. protect investors, depositors, participants in the financial market, holders or beneficiaries of policies or creditors of fiduciary obligations in charge of a financial institution or a provider of cross-border financial services;
b. maintain the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers; either
c. ensure the integrity and stability of a Party's financial system.
2. Nothing in this chapter applies to non-discriminatory measures of general application adopted by a public entity in the conduct of monetary policies or related credit policies, or exchange policies. This paragraph shall not affect the obligations of any Party derived from Articles 16-05 and 16-08 with respect to the measures subject to Chapter XVI (Investment), nor those derived from Article 13-17.
3. Article 13-06 does not apply to the granting of exclusive rights by a Party to a financial institution to provide one of the financial services referred to in subparagraph a) of paragraph 2 of Article 13-02.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 through 3 of Article 13-17, a Party may prevent or limit cross-border transfers by a financial institution or financial service provider, or those for the benefit of a subsidiary or related person. with that institution or with that service provider, through the fair and non-discriminatory application of measures related to maintaining the safety, soundness, integrity or financial responsibility of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply without prejudice to any other provision of this Agreement that allows a Party to restrict transfers.
Article 13-10: Transparency
1. In addition to the provisions of Article 18-02, each Party shall ensure that any measure it adopts on matters related to this Chapter is officially published or timely disclosed to the recipients of the measure by some other written means. .
2. The regulatory authorities of each Party will make available to interested parties the requirements to fill out an application for the provision of financial services.
3. At the request of the applicant, the regulatory authority will inform him about the status of his application. When that authority requires additional information from the applicant, it will communicate it without undue delay.
4. Each of the regulatory authorities will dictate, within a period not exceeding 120 days, an administrative measure regarding a complete application related to the provision of a financial service, presented by an investor in a financial institution, by a financial institution or by a cross-border financial service provider of the other Party. The authority will notify the interested party, without delay, the resolution. The application will not be considered complete until all relevant hearings are held and all necessary information is received. When it is not feasible to issue a resolution within 120 days, the regulatory authority will notify the interested party without undue delay and will subsequently seek to issue the resolution within a reasonable period of time.
5. Nothing in this chapter requires a Party to disclose or allow access to:
a. information relating to the financial affairs and accounts of individual clients of financial institutions or cross-border financial service providers; neither
b. any confidential information the disclosure of which would hinder law enforcement, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or harm the legitimate business interests of particular companies.
6. Each Party shall maintain or establish one or more information centers, within one year of the entry into force of this Agreement, to respond in writing as soon as possible to all reasonable inquiries from interested persons regarding measures of general application that adopt that Part in connection with this chapter.
Article 13-11: Financial Services Committee 1. The Parties establish the Financial Services Committee made up of representatives of the competent authorities indicated in the annex to this article.
2. The committee:
a. will supervise the application of this chapter and its further development;
b. it will consider the aspects related to financial services that are presented to it by a Party;
c. will participate in dispute resolution procedures in accordance with articles 13-19 and 13-20; Y
d. It will facilitate the exchange of information between supervisory authorities and will cooperate, in terms of advice, on prudential regulation, seeking the harmonization of regulatory regulatory frameworks, as well as other policies, when deemed appropriate.
3. The committee will meet at least once a year to evaluate the application of this chapter.
Article 13-12: Consultations 1. Either Party may request consultations with the other Party, regarding any matter related to this Agreement that affects financial services. The other Party shall favorably consider such request. The consulting Party shall inform the committee of the results of its consultations during the meetings it holds.
2. Representatives of the competent authorities indicated in the annex to article 13-11 will participate in the consultations provided for in this article.
3. A Party may request that the regulatory authorities of the other Party intervene in the consultations carried out in accordance with this article, to discuss the measures of general application of that other Party that may affect the operations of financial institutions or service providers. cross-border financial services in the territory of the Party that requested the consultation.
4. Nothing in this article shall be construed to oblige the regulatory authorities involved in inquiries pursuant to paragraph 3, to disclose information or to act in a manner that could interfere in particular matters of regulation, supervision, administration or application of measures.
5. In cases where, for supervisory purposes, a Party needs information on a financial institution in the territory of the other Party or on cross-border financial service providers in the territory of the other Party, the Party may turn to the responsible regulatory authority. in the territory of that other Party to request the information.
Article 13-13: New financial services and data processing 1. Each Party shall permit a financial institution of the other Party to provide any new financial services of a type similar to those that that Party allows its financial institutions to provide, in accordance with its legislation in similar circumstances. The Party may decide the institutional and legal modality through which this service is offered and may require authorization for its provision. When such authorization is required, the respective resolution will be issued within a reasonable period of time and may only be denied for prudential reasons.
2. Each Party shall allow the financial institutions of the other Party to transfer, for processing, information to the interior or exterior of the territory of the Party, using any of the means authorized by it, when necessary to carry out the activities ordinary business of those institutions.
Article 13-14: Senior corporate management and boards of directors 1. No Party may oblige financial institutions of another Party to hire personnel of a particular nationality for senior corporate management or other essential positions.
2. Neither Party may require that the board of directors of a financial institution of the other Party be composed of a greater than simple majority of nationals of that Party, residents of its territory, or a combination of both.
Article 13-15: Reservations and specific commitments 1. Within a period not exceeding one year from the Entry into Force of this Agreement, the Parties will negotiate and register in their list of the annex to this article, the reservations to articles 13 -04, 13-05, 13-06, 13-07, 13-13 and 13-14.
2. The Parties, in the negotiations referred to in paragraph 1, will seek to reach agreements aimed at achieving a global balance in the concessions granted.
3. The Parties agree to liberalize each other, progressively, any financial restriction or reserve included in the lists referred to in paragraph 1, with the purpose of making the economic complementation between them effective.
4. No Party shall increase the degree of non-conformity of the measures reserved in accordance with paragraph 1 after their inscription in said lists.
5. When a Party has established, in chapters X (General Principles on Trade in Services) and XVI (Investment), a reservation to the right of establishment, cross-border trade, national treatment, most favored nation treatment, new financial services and data processing or senior business management and boards of directors, the reservation will be understood as made to articles 13-04, 13-05, 13-06, 13-07, 13-13 and 13-14 of this chapter, depending on the case, to the extent that the measure, sector, subsector or activity specified in the reservation is covered by this chapter.
Article 13-16: Denial of benefits A Party may partially or totally deny the benefits derived from this Chapter to a financial service provider of the other Party or to a cross-border financial service provider of the other Party, after prior notification and consultation, pursuant to Articles 13-10 and 13-12, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not carry out significant business activities in the territory of either Party or is owned by persons of a country that is not Part of or under their control.
Article 13-17: Transfers 1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to the investment of an investor of the other Party in the territory of the Party, to be made freely and without delay. Those transfers include:
a. profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administrative expenses, technical assistance and other charges, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;
b. products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;
c. payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or an investor's investment is a party;
d. payments derived from compensation for the concept of expropriation in accordance with article 16-09; either
and. payments resulting from a dispute resolution procedure pursuant to article 13-20.
2. Each Party will allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currency, at the exchange rate prevailing in the market on the transfer date for cash transactions of the currency to be transferred, without prejudice to the provisions of article 13-18.
3. Neither Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits, or profits or other amounts derived from investments carried out in the territory of the other Party, or attributable to them.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, each Party may prevent transfers, through the equitable and non-discriminatory application of its laws, in the following cases:
a. bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;
b. issuance, trading and operations of securities;
c. criminal or administrative offenses;
d. reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments;
and. guarantee of compliance with judgments or awards in a contentious proceeding; either
F. Establishment of the necessary instruments or mechanisms to ensure the payment of income taxes by means such as the withholding of dividends or other concepts.
5. Paragraph 3 shall not be interpreted as an impediment for a Party, through the application of its legislation, in an equitable, non-discriminatory manner and in good faith, to impose any measure related to subparagraphs a) and e) of paragraph 4 .
Article 13-18: Balance of payments and safeguard 1. Each Party may adopt or maintain a measure to suspend, for a reasonable time, all or only some of the benefits contained in this chapter and in article 16-08, when:
a. the application of any provision of this chapter or of article 16-08 results in a serious economic and financial disturbance in the territory of the Party, which cannot be adequately resolved by any other alternative measure; either
b. the balance of payments of a Party, including the state of its monetary reserves, is seriously threatened or faces serious difficulties.
2. The Party that suspends or intends to suspend the benefits of this chapter must notify, as soon as possible, the competent authority of the other Party:
a. what the serious economic and financial disorder caused by the application of this chapter or article 16-08 consists of, as appropriate, the nature and scope of the serious threats to its balance of payments;
b. the situation of the economy and foreign trade of the Party;
c. any alternative measures available to you to correct the problem; Y
d. the economic policies that it adopts to face the problems mentioned in paragraph 1, as well as the direct relationship that exists between them and their solution.
3. The measure adopted or maintained by the Party, at all times shall:
a. avoid unnecessary damage to the economic, commercial and financial interests of the other Party;
b. not impose greater burdens than those necessary to face the difficulties that cause the measure to be adopted or maintained;
c. be temporary and progressively liberalized, to the extent that the balance of payments, or the economic and financial situation of the Party, as the case may be, improves;
d. be applied ensuring, at all times, that this measure avoids discrimination between the Parties; Y
and. try to be compatible with internationally accepted criteria.
4. Any Party that adopts a measure to suspend benefits contained in this chapter or in article 16-08, shall inform the other Party about the evolution of the events that gave rise to the adoption of the measure.
5. For the purposes of this article, reasonable time means the time during which the events described in paragraph 1 persist.
Article 13-19: Settlement of disputes between the Parties 1. In the terms in which this article modifies it, Chapter XX (Settlement of Disputes) applies to the settlement of disputes that arise between the Parties regarding this chapter.
2. The Financial Services Committee shall create by consensus a list of up to ten individuals that includes up to five individuals from each Party, who have the necessary skills and dispositions to act as arbitrators in disputes related to this chapter. The members of this list must, in addition to meeting the requirements established in Chapter XX (Dispute Resolution), have specialized knowledge in financial matters, extensive experience derived from the exercise of responsibilities in the financial sector, or in its regulation.
3. For the purposes of constituting the arbitral tribunal, the list referred to in paragraph 2 shall be used, except that the disputing Parties agree that individuals not included in that list may be part of the arbitral tribunal, provided they meet the requirements established in paragraph 2. The president of the arbitral tribunal will always be chosen from that list.
4. In any dispute in which the arbitral tribunal has found that a measure is incompatible with the obligations of this chapter, when the suspension of benefits referred to in chapter XX (Dispute Settlement) is appropriate and the measure affects:
a. only to the financial services sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits only in that sector;
b. to the financial services sector and to any other sector, the complaining Party may suspend benefits in the financial services sector that have an effect equivalent to the effect of that measure in the financial services sector; either
c. any sector other than services, the complaining Party may not suspend benefits in the financial services sector.
Article 13-20: Settlement of Disputes between a Party and an investor of the other Party 1. Except as provided in this article, the claims made by a disputing investor against a Party in relation to the obligations set forth in this chapter shall be resolved in accordance with what is established in section B of chapter XVI (Investment). For this purpose, the provisions of section B of chapter XVI (Investment) are incorporated into this chapter and are an integral part thereof.
2. When the Party against which the claim is made invokes any of the exceptions referred to in article 13-09, the following procedure shall be observed:
a. the arbitral tribunal will refer the matter to the Financial Services Committee for its decision. The court may not proceed until it has received a decision from the committee under the terms of this article or 60 days have elapsed from the date of receipt by the committee; Y
b. once the matter is received, the committee will decide whether and to what degree the exception of Article 13-09 invoked is a valid defense against the investor's claim and will transmit a copy of its decision to the arbitral tribunal and to the Commission. That decision will be binding on the court.
Annex to Article 13-11 Competent Authorities
1. The Financial Services Committee will be made up of the representatives designated by:
a. in the case of Mexico, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, or its successor; Y
b. in the case of Nicaragua, the Ministry of Economy and Development, the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank and the Superintendency of Banks, or their successors.
2. The main representative of each Party will be the one designated by that authority for that purpose.
Chapter XIV Measures Related to Standardization
Article 14-01: Definitions 1. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms presented in the sixth edition of ISO/IEC Guide 2: 1991, "General Terms and their Definitions in Relation to Standardization and Related Activities", shall have the same meaning when used in this chapter, unless defined differently herein.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be understood as:
risk assessment : the assessment of the potential damage to human, animal and plant health and safety or the environment could be caused by any product or service that is marketed between the Parties;
make compatible : bring to the same level, different standardization-related measures, but with the same scope, approved by different standardization bodies, so that they are identical, equivalent or have the effect of allowing products and services to be used interchangeably or for the same purpose, in order to allow goods and services to be traded between the Parties;
measures related to standardization : standards, technical regulations or conformity assessment procedures;
standard : the document approved by a recognized institution, which provides for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for products or related processes and production methods, or for related services or methods of operation, and the observance of which is not mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling requirements applicable to a product, service, process or related production method;
international standard : a standardization measure, or other guide or recommendation, adopted by an international standardization body and made available to the public;
legitimate objectives : among others, the guarantee of safety and the protection of human, animal and plant life and health, its environment and the prevention of practices that may mislead consumers, including issues related to identification of goods or services, considering, among other aspects, when appropriate, fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure type or scientific justification;
standardization body : a body whose standardization activities are recognized by the government of each Party, respectively;
international standardization body: a standardization body, open to participation by relevant bodies of at least the members of the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, including the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML), or any other body designated by the Parties;
conformity assessment procedure : a procedure used, directly or indirectly, to determine that the relevant requirements established by technical regulations or standards are met, including sampling, testing, inspection, evaluation, verification, assurance of conformity, accreditation , certification, registration or approval, used for such purposes, but does not mean an approval procedure;
approval procedure : the registration, notification or any other obligatory administrative process to obtain a permit in order for a product or service to be commercialized or used for defined purposes or according to established conditions;
administrative refusal : actions taken by a public administration body of the importing Party, in the exercise of its powers, to prevent a shipment from entering its territory or the provision of services, for technical reasons;
technical regulation : a document that establishes the characteristics of products, services or their processes and related production methods, including the applicable administrative provisions, and compliance with which is mandatory. It may also include or deal exclusively with terminology, symbols, packaging or labeling requirements applicable to a product, service, process or related production method; Y
service : a service within the scope of this Agreement, except financial services.
Article 14-02: Scope of application 1. This chapter applies to measures related to the standardization of the Parties, metrology and related measures that may affect, directly or indirectly, trade in goods and services between them. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
2. Each Party shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall adopt the necessary measures to guarantee its compliance by the state, regional and municipal governments, and shall adopt the measures in this regard that are within its power with respect to non-governmental organizations of standardization duly accredited in their territory.
Article 14-03: Reaffirmation of international rights and obligations The Parties reaffirm their current rights and obligations related to the measures related to standardization arising from the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade of the WTO and all other international agreements related to security, the protection of human, animal and plant life, the environment and practices that avoid misleading consumers, of which the Parties are part.
Article 14-04: Basic Rights and Obligations 1. The Parties shall not develop, adopt, maintain or apply any measure relating to standardization that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade between them. To that end, each Party shall ensure that its standardization-related measures do not restrict trade more than is required to achieve a legitimate objective, taking into account the risks that failure to do so would create.
2. Measures relating to standardization shall not be considered to create unnecessary obstacles to trade where:
a. the demonstrable purpose of the measure is to achieve a legitimate objective; Y
b. does not function in such a way as to exclude the goods and services of the other Party that fulfill that legitimate objective.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each Party may set the level of protection that it deems appropriate in the pursuit of its legitimate objectives.
4. In accordance with paragraph 3, each Party may develop, adopt, maintain and apply the measures related to standardization that allow guaranteeing its level of protection, as well as the measures that guarantee the application and compliance with said measures related to standardization. , including the relevant approval procedures.
5. In relation to its measures related to standardization, each Party shall grant to goods and services from the territory of the other Party national treatment and no less favorable than that granted to similar goods and services from any other country.
Article 14-05: Use of international standards 1. Each Party shall use, as a basis for its own standardization-related measures, international standards in force or imminent adoption, or their relevant elements, except when such standards do not constitute an effective means. or suitable to achieve its legitimate objectives; for example, due to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Standardization measures of a Party that conform to an international standard shall be presumed to be consistent with the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2, and 5 of Article 14-04.
3. In the pursuit of its legitimate objectives, each Party may adopt, maintain, or apply any standardization-related measure that achieves a higher level of protection than would have been obtained if the measure were based on an international standard due to, among other things, to fundamental factors of a climatic, geographical, technological or infrastructure nature.
Article 14-06: Compatibility and Equivalence 1. Recognizing the central role that standardization measures play in promoting and protecting legitimate objectives, the Parties shall work together, in accordance with this Chapter, to strengthen the level of safety and protection of human, animal and plant life and health, of their environment and for the prevention of practices that may mislead consumers.
2. The Parties will make their respective technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures compatible, to the greatest extent possible, without reducing the level of safety or protection of human, animal and plant life and health, their environment or of consumers, without prejudice to the rights conferred by this chapter on any Party and taking into account international standardization activities.
3. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall adopt reasonable measures within its power to promote the compatibility of the specific standardization-related measures that exist in its territory, with the standardization-related measures that exist in the territory of the other. Part, taking into account international standardization activities.
4. Each Party shall accept a technical regulation adopted or maintained by the other Party as equivalent to its own, when, in cooperation with the importing Party, the exporting Party certifies, to the satisfaction of the other Party, that its technical regulation adequately complies with the legitimate objectives of the importing Party, and, if appropriate, review it. At the request of the exporting Party, the importing Party shall notify it in writing of the reasons for non-acceptance of a technical regulation as equivalent.
5. Each Party, whenever possible, shall accept the results of conformity assessment procedures carried out in the territory of the other Party, even when those procedures differ from its own, provided that those procedures offer a guarantee satisfactory, equivalent to that offered by the procedures that the Party carries out or that are carried out in its territory, the result of which is accepted, that the relevant good or service complies with the applicable technical regulations or with the standards that are developed or maintained in the territory of that Party, and if applicable, review the relevant standardization measure.
6. Prior to acceptance of the results of a conformity assessment procedure, in accordance with paragraph 5, and in order to strengthen confidence in the continuing integrity of the conformity assessment results of each of them, the Parties may consult on matters such as the technical capacity of conformity assessment bodies, taking into account the verified compliance with relevant international standards and recommendations.
Article 14-07: Conformity Assessment 1. The Parties recognize the advisability of achieving reciprocal recognition of their conformity assessment systems, including the bodies accredited by the corresponding entity, in order to facilitate trade in goods and services. among themselves and commit themselves to work towards the achievement of this objective.
2. In addition to what is established in paragraph 1, and recognizing the existence of differences in their conformity assessment procedures in their respective territories, the Parties shall make their respective conformity assessment systems and procedures compatible to the greatest extent possible. conformity, so that they are mutually recognizable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
3. For the mutual benefit of the Parties and reciprocally, each Party through the competent institutions:
a. evaluate and recognize the national accreditation system of the other Party; Y
b. shall accredit, approve, grant licenses or recognition to conformity assessment bodies in the territory of the other Party on terms no less favorable than those granted to those bodies in its territory.
4. Each Party shall give favorable consideration to requests submitted by the other Party to negotiate agreements on mutual recognition of the results of that Party's conformity assessment procedures.
5. When it is required to carry out a conformity assessment procedure, each Party shall have the obligation to:
a. not to adopt or maintain stricter conformity assessment procedures and not to apply them more strictly than is necessary to be certain that the good or service complies with the technical regulation or applicable standard, taking into account the risks that could create the nonconformity;
b. initiate and complete that procedure in the most expeditious manner possible;
c. establish a non-discriminatory order for processing applications;
d. publish the normal duration of each of these procedures or communicate, at the applicant's request, the approximate duration of the procedure;
and. ensure that the competent body:
i) upon receipt of an application, promptly examine the documentation for completeness and inform the applicant accurately and completely of any deficiencies;
(ii) as soon as possible, convey to the applicant the results of the conformity assessment procedure in an accurate and complete manner, so that the applicant can take any corrective action;
iii) when the request is deficient, advance the procedure as much as possible, if the requester requests it; Y
iv) report at the applicant's request the status of their application and the reasons for any delay;
F. limit to what is necessary, and in accordance with its current legislation, the information that the applicant must present to assess conformity and to determine the relevant rights;
g. grant to the confidential information that derives from the procedure or that is presented in connection with it:
i) the same treatment as information regarding a national product or service; Y
ii) in any case, treatment that protects the legitimate commercial interests of the applicant;
h. ensure that the amount of any duty charged for assessing the conformity of a good or service that is exported from the other Party is not greater than any duty charged for assessing the conformity of an identical or similar domestic good or service, taking into account the costs of communication, transport and other related costs;
Yo. ensure that the location of the facilities where the conformity assessment procedures are carried out does not cause unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative;
j. where possible, ensure that the procedure is carried out at that facility and, where appropriate, a mark of conformity is awarded;
k. limit the procedure, in the case of a good or service that has been modified as a result of a conformity assessment determination, to what is necessary to determine that said good or service continues to comply with the applicable technical regulations or standards; Y
he. limit to what is reasonable any requirement related to samples of a good and to ensure that the selection of the samples does not cause unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant or his representative, in accordance with the procedures used and approved internationally for sampling.
6. The Parties shall apply the provisions of paragraph 5 to their approval procedures, with appropriate modifications.
7. At the request of a Party, the other Party shall take reasonable measures within its power to facilitate the performance of conformity assessment activities.
Article 14-08: Notification, publication and delivery of information 1. Each Party shall notify the other Party, before the entry into force and not after its nationals, about the measures related to standardization that it intends to establish in accordance with the indicated in this chapter.
2. When proposing the adoption or modification of any measure related to standardization, each Party:
a. publish a notice and notify the other Party in writing of its intention to adopt or modify such measure, at least 60 days in advance of its adoption or modification, in order to allow interested persons to familiarize themselves with the proposal, except in the cases of any standardization measure related to perishable goods, in which case the Party shall, to the best of its ability, publish the notice and notify the other Party at least 30 days in advance of the adoption or amendment of such a measure, but simultaneously that domestic producers be notified;
b. it will identify in said notice and notification the good or service to which the measure will be applied, and will include a brief description of the objective and the motivation of said measure;
c. provide a copy of the proposed measure to the other Party and to any interested person who requests it and, where possible, identify provisions that deviate substantially from relevant international standards;
d. without discrimination, allow the other Party and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, discuss and take these comments into account, as well as the results of the discussions; Y
and. ensure that, upon adoption of the measure, it is promptly published, or otherwise made available to interested persons in the Party for familiarization with it.
3. Where there is no relevant or imminent international standard for a proposed standardization measure, or such standardization measure is not substantially the same as an international standard, and where the standardization measure may have a significant effect on the trade of the Parties, each Party:
a. publish a notice and deliver a notice of the type required in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2, at an appropriate initial stage; Y
b. The provisions of subparagraphs c) and d) of paragraph 2 shall be observed.
4. With regard to technical regulations of state, regional and municipal governments, each Party:
a. ensure that a notice is published and the other Party is notified in writing of its intention to adopt or modify such regulation at an appropriate initial stage;
b. it will ensure that said notice and notification identifies the good or service to which the technical regulation will apply, and will include a brief description of the objective and motivation of said regulation;
c. ensure that a copy of the proposed regulation is delivered to the other Party and to any interested person who requests it; Y
d. shall take reasonable steps in its power to ensure that upon adoption of the technical regulation, it is promptly published or otherwise made available to interested persons in the Party for familiarization.
5. Each Party shall notify the other Party each year about its normalization plans and programs.
6. When a Party considers it necessary to address an urgent problem related to the safety or protection of human, animal and plant life and health, its environment or practices that mislead consumers, it may omit any of the steps established in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2, provided that, when adopting the measure related to standardization:
a. immediately notify the other Party, in accordance with the requirements established in subparagraph b) of paragraph 2, including a brief description of the urgent problem;
b. deliver a copy of the measure to the other Party and interested persons who request it;
c. without discrimination, allow the other Party and interested persons to make comments in writing and, upon request, discuss and take into account those comments, as well as the results of the discussions; Y
d. ensure that the measure is published expeditiously, or else allow interested persons to become familiar with it.
7. The Parties shall allow a reasonable period of time between the publication of their standardization measures and the date they come into force, to allow time for interested persons to adjust to these standardization measures, except when necessary to address one of the urgent problems identified in paragraph 6.
8. Where a Party allows non-government persons from its territory to be present during the process of developing standardization measures, it shall also allow non-government persons from the other Party's territory to be present.
9. Each Party shall designate a governmental authority as responsible for the application of the notification provisions of this chapter at the federal or central level, and shall notify the other Party no later than three months after the entry into force of this Treaty. When a Party designates two or more government authorities for this purpose, it must inform the other Party, without ambiguity or exceptions, about the scope of responsibilities of those authorities.
10. When a Party administratively rejects a shipment or the provision of services due to non-compliance with a measure related to standardization, it must inform, without delay and in writing, the person holding the shipment or the service provider of the technical justification of rejection.
11. Once the information referred to in paragraph 10 has been generated, it shall be sent immediately to the information center or centers for measures related to standardization located in the territory of that Party, which, in turn, shall provide it. knowledge of the information center or centers of the other Party.
Article 14-09: Information Centers 1. Each Party shall ensure that there is at least one information center within its territory capable of answering all reasonable questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons, as well as providing documentation. relevant in relation to:
a. any measures relating to standardization adopted or proposed in its territory at the level of its federal or central, state or regional, or municipal government;
b. the membership and participation of that Party, and its relevant authorities at the federal or central, state or regional, or municipal level in international or regional standards bodies and conformity assessment systems, in bilateral or multilateral agreements, within the scope of application of the chapter, as well as the provisions of said systems and agreements;
c. the location of, or where such information may be obtained, notices published pursuant to this chapter;
d. the location of information centers; Y
and. the Party's risk assessment processes, the factors it takes into consideration to carry out the assessment, and for the establishment of the levels of protection it deems appropriate, in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 14-04.
2. When a Party designates more than one information center:
a. inform the other Party, unambiguously and completely, about the scope of responsibilities of each of said centers; Y
b. will ensure that any request sent to the wrong information center is forwarded, expeditiously, to the correct information center.
3. Each Party shall take reasonable measures within its power to ensure that there is at least one information center within its territory capable of answering all questions and requests from the other Party and interested persons. , as well as to provide the pertinent documentation, or the information from where such documentation can be obtained related to:
a. any standard or conformity assessment procedure adopted or proposed by non-governmental standardization bodies in its territory; Y
b. the membership and participation in international and regional standardization organizations and conformity assessment systems of the relevant non-governmental organizations in their territory.
4. Each Party shall ensure that when the other Party or interested persons, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, request copies of the documents referred to in paragraph 1, they are provided at the same price that applies to nationals, except the actual shipping cost.
Article 14-10: Limitations on Provision of Information In addition to Article 21-03, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require a Party to provide any confidential information the disclosure of which may harm a Party's legitimate business interests. company.
Article 14-11: Metrological standards In order to prevent the metrological standards of each Party from constituting unnecessary obstacles to trade, the Parties will make them compatible, to the greatest extent possible, based on current international standards.
Article 14-12: Health protection 1. Medicines, medical equipment and instruments, pharmaceutical products and other inputs for human, animal and plant health; foods; toxic products and substances; radioactive products, materials, sources and equipment; Sources and equipment emitting ionizing radiation that are subject to registration in the territory of a Party, will be, where appropriate, registered, recognized or evaluated by the competent authority of that Party based on a single national system of a federal or central nature. mandatory observance.
2. The conformity assessment certificates of the goods referred to in paragraph 1 shall be accepted only if they have been issued by competent governmental or non-governmental conformity assessment bodies of each Party.
3. The Parties will establish a mutual technical cooperation system that will work based on the following work program:
a. identification of specific needs related to:
i) the application of good manufacturing practices in the preparation and approval of medicines for human, animal or plant use;
ii) the application of good laboratory practices in the analysis and evaluation systems established in the pertinent international standards and guides in force; Y
iii) the development of common identification and nomenclature systems for auxiliary health products and medical instruments;
b. harmonization of requirements related to labeling and the strengthening of standardization and surveillance systems in relation to warning labeling;
c. training and training programs, including the organization of a common system of training, continuing education, training and evaluation of sanitary officials and inspectors;
d. development of a mutual accreditation system for verification units and testing laboratories;
and. updating of regulatory legal frameworks; Y
F. strengthening of formal communication systems to monitor and regulate the exchange of products related to human, animal or plant health.
4. In order to carry out the activities proposed in paragraph 3, the Committee on Measures Related to Standardization shall establish, in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6 of article 14-16, a technical subcommittee in charge of monitoring and organizing such activities. , to guide and make recommendations to the Parties when they so request.
Article 14-13: Risk Assessment 1. Pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 14-04, each Party may carry out risk assessments within its territory, when it deems appropriate. In doing so, it will ensure that it takes into account the risk assessment methods developed by international organizations and that its technical regulations and standards are based on a risk assessment to human, animal or plant health and safety and its environment.
2. When conducting a risk assessment, the Party conducting it shall take into consideration all relevant scientific evidence, available technical information, intended end use, production processes or methods, operation, inspection, quality, sampling or test, or environmental conditions.
3. Having established its level of protection that it considers appropriate, when a Party, in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 14-04, carries out a risk assessment, it shall avoid distinctions between similar goods and services, in the level of protection that it considers appropriate, if such distinctions:
a. have the effect of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against goods or services of the other Party;
b. constitute a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties; either
c. They discriminate between similar goods or services for the same use, under the same conditions, posing the same level of risk and conferring similar benefits.
4. When the Party carrying out a risk assessment concludes that the available scientific evidence or other information is insufficient to complete the risk assessment, that Party may provisionally adopt a measure based on the pertinent information available. Once it has been presented with sufficient information to complete the risk assessment, the Party shall complete the assessment as soon as possible, review and, where appropriate, reconsider such measure in light of that assessment.
Article 14-14: Protection of the environment and management of hazardous substances and waste 1. For the care and protection of its environment, each Party shall apply, in addition to the provisions of its legislation, the provisions, guides or recommendations of the United Nations Organization Nations and the relevant international agreements to which both Parties are party.
2. Each Party shall regulate and control the production, introduction, and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, pesticides, and any other hazardous substance to human, animal, or plant health, or to the environment, in accordance with its legislation and the provisions of this Agreement.
3. Each Party, in accordance with its legislation, shall regulate the introduction, acceptance, deposit, transportation, and transit through its territory of hazardous, radioactive, or other wastes of internal or external origin that, due to their characteristics, constitute a danger to the health of its population, fauna, flora or environment.
Article 14-15: Labeling 1. The labeling requirements for goods and services are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
2. Each Party shall apply its pertinent labeling requirements in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. \
3. The Parties shall develop common labeling requirements. The proposals made by each Party will be evaluated by the Subcommittee on Measures Related to Standardization in Labeling, Packaging and Packaging, in accordance with paragraph 5 of article 14-16.
4. The Subcommittee on Measures Related to Standardization in Labeling, Packaging and Packaging may work and formulate recommendations on:
a. the establishment of a common system of symbols and pictograms for the parties;
b. definitions and terminology;
c. presentation of information, including information regarding language, measurement systems, ingredients and sizes; either
d. other related matters.
Article 14-16: Committee for Measures Related to Standardization 1. The Parties establish a Committee for Measures Related to Standardization composed of representatives of each of them.
2. The functions of the committee include:
a. the monitoring of the application, compliance and administration of this chapter, including the progress of the sub-committees established pursuant to paragraph 5, the operation of the information centers established pursuant to paragraph 1 of article 14-09, as well as in role of updates to ISO/IEC Guide 2:1991;
b. facilitate the process through which the Parties will make their measures related to standardization and metrology compatible;
c. provide a forum for Parties to consult on issues related to measures relating to standardization and metrology;
d. promote that the competent institutions in the matter take into consideration the developments on measures related to standardization at the governmental, non-governmental, regional and multilateral levels, including those of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade of the WTO;
and. develop the necessary procedural mechanisms to achieve mutual recognition of conformity assessment bodies; Y
F. report annually to the Commission on the application of this chapter.
3. The committee:
a. It will be made up of an equal number of representatives of the competent government institutions of each Party. Each Party shall establish its procedures for the selection of its representatives;
b. unless the Parties agree otherwise, it will meet:
i) at least once a year; Y
ii) when requested by any Party;
c. it will establish its regulations; Y
d. It will make its decisions by consensus.
4. Each Party shall adopt the necessary measures so that representatives of state, regional, or municipal governments participate in the work of the committee when deemed necessary.
5. The committee will establish:
a. the Subcommittee on Measures Related to Health Standardization;
b. the Subcommittee on Measures Related to the Standardization of Labeling, Packaging and Packaging;
c. the Subcommittee on Measures Related to the Standardization of Telecommunications; Y
d. any other subcommittee that it deems appropriate to discuss, among others, the following issues:
i) the identification and nomenclature of the goods and services subject to the measures related to standardization;
ii) technical regulations and quality and identity standards;
iii) programs for product approval and post-sale surveillance;
iv) principles for the accreditation and recognition of test facilities, inspection agencies and conformity assessment bodies;
v) development and implementation of a uniform system for the classification and reporting of hazardous chemicals and chemical hazard communication;
vi) programs to ensure compliance with current provisions, including training and inspection by personnel responsible for regulation, analysis, and compliance verification;
vii) promotion and application of good laboratory practices;
viii) the promotion and application of good manufacturing practices;
ix) criteria for the evaluation of potential damage to the environment due to the use of goods or services;
x) analysis of the procedures for the simplification of the import requirements of specific goods or services;
xi) methodologies for risk assessment;
xii) guidelines for testing chemical substances, including those of an industrial type and those for agricultural, pharmaceutical and biological use;
xiii) means that facilitate consumer protection, including the compensation for damages to the consumer; Y
xiv) any other subject, according to the mandate determined by the committee.
6. Each subcommittee shall be made up of representatives of each Party and may:
a. When deemed necessary, include or consult with:
i) representatives of non-governmental organizations, such as standardization bodies or private sector chambers and associations;
ii) representatives of higher academic, research and scientific centers;
iii) technical experts;
iv) representatives of government institutions; Y
b. determine its work program, taking into account relevant international activities.
Article 14-17: Technical cooperation 1. At the request of a Party, the other Party may, to the best of its ability:
a. provide that Party with advice, information or technical assistance on mutually agreed terms and conditions, to strengthen that Party's standardization-related measures, as well as its related activities, processes and systems; Y
b. provide that Party with information on its technical cooperation programs related to measures relating to standardization in areas of particular interest.
2. Each Party shall encourage the cooperation of its standard-setting bodies, as appropriate, in standard-setting activities, for example, through membership in international standard-setting bodies.
Article 14-18: Technical consultations 1. When a Party has doubts about the interpretation or application of this Chapter, about the measures related to standardization or metrology of the other Party, as well as about the measures related to them, it may alternatively go to the committee or mechanism established in Chapter XX (Dispute Resolution). The Parties may not use both channels simultaneously.
2. When a Party decides to go to the committee, it must notify the other Party so that it can consider the matter, refer it to a subcommittee or other competent forum, in order to obtain non-binding technical advice or recommendations.
3. The committee will consider any matter that is referred to it, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2, as expeditiously as possible and, in the same way, will inform the Parties of any advice or technical recommendation that it prepares or receives in relation to that matter. Once the Parties receive from the committee a technical advice or recommendation that they have requested, they will send to the latter a written response in relation to said technical advice or recommendation, in a period determined by the committee.
4. Pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3, in the event that the technical recommendation issued by the committee does not resolve the existing difference between the Parties, they may invoke the mechanism established in Chapter XX (Dispute Settlement). If the Parties so agree, the consultations carried out before the committee shall constitute consultations for the purposes of Article 20-05.
5. The Party that asserts that a standardization measure of the other Party is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter shall have to demonstrate such inconsistency.
Chapter XV Public Sector Procurement
Section A Definitions
Article 15-01: Definitions 1. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
scheduled purchase : the purchase in respect of which an entity listed in annexes 2 and 3 to article 15-02 issues a purchase notice pursuant to paragraph 4 of article 15-11, and subsequently invites suppliers who have expressed interest in the purchase to confirm your interest in accordance with paragraph 5 of article 15-11;
entity : an entity included in annex 1, 2 or 3 to article 15-02;
technical specification : a specification that establishes the characteristics of goods or related processes and production methods, or the characteristics of services or their related methods of operation, including applicable administrative provisions. It may also include requirements regarding terminology, symbols, packaging, marking or labeling applicable to a good, process, or method of production or operation or deal exclusively with them;
norm : "norm", as defined in article 14-01;
international norm : "international norm", as defined in article 14-01;
tendering procedures: open tendering procedures, selective tendering procedures or restricted tendering procedures;
open tendering procedures : the procedures in which all interested suppliers can submit offers;
restricted tendering procedures : the procedures by which an entity communicates individually with suppliers, only in the circumstances and in accordance with the conditions described in article 15-16;
selective bidding procedures : the procedures in which, under the terms of paragraph 3 of article 15-12, the suppliers whom the entity invites to do so may submit bids;
supplier – a person who has provided or may provide goods or services in response to an entity's invitation to bid;
locally established supplier : a natural person residing in the Party's territory, a company organized under the Party's legislation and established in the Party, and a branch or representative office located in the Party's territory, among others;
services : the services specified in the appendix to annex 5 to article 15-02 and those specified in the appendix to annex 6 to article 15-02, unless otherwise specified; Y
construction services : the services specified in the appendix to annex 6 to article 15-02.
Section B Scope of application
Article 15-02 : Scope of Application 1. This Chapter applies to measures that a Party adopts or maintains in relation to purchases:
a. of a federal or central government entity indicated in annex 1 to this article; a government company or autonomous entity indicated in annex 2 to this article; or a state or regional, or municipal government entity indicated in annex 3 to this article in accordance with article 15-24;
b. of goods, in accordance with annex 4 to this article; of services, in accordance with annex 5 to this article; or construction services, in accordance with annex 6 to this article; Y
c. when it is estimated that the value of the contract to be awarded equals or exceeds the value of the following thresholds, calculated and adjusted in accordance with the inflation rate of the United States of America, as provided in annex 7 to this article, for:
i) federal or central government entities, 50,000 United States dollars (dollars) for contracts for goods, services or any combination thereof, and 6.5 million dollars for construction service contracts;
ii) government companies and autonomous entities, US$250,000 for contracts for goods, services or any combination thereof, and US$8 million for construction service contracts; Y
iii) state or regional and municipal government entities, the value of the applicable thresholds, as provided in Annex 3 to this article, in accordance with Article 15-24.
2. Paragraph 1 is subject to the transition mechanisms provided in annex 8 to this article and the general notes indicated in annex 9 to this article.
3. Subject to paragraph 4, where a contract to be awarded by an entity is not subject to this chapter, its provisions may not be construed to cover the components of any good or service of such contract.
4. No entity shall conceive, construct, or structure a purchase contract in such a way as to circumvent the obligations of this chapter.
5. Purchases include acquisitions made by entities by methods such as purchase or rental, with or without a purchase option. Purchases do not include:
a. non-contractual agreements or any form of government assistance, including cooperative agreements, transfers, loans, capital transfers, guarantees, tax incentives and government provision of goods and services granted to individuals or to state or regional governments, or municipalities; neither
b. the acquisition of agency services or fiscal deposits, the liquidation and administration services for regulated financial institutions, nor the sale and distribution services of public debt.
6. The provisions contained in this chapter establish the general principles that the entities of each Party must observe in their purchasing procedures.
7. The Parties shall ensure that the measures applied by their entities are in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 15-03: Valuation of contracts 1. Each Party shall ensure that, in determining whether a contract is covered by this Chapter, its entities apply the provisions of paragraphs 2 through 7 to calculate the value of such contract.
2. The value of the contract will be estimated at the time of publication of the call in accordance with article 15-11.
3. When calculating the value of a contract, entities will take into account all forms of remuneration, including bonuses, rights, commissions and interest.
4. In addition to the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 15-02, an entity may not choose a valuation method or divide purchases into independent contracts, in order to evade the obligations contained in this chapter.
5. When an individual requirement results in the award of more than one contract or the contracts are awarded in separate parts, the basis for valuation will be:
a. the actual value of successive contracts of the same nature entered into during the preceding fiscal year or in the preceding 12 months, adjusted, where possible, for expected changes in quantity and value in the following 12 months; either
b. the estimated value of successive contracts of the same nature entered into during the fiscal year or in the 12 months following the initial contract.
6. In the case of rental contracts, with or without a purchase option, or contracts in which a total price is not specified, the basis for valuation will be in the case of:
a. contracts signed for a specific period, the calculation will be made on the basis of the total value of the contract during its period of validity; either
b. contracts for an indefinite term, the base will be the estimated monthly payment multiplied by 48.
If the entity is not certain whether a contract is for fixed or indefinite terms, it will calculate the value of the contract using the method indicated in subparagraph b).
7. When the bidding conditions include clauses that allow the quotation of optional or alternative goods or services, the basis for valuation will be the total value of the maximum purchase allowed, including all possible optional purchases.
Article 15-04: National Treatment and Non-Discrimination 1. With respect to the measures included in this Chapter, each Party shall accord to the goods of the other Party, to the suppliers of such goods and to the service providers of the other Party, treatment not less favorable than the most favorable granted to:
a. its own goods and suppliers; Y
b. the goods and suppliers of another Party.
2. With respect to the measures included in this Chapter, neither Party may:
a. give a supplier established in its territory treatment less favorable than that accorded to another supplier established in said territory, by reason of the degree of foreign affiliation or ownership; neither
b. discriminate against a supplier established in its territory on the grounds that the goods or services offered by that supplier for a particular purchase are goods or services of the other Party.
3. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to measures relating to customs duties or other charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with the method of collecting such duties and charges, or to other import regulations, including restrictions and formalities.
4. The Parties shall not establish representation or local presence requirements that have the purpose or effect of discriminating in favor of national suppliers.
Article 15-05: Rules of origin For purposes of public sector purchases covered by this chapter, neither Party shall apply rules of origin to goods imported from the other Party that are different from or incompatible with the rules of origin that the Party applies to goods imported from the other Party. normal business operations.
Article 15-06: Denial of benefits 1. A Party may deny the benefits derived from this chapter to a service provider of the other Party, prior notification and consultation, when the Party determines that the service is being provided by a company that does not conduct significant business activities in the territory of either Party and is owned or controlled by persons of a non-Party.
Article 15-07: Prohibition of special compensatory conditions Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not take into account, request, or impose special compensatory conditions in the qualification and selection of suppliers, goods or services, in the evaluation of offers or in the award of contracts. For the purposes of this article, special compensatory conditions are understood to be those that an entity imposes or takes into account before or during the purchase procedure to promote local development or improve balance of payments accounts, through local content requirements. , licensing of technology, investment, countertrade or similar requirements.
Article 15-08: Technical Specifications 1. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not prepare, adopt, or apply any technical specification that has the purpose or effect of creating unnecessary obstacles to trade.
2. Each Party shall ensure that, where applicable, any technical specifications stipulated by its entities:
a. is defined in terms of performance criteria rather than design or descriptive features; Y
b. is based on international standards, national technical regulations, recognized national standards, or building codes.
3. Each Party shall ensure that the technical specifications stipulated by its entities do not require or make reference to a particular brand or trade name; patent, design or type; specific origin, producer or supplier; unless there is no other sufficiently precise or understandable way to describe the purchase requirements and provided, in such cases, words such as "or equivalent" are included in the bidding documents.
4. Each Party shall ensure that its entities do not solicit or accept, in a manner that has the effect of preventing competition, advice that could be used in preparing or adopting any technical specification in respect of a particular purchase, from a person who may have a commercial interest in that purchase.
Section C Bidding Procedures
Article 15-09: Bidding procedures 1. Entities will make their purchases through open, selective or restricted bidding. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 15-16, the entities of each Party may opt for open or selective bidding procedures, provided that the chosen procedure guarantees the maximum possible competition.
2. Each Party shall ensure that the bidding procedures of its entities:
a. are applied in a non-discriminatory manner; Y
b. be consistent with this article and with articles 15-10 through 15-16.
3. In this regard, each Party shall ensure that its entities:
a. do not provide any supplier with information about a specific purchase in a way that has the effect of preventing competition or granting an advantage to a specific supplier; Y
b. provide all suppliers equal access to information regarding a purchase during the period prior to the issuance of any call or bidding conditions.
Article 15-10: Qualification of suppliers 1. Pursuant to Article 15-04, in the qualification of suppliers during the bidding procedure, no entity of a Party may discriminate between suppliers of the other Party or between national suppliers and suppliers of The other part.
2. The qualification of suppliers carried out by an entity will be consistent with the following:
a. The conditions for the participation of suppliers in the bidding procedures will be published sufficiently in advance, so that the suppliers have adequate time to start and, to the extent that is compatible with the efficient operation of the contracting process, finish the procedures. qualification procedures;
b. the conditions for participating in the bidding procedures, such as financial guarantees, technical qualifications and the information necessary to prove the financial, commercial and technical capacity of the suppliers, as well as the verification that the supplier satisfies said conditions, will be limited those essential to ensure compliance with the contract in question;
c. the financial, commercial and technical capacity of a supplier shall be determined on the basis of its global activity, including both its activity carried out in the territory of the Party of the supplier, and its activity in the territory of the Party of the purchasing entity, if any;
d. An entity may not use the qualification process, including the time it takes, to exclude suppliers of another Party from a list of suppliers or not consider them for a given purchase;
and. an entity shall recognize as qualified suppliers those suppliers of another Party that meet the conditions required to participate in a specific purchase;
F. An entity shall consider for a given purchase those suppliers of another Party that request to participate in the purchase and that have not yet been qualified, provided that sufficient time is available to complete the qualification procedure;
g. An entity that maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers will ensure that suppliers can request their qualification at all times, that all qualified suppliers who request it are included in the list within a reasonably short period of time, and that all suppliers included in the list are notified of the cancellation of the list or their removal from the list;
h. when, after the publication of the call in accordance with article 15-11, a supplier that has not yet been qualified requests to participate in a certain purchase, the entity will initiate, without delay, the qualification procedure;
Yo. An entity will communicate to any provider that has requested its qualification, the decision on whether it has been qualified; Y
j. When an entity rejects a qualification request, or stops recognizing the qualification of a supplier, at the request of the same, the entity will provide, without delay, pertinent information on the reasons for its action.
3. Each Party:
a. it will ensure that each of its entities uses a unique rating procedure; however, the supplier evaluation procedure will vary according to the nature of the aspects to be analyzed. When the entity establishes the need to resort to a different procedure, and, at the request of the other Party, is prepared to demonstrate said need, it may use additional qualification procedures; Y
b. It will try to reduce to a minimum the differences between the rating procedures of its entities.
4. Nothing in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall prevent an entity from excluding a provider for reasons such as bankruptcy or misrepresentation.
Article 15-11: Invitation to Participate 1. Except as provided in Article 15-16, an entity shall publish, in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3, and 5, an invitation to participate for all purchases in the applicable publication designated in Article 15-16. annex 1 to article 15-19.
2. The invitation to participate will take the form of a call, which will contain the following information:
a. a description of the nature and quantity of the goods or services to be purchased, including any future purchase options and, if possible:
i) an estimate of when such options may be exercised; Y
ii) in the case of successive contracts of the same nature, an estimate of when subsequent calls may be issued;
b. an indication of whether the tender is open or selective;
c. if relevant, the date to begin or conclude the delivery of the goods or services to be purchased;
d. when applicable, the address to which the request must be sent to be invited to bid or to qualify on the list of suppliers, and the deadline for receipt of the request;
and. the address to which the offers should be sent, and the deadline for their receipt;
F. The address of the entity that will award the contract and that will provide any information necessary to obtain specifications and other documents;
g. a statement of any conditions of an economic or technical nature, and of any financial guarantees, information and documents required from suppliers;
h. the amount and form of payment of any amount to be paid for the bidding conditions; and
Yo. the indication of whether the entity calls for the presentation of offers for the purchase, or rent, with or without purchase option.
3. In the case of selective bidding, the invitation to participate will contain, in addition to the provisions of paragraph 2, the following information:
a. the address to which the request must be sent to be invited to bid or to qualify on the list of suppliers, and the deadline for receipt of the request; Y
b. when it does not imply the use of a register of suppliers, the deadlines indicated for the presentation of applications for admission to the tender.
4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3, an entity indicated in annex 2 or 3 to article 15-02 may use a scheduled purchase call as an invitation to participate, which will contain the information in paragraphs 2 and 3 to the extent that that is available to the entity, but that will include, as a minimum, the following information:
a. a description of the object of the purchase;
b. the deadlines set for the receipt of offers or, in the case of selective bidding, for the presentation of requests to be invited to bid;
c. the address from which documentation related to the purchase may be requested;
d. an indication that interested suppliers should express to the entity their interest in the purchase; Y
and. the identification of an information center in the entity where additional information can be obtained.
5. An entity that uses a scheduled purchase call as an invitation to participate will subsequently invite suppliers that have expressed interest in the purchase to confirm their interest, based on the information provided by the entity that will include, at least, the information stipulated in paragraphs 2 and 3.
6. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3, an entity indicated in annex 2 or 3 to article 15-02 may use a call regarding the qualification system as an invitation to participate. An entity that uses such a call will offer, in accordance with the considerations referred to in paragraph 8 of article 15-15, information in a timely manner that allows all suppliers that have expressed an interest in participating in the purchase to have a real possibility to assess your interest. The information will normally include the data required for the call referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3. The information provided to an interested supplier will be provided, without discrimination, to all other interested parties.
7. In the case of selective bidding procedures, an entity that establishes or maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers will insert in the appropriate publication referred to in annex 1 to article 15-19, a notice containing the following information :
a. a listing of all current lists, including their headings, in relation to the goods or services or categories of goods or services purchased through the lists;
b. the conditions that suppliers must meet to be included in the lists and the methods according to which the entity in question will verify each of those conditions; Y
c. the period of validity of the lists and the formalities for its renewal. This publication must be complied with annually.
8. When, after the publication of an invitation to participate, but before the expiration of the term set for the opening or receipt of offers as stated in the calls or in the bidding conditions, the entity considers it necessary to make modifications or To reissue the call or the bidding conditions, the entity must ensure that the same dissemination is given to the call or to the new or modified tender conditions as was given to the original documentation. Any material information provided to one supplier regarding a particular purchase will be simultaneously provided to the other interested suppliers, sufficiently in advance to allow all interested parties appropriate time to review the information and to respond.
9. An entity must indicate in the calls referred to in this article that the purchase is covered by this chapter.
Article 15-12: Selective bidding procedures 1. In selective bidding procedures the entity shall publish an invitation to participate in accordance with article 15-11.
2. In order to guarantee optimal effective competition between the suppliers of the Parties in the selective bidding procedures, an entity may directly invite, for each purchase, the largest number of national suppliers and suppliers of the other Party that is compatible with efficient operation of the purchasing system.
3. An entity may limit, in accordance with objective criteria and for fully justified reasons, the number of bids to be evaluated when the analysis of all the bids received could substantially affect the efficient functioning of the purchasing system, as long as it is guaranteed to the suppliers of the other Party comply with article 15-04.
4. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 5, an entity that maintains a permanent list of qualified suppliers may select those that will be directly summoned to bid on a given purchase. In the selection process, the entity will give equal opportunities to the suppliers included in the list.
5. Pursuant to subparagraphs f) and h) of paragraph 2 of article 15-10, an entity will allow a supplier that requests to participate in a particular purchase, submit an offer and take it into account. The number of additional suppliers authorized to participate will only be limited for reasons of efficient operation of the purchasing system.
6. When an entity does not summon or admit a provider to the tender, at the latter's request, it will provide, without delay, pertinent information on the reasons for its proceeding.
Article 15-13: Deadlines for bidding and delivery 1. An entity:
a. by setting a deadline, it will give suppliers of another Party sufficient time to prepare and submit bids before the closing of the bid;
b. In setting a timeframe, in accordance with its own reasonable needs, it will take into account factors such as the complexity of the purchase, the anticipated degree of subcontracting, and the time normally required to transmit offers by mail, both from foreign locations , as within the national territory; Y
c. when establishing the deadline for the receipt of offers or requests for admission to the tender, it will duly consider publication delays.
2. An entity shall provide that:
a. in open bidding procedures, the term for the receipt of an offer is not less than 40 days from the date of publication of a call, in accordance with article 15-11;
b. in selective bidding procedures that do not imply the use of a permanent list of qualified suppliers, the deadline for submitting a request for admission to the bidding process is not less than 25 days from the date of publication of a call, from in accordance with article 15-11, and the term for the receipt of offers is not less than 40 days from the date of publication of a call; Y
c. in selective bidding procedures that imply the use of a permanent list of qualified suppliers, the term for the receipt of offers is not less than 40 days from the date of the first invitation to bid, but when this last date does not coincides with the publication of a call referred to in article 15-11, no less than 40 days must elapse between publication and receipt of offers.
3. An entity may reduce the periods provided in paragraph 2 in accordance with the following:
a. as provided in paragraph 4 or 6 of article 15-11, when a call has been published within a period of not less than 40 days and not more than 12 months, the 40-day term for the receipt of offers may be reduced to not less than 24 days;
b. In the case of a second publication or a subsequent publication related to successive contracts of the same nature, in accordance with literal a) of paragraph 2 of article 15-11, the 40-day term for the receipt of offers may be reduced to no less than 24 days;
c. When, for reasons of urgency duly justified by the entity and which it could not have foreseen, the established deadlines cannot be observed, in no case will said deadlines be less than ten days, counted from the date of publication of a call in accordance with article 15-11; either
d. when one of the entities indicated in annex 2 or 3 to article 15-02 uses as an invitation to participate a call referred to in paragraph 6 of article 15-11, the entity and the selected suppliers may establish, by mutual agreement, the deadlines; however, in the absence of an agreement, the entity may set terms sufficiently long to allow the due submission of offers, which in no case shall be less than ten days.
4. An entity shall take into account factors such as the complexity of the purchase, the expected degree of subcontracting, and the time that it realistically takes to deliver the goods or services, and in accordance with its reasonable needs. deemed necessary for the production, dispatch and transportation of the goods from the different places of supply.
Article 15-14: Bidding Bases 1. When entities provide bidding bases to suppliers, the documentation will contain all the necessary information that allows them to duly present their offers, including the information that must be published in the call referred to in the paragraph 2 of article 15-11, except for the information required under letter h) of paragraph 2 of article 15-11. The documentation will also include:
a. the address of the entity to which the offers should be sent;
b. the address where requests for additional information should be sent;
c. the closing date and time for the receipt of offers and the period during which they must be validated;
d. the persons authorized, in addition to the participating suppliers, to attend the opening of the offers and the date, time and place of said opening;
and. a description of any conditions of an economic or technical nature, and of any financial guarantees, information and documents required from suppliers;
F. a full description of the goods or services to be purchased and any other requirements, including technical specifications, certificates of conformity, and necessary drawings, drawings and instructions;
g. the criteria on which the award of the contract will be based, such as price, and any other factor that will be considered in the evaluation of the offers; The cost elements that will be taken into account when evaluating the prices of the offers, will include, where appropriate, aspects such as transportation, insurance and inspection expenses and, in the case of goods or services of the other Party, the rights Customs and other import charges, taxes and currency of payment;
h. the terms of payment; and
Yo. any other stipulations or conditions.
2. An entity:
a. provide the bidding conditions at the request of a supplier that participates in the open bidding procedures or requests to participate in the selective bidding procedures, and respond, without delay, to any reasonable request for clarification thereof; Y
b. will promptly respond to any reasonable request for relevant information from a supplier participating in the tender, provided that such information does not give that supplier an advantage over its competitors in the contract award procedure.
Article 15-15: Presentation, reception and opening of offers and award of contracts 1. The entity will use procedures for the presentation, reception and opening of offers and the award of contracts that are consistent with the following:
a. Bids will normally be submitted in writing, either directly or by post;
b. When bids transmitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile or other means of electronic transmission are admitted in the invitation to participate, the bid submitted must include all the information necessary for its evaluation, in particular the final price proposed by the supplier and a statement that the supplier accepts all the clauses and conditions of the call;
c. Offers submitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile or other means of electronic transmission must be confirmed within the term set in the call or in the bidding conditions, sending the original document of the offers or a signed copy of the telex, telegram, telefacsimile or message electronic;
d. the content of the telex, telegram, telefacsimile or electronic message shall prevail in the event of any difference or contradiction between it and any other documentation received after the deadline for the receipt of offers has expired;
and. it will not be allowed to present offers by telephone;
F. Applications to participate in a selective bidding may be submitted by telex, telegram, telefacsimile and, when permitted, by other means of electronic transmission; Y
g. The opportunities to correct involuntary errors of form, such as arithmetic errors or others that do not affect the essence of the offer, which are granted to suppliers during the period between the opening of the offers and the award of the contract, may not be used. in such a way that they discriminate between providers.
For the purposes of this paragraph, means of electronic transmission shall be understood as those through which the recipient can produce a printed copy of the offer at the place of destination of the transmission.
2. No entity will penalize a supplier for causes exclusively attributable to the entity.
3. All the offers requested by an entity in the open or selective bidding procedures must be received and opened in accordance with the procedures and under the conditions that guarantee the regularity of the opening of the offers. The entity will keep the information corresponding to the opening of the offers. The information must remain available to the participants with legitimate interest and to the competent authorities of the Party to be used, if required, in accordance with article 15-17 or 15-19 or chapter XX (Dispute Resolution).
4. An entity shall award contracts in accordance with the following:
a. In order for an offer to be considered for the award, it must comply, at the time of opening, with the requirements stipulated in the call or in the bidding conditions and come from suppliers that meet the conditions of participation;
b. If the entity receives an offer that is abnormally lower in price than the others submitted, the entity may check with the supplier to ensure that the supplier satisfies the conditions for participation and is or will be able to comply with the terms of the contract;
c. Unless, for reasons of public interest, the entity decides not to award the contract, it will award it to the supplier that it has considered capable of performing the contract and whose offer is the lowest or most advantageous price, in accordance with the criteria evaluation specifications established in the call or in the bidding conditions;
d. the awards will be made in accordance with the criteria and requirements established in the bidding conditions; Y
and. The clauses that allow the quotation of optional or alternative goods or services will not be used in order to circumvent this chapter.
5. No entity of a Party may condition the award of a contract on the fact that a supplier has previously been assigned one or more contracts by an entity of that Party, or on the supplier's previous work experience in the territory of that Party.
6. An entity:
a. upon express request, it will promptly inform the participating providers of the decisions on the awarded contracts and, if requested, do so in writing; Y
b. at the express request of a supplier whose offer has not been chosen, it will provide the relevant information to that supplier about the reasons why its offer was not chosen, the characteristics and advantages of the selected offer and the name of the winning supplier.
7. Within a reasonable period of time after the award of the contract, an entity shall insert a notice in the appropriate publication referred to in Annex 1 to Article 15-19 containing the following information:
a. a description of the nature and quantity of the goods or services that are the subject of the contract;
b. the name and address of the entity that awards the contract;
c. the award date;
d. the name and address of each selected provider;
and. the value of the contract; Y
F. the tendering procedure used.
8. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 through 7, an entity may withhold certain information about the award of the contract, when its disclosure:
a. could impede compliance with laws or be contrary to the public interest;
b. harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person; either
c. out to the detriment of fair competition between suppliers. In no case, literals b) and c) will prevail when information is requested in matters of public interest.
Article 15-16: Restricted bidding 1. An entity may, in the circumstances and in accordance with the conditions described in paragraph 2, use restricted bidding procedures and, accordingly, deviate from the provisions of articles 15-10 to 15-15, provided that restricted bidding procedures are not used to avoid the maximum possible competition or in a way that constitutes a means of discrimination between suppliers of the other Party or protection of domestic suppliers.
2. An entity may use restricted tendering procedures in the following circumstances and under the following conditions, as appropriate:
a. in the absence of offers in response to an open or selective invitation to tender; when the offers presented have resulted from collusion; do not meet the essential requirements of the bidding conditions; or when the offers have been made by suppliers that do not meet the conditions of participation provided for in accordance with this chapter, provided that the initial purchase requirements are not substantially modified in the award of the contract;
b. when the goods or services can only be supplied by a specific supplier without other reasonable alternatives or substitutes; because they are works of art; for reasons related to the protection of patents, copyrights or other exclusive rights; reserved information; or there is no competition for technical reasons;
c. to the extent strictly necessary, when, for reasons of extreme urgency due to events that the entity cannot foresee, it is not possible to obtain the goods or services on time through open or selective bidding;
d. in the case of additional deliveries from the initial supplier either as replacement parts or continuing services for existing materials, services or facilities, or as an expansion of existing materials, services or facilities, when a change of supplier would require the entity to acquire equipment or services that will not meet the requirement to be interchangeable with existing equipment or services, including software, to the extent that the initial purchase of the software was covered by this chapter;
and. when an entity acquires prototypes or a first good that is manufactured or a first service that is provided at its request in the course of a certain research, experimentation, study or original manufacturing contract. Once the contracts of this class have been fulfilled, the purchase of goods or services that are made as a result of them will be adjusted to articles 15-10 to 15-15. The original development of a first good may include its production in limited quantity in order to take into account the results of field tests and to demonstrate that the product lends itself to mass production meeting acceptable quality standards, but does not include series production to determine commercial viability or to recover research and development costs;
F. for goods purchased on a commodity market whose price is quoted on an international market;
g. for purchases made under exceptionally favorable conditions that are only offered at very short notice, but does not include purchases made under ordinary conditions from regular suppliers. Exceptionally favorable conditions are understood to be those that are substantially advantageous for the purchasing entity in relation to normal market conditions, such as extraordinary disposals made by companies that are not normally suppliers; or to the alienation of assets of persons in liquidation or under judicial administration;
h. for contracts to be awarded to the winner of an architectural design competition, provided that the competition is:
i) organized in accordance with the principles of this chapter, including in relation to the publication of the invitation to qualified suppliers to bid;
ii) organized in such a way that the design contract is awarded to the winner; Y
iii) submitted to an independent jury; and
Yo. when an entity requires consulting services related to aspects of a confidential nature, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to compromise confidential information of the public sector, cause serious economic damage or, similarly, be contrary to the public interest.
3. The entities must justify the reasons on which they base the use of restricted bidding and prepare a written report on each contract they have awarded in accordance with paragraph 2. Each report will contain the name of the contracting entity, the value and the class of goods or services purchased, the country of origin, and a statement of the circumstances and conditions described in paragraph 2 that justified the use of restricted bidding. The entity must keep each report in a file in which the complete documentation related to the contract will be added. These will remain at the disposal of the competent authorities of the Party to be used, if required, in accordance with article 15-17 or 15-19 or with chapter XX (Dispute Resolution).
Section D Challenge Procedures
Article 15-17: Challenge Procedures 1. In order to promote fair, open, and impartial procurement procedures, each Party shall adopt and maintain administrative challenge procedures for purchases covered by this Chapter, in accordance with the following:
a. each Party shall establish a procedure for suppliers to challenge the different aspects of the purchasing process which, for the purposes of this article, begins from the moment an entity has defined its purchase requirement and continues until the contract is awarded;
b. Before initiating a challenge procedure, a Party may encourage the supplier to seek a solution to its complaint with the procuring entity; It will ensure that its entities consider in a timely and impartial manner any complaint or challenge regarding the purchases covered by this chapter;
d. whether or not a supplier has attempted to resolve its complaint with the entity, or after it has failed to reach a successful resolution, neither Party may preclude the supplier from initiating a challenge proceeding or seeking other available remedy;
and. a Party may request a supplier to notify the entity of the initiation of a challenge procedure;
F. a Party may limit the period within which a supplier may initiate the challenge procedure 1 but in no c
c. each Party agrees that this term shall be less than ten business days, from the moment the supplier knows or considers that he should have known the basis of the complaint;
g. each Party shall establish or designate a specialized reviewing authority with no substantial interest in the outcome of the purchases to receive challenges and issue the resolutions and, where appropriate, the pertinent recommendations;
h. upon receiving the challenge, the reviewing authority will proceed to investigate it expeditiously;
Yo. the reviewing authority will limit its considerations to the challenge itself;
j. the reviewing authority will issue a resolution to resolve the challenge, which may include directives to the entity to re-evaluate the offers, terminate the purchase process, the contract or submit it again to the contest;
k. generally, entities will follow the recommendations of the reviewing authority;
he. upon conclusion of the challenge proceeding, each Party shall empower its review authority to make further written recommendations to an entity regarding any phase of its procurement process found to be problematic during the challenge investigation, including recommendations for make changes to the entity's purchasing procedures so that they are consistent with this chapter;
m. the reviewing authority will notify in a timely manner and in writing the result of its inquiries, resolutions and recommendations regarding the challenges, and will make them available to the Parties and interested persons;
no. each Party shall specify in writing and make generally available all of its challenge procedures; Y
either. In order to verify that the procurement process was carried out in accordance with this chapter, each Party shall ensure that its entities maintain complete documentation relating to each purchase, including a written record of all communications that substantially affect the procurement process, during a period of at least three years from the date the contract was awarded.
2. A Party may request the initiation of the challenge procedure only after the call has been published or, in case of not being published, after the bidding conditions are available. When a Party establishes said requirement, the term of ten business days referred to in subparagraph f) of paragraph 1, will begin to run no earlier than the date on which the call has been published or the bidding conditions are available.
Section E General Provisions
Article 15-18: Exceptions 1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from taking any action or refraining from disclosing information that it considers necessary to protect its essential security interests in connection with the purchase of arms. , munitions or war material, or any other procurement essential for national security or for national defense purposes.
2. As long as these measures are not applied in such a way that they constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between the Parties where the same conditions exist or that they imply a disguised restriction of trade between the Parties, nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted in the meaning of preventing a Party from establishing or maintaining the measures:
a. necessary to protect morality, public order or safety;
b. necessary to protect human, animal or plant life and health;
c. necessary to protect intellectual property; either
d. related to goods or services provided by disabled people, charitable institutions or prison labor.
Article 15-19: Provision of Information 1. Pursuant to Article 18-02, each Party shall promptly publish any law, regulation, case law, administrative decision of general application and any procedure, including model contractual clauses, relating to procurement of the public sector included in this chapter, through its insertion in the pertinent publications referred to in annex 2 to this article.
2. Each Party:
a. shall explain to the other Party, upon request, its public sector procurement procedures;
b. ensure that its entities, upon request from a supplier, explain, without delay, their public sector procurement practices and procedures; Y
c. designate, no later than the entry into force of this Agreement, one or more information centers for:
i) facilitate communication between the Parties; Y
ii) answer, upon request, all reasonable questions from the other Party in order to provide relevant information on aspects covered by this chapter.
3. A Party may request additional information on the award of the contract that may be necessary to determine if a purchase was made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter with respect to offers that have not been selected. For this purpose, the Party of the purchasing entity will provide information on the relative characteristics and advantages of the winning offer and the price of the contract. When disclosure of this information may prejudice competition in future tenders, the requesting Party may not disclose the information except after consulting with the other Party and obtaining their consent.
4. Each Party shall provide to the other Party, upon request, information available to that Party or its entities about its entities' covered purchases, and about individual contracts awarded by its entities.
5. No Party may disclose confidential information the disclosure of which would harm the legitimate business interests of a particular person or would be detrimental to fair competition between suppliers, without the formal authorization of the person who provided such information to the Party.
6. With a view to ensuring effective monitoring of purchases covered by this Chapter, each Party shall collect statistics and provide to the other Party, unless the Parties otherwise agree, an annual report in accordance with the following requirements:
a. statistics on the estimated value of the contracts awarded, both below and above the value of the applicable thresholds, broken down by entity;
b. statistics on the number and total value of contracts above the value of the applicable thresholds, broken down by entity, by categories of goods and services established in accordance with the classification systems, prepared in accordance with this chapter and by country of origin of the goods and services goods and services purchased;
c. Statistics on the total number and value of contracts awarded under Article 15-16, broken down by entity, by category of goods or services, and by country of origin of the goods and services purchased; Y
d. Statistics on the number and total value of contracts awarded in accordance with the exceptions to this chapter established in Annex 9 to Article 15-02, broken down by entity.
7. Each Party may organize by state, municipality or region any portion of the report referred to in paragraph 6 that corresponds to the entities indicated in Annex 3 to Article 15-02.
Article 15-20: Technical Cooperation 1. The Parties shall cooperate, on mutually agreed terms, to achieve a greater understanding of their public sector procurement systems, with a view to achieving greater access to public sector procurement opportunities for their providers.
2. Each Party will provide the other Party and its suppliers with information regarding training and orientation programs related to its public sector procurement systems and access without discrimination to any program carried out on the basis of cost recovery.
3. The training and orientation programs referred to in paragraph 2 include:
a. training of public sector personnel directly involved in public sector procurement procedures;
b. training of suppliers interested in taking advantage of public sector purchasing opportunities;
c. the explanation and description of specific aspects of each Party's public sector procurement system, such as its challenge mechanism; Y
d. information regarding public sector procurement market opportunities.
4. Each Party shall establish, no later than the entry into force of the Agreement, at least one contact point to provide information on the training and orientation programs referred to in this article.
Article 15-21: Joint Participation Programs for Micro, Small, and Medium Industry 1. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall establish the Committee for Micro, Small, and Medium Industry, made up of representatives of each Party. The committee will meet by agreement of the Parties, at least once a year, and will report annually to the Commission on the efforts of the Parties to promote public sector procurement opportunities for their micro, small, and medium-sized industries.
2. The committee shall work to facilitate the following activities of the Parties:
a. the identification of available opportunities for the training of the personnel of micro, small and medium-sized industries in terms of public sector purchasing procedures;
b. the identification of micro, small and medium-sized industries interested in becoming business partners of micro, small and medium-sized industries in the territory of the other Party;
c. the development of databases on micro, small and medium-sized industries in the territory of each Party to be used by entities of the other Party that wish to make purchases from smaller-scale companies;
d. consultations regarding the factors that each Party uses to establish its eligibility criteria for any program for micro, small, and medium-sized industries; Y
and. carrying out activities to deal with any related matter.
Article 15-22: Rectifications or Modifications 1. A Party may modify its coverage under this Chapter only in exceptional circumstances.
2. When a Party modifies its coverage under this chapter:
a. notify the modification to its Secretariat and to the other Party;
b. it will incorporate the change to the corresponding annex; Y
c. will propose to the other Party appropriate compensatory adjustments to its coverage, in order to maintain a level of coverage comparable to that existing before the modification.
3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Party may make exclusively formal rectifications and minor amendments to its schedules in Annexes 1 to 6 and 9 to Article 15-02 provided that it notifies the other Party and its Secretariat of said rectifications, and the other Party does not express its objection to the proposed rectifications within a period of 30 days. In such cases, it will not be necessary to propose compensation.
4. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, a Party may carry out reorganizations of its public sector entities covered by this Chapter, including programs for the decentralization of the purchases of said entities or the corresponding public functions cease to be carried out by any public sector entity, whether or not included in this chapter. In such cases, it will not be necessary to propose compensation. No Party may carry out such reorganizations or programs in order to evade compliance with the obligations of this chapter.
5. A Party may resort to the procedure established in Chapter XX (Dispute Settlement) when it considers that:
a. the adjustment proposed in accordance with subparagraph c) of paragraph 2 is not adequate to maintain a level comparable to that of the mutually agreed coverage; either
b. a minor rectification or amendment pursuant to paragraph 3 or a reorganization pursuant to paragraph 4 does not meet the requirements stipulated in those paragraphs and as a consequence requires compensation.
Article 15-23: Disposal of Entities 1. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from disposing of an entity covered by this Chapter.
2. If, through the public offering of shares of an entity contained in Annex 2 of Article 15-02, or through other methods, the entity ceases to be subject to federal or central government control, the Party may remove said entity from such annex and remove it from the coverage of this chapter, after notifying the other Party and its Secretariat.
3. When a Party objects to the withdrawal of the entity considering that it remains subject to federal or central government control, said Party may resort to the procedure established in Chapter XX (Dispute Resolution).
Article 15-24: Future Negotiations 1. With a view to achieving further liberalization of their respective public sector procurement markets, the Parties shall enter into negotiations when so determined by the Commission.
2. In such negotiations, the Parties shall review all aspects of their public sector procurement practices for the purposes of:
a. evaluate the operation of their public sector procurement systems;
b. seek to expand the coverage of the chapter by incorporating:
i) other government companies, autonomous entities, decentralized entities or other types of public companies; Y
ii) purchases subject in some way to legislative or administrative exceptions; Y
c. review the value of the thresholds.
3. Before said review, the Parties shall consult with their state or regional governments, and municipalities with a view to reaching commitments, on a voluntary and reciprocal basis, for the incorporation into this chapter of the purchases of state government entities and companies. or regional, and municipal.
Annex 1 to Article 15-02 Federal and Central Government Entities
Mexico roster
1. Ministry of the Interior
- National Center for Municipal Development
- Qualifying Commission for Publications and Illustrated Magazines
- National Population Council
- General Archive of the Nation
- National Institute of Historical Studies of the Mexican Revolution
- Assistance Board for Social Reincorporation through Employment in the Federal District
- National Center for Disaster Prevention
2. Ministry of Foreign Relations
3. Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
- National Baking and Stock Commission
- National Insurance and Bond Commission
- National Institute of Statistics, Geography and Informatics
4. Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Rural Development
- Support and Services for Agricultural Marketing (ASERCA)
5. Ministry of Communications and Transportation (including the Federal Telecommunications Commission and the Mexican Institute of Communications and the Mexican Institute of Transportation)
6. Secretariat of Commerce and Industrial Development
7. Ministry of Public Education
- National Institute of Anthropology and History
- National Institute of Fine Arts and Literature
- Radio Education
- Center for Engineering and Industrial Development
-National Council for Culture and the Arts
8. Ministry of Health
- Administration of the Patrimony of Public Charity
- National Center for Blood Transfusion
- General Management of Works, Conservation - General Management of Biologicals and Reagents and Maintenance
- National Institute of Human Communication "Dr. Andrés Bustamante Gurría"
- National Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine
- National Institute of Orthopedics
- Council for the Prevention and Control of Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (Conasida)
9. Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare
- Federal Labor Defense Attorney
10. Secretariat of Agrarian Reform
- National Institute of Agrarian Development
11. Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources and Fisheries
- National Fisheries Institute
- Mexican Institute of Water Technology
12. Office of the Attorney General of the Republic
13. Ministry of Energy
- National Commission for Nuclear Safety and Safeguards
- National Commission for Energy Saving
14. Ministry of Social Development
15. Ministry of Tourism
16. Secretariat of Comptrollership and Administrative Development
17. Secretary of National Defense
18. Secretary of the Navy
Nicaraguan roster
1. National Assembly
2. Supreme Electoral Council
3. Supreme Court of Justice
4. Comptroller General of the Republic
5. Presidency of the Republic
- Vice presidency
6. Department of Social Communication
7. Radio Nicaragua
8. Emergency Social Investment Fund
9. Ministry of Social Action (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
10. Institute for Attention to War Victims
11. Nicaraguan Institute for Women
12. Nicaraguan Fund for Children and the Family
13. Ministry of Health
14. Ministry of Education
15. Ministry of Labor
16. National Technological Institute (INATEC)
17. Ministry of Finance
18. Nicaraguan Institute of Public Administration
19. Ministry of Economy and Development
20. Nicaraguan Institute of Statistics and Censuses
21. MEDE - FISHING
22. Ministry of Construction and Transport
23. Nicaraguan Institute of Territorial Studies
24. Ministry of Tourism
25. Rubén Darío National Theater
26. Nicaraguan Institute of Culture
27. Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
28. Nicaraguan Institute of Agricultural Technology
29. Nicaraguan Institute of Agrarian Reform
30. Ministry of Foreign Affairs
31. Ministry of External Cooperation
32. Ministry of Defense
33. Ministry of the Interior
34. Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources
35. Attorney General's Office
36. Nicaraguan Youth and Sports Institute
37. National Rural Development Program
38. Micro Business Support Program (PAMIC)
39. National Agricultural Council (CONAGRO)
40. House of Culture
Annex 2 to Article 15-02 Government Companies and Autonomous Entities
List of Mexico: Printing and Publishing
1. Graphic Workshops of Mexico
2. Producer and Importer of Paper SA de CV
3. National Commission for Free Textbooks
Communications and Transportation
4. Airports and Auxiliary Services
5. Federal Roads and Bridges for Income and Related Services (CAPUFE)
6. Mexican Postal Service
7. National Railways of Mexico (FERRONALES)
8. Telecommunications of Mexico (TELECOM)
Industry
9. Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) (Does not include fuel and gas purchases)
- Pemex Exploration and Production
- PEMEX Refining
- PEMEX Gas and Basic Petrochemicals
- PEMEX Petrochemical
10. Federal Electricity Commission (CFE)
Commerce
11. Mineral Resources Council
12. Federal Consumer Attorney's Office
Social Security
14. Institute of Security and Social Services for State Workers (ISSSTE)
15. Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS)
16. National System for Integral Family Development (DIF) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
17. Social Security Institute for the Mexican Armed Forces
18. National Indigenous Institute (INI)
19. National Institute for Adult Education
20. Youth Integration Centers
21. National Institute of Senescence
22. Distribuidora e Impulsora Comercial Conasupo, SA de CV (Diconsa)
23. Leche Industrializada Conasupo, SA de CV (Liconsa) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.).
Others
24. Administrative Committee of the Federal School Construction Program (CAPFCE)
25. National Water Commission (CNA)
26. Commission for the Regularization of Land Tenure
27. National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT)
28. NOTIMEX, SA de CV
29. Mexican Institute of Cinematography
30. National Lottery for Public Assistance
31. Forecasts for Public Assistance
32. National Commission for Arid Zones
33. National Human Rights Commission
34. National Council for Educational Promotion
35. Compañía Nacional de Subsistencia Populares (Conasupo) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for programs to support agriculture or for human nutrition.)
36. Bodegas Rurales Conasupo, SA de CV
Nicaraguan roster
1. Nicaraguan Telecommunications Company (ENITEL)
2. Nicaraguan Institute of Telecommunications and Posts (TELCOR)
3. Nicaraguan Electricity Company (ENEL)
4. Nicaraguan Energy Institute (INE)
5. Nicaraguan Import Company (ENIMPORT) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
6. National Lottery
7. National Supply Company (ENABAS) (Does not include purchases of agricultural goods acquired for agricultural support programs or for human nutrition.)
8. National Airport Company
9. Post Office of Nicaragua
10. Nicaraguan Red Cross
11. Nicaraguan Institute of Aqueducts and Sewers (INAA)
12. Nicaraguan Social Security Institute (INSS)
13. Nicaraguan Institute for Municipal Development (INIFOM)
Annex 3 of Article 15-02 State or Regional and Municipal Government Entities
Annex 4 of Article 15-02 List of Assets Section A - General Provisions
1. This chapter applies to all goods that are purchased by the entities indicated in annexes 1 to 3 to article 15-02.
2. In relation to Mexico, the strategic assets indicated in section B acquired by the Ministry of National Defense and the Ministry of the Navy are excluded from the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of article 15-18 .
3. In relation to Nicaragua, the assets of a strategic nature indicated in section B acquired by the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of the Interior are excluded from the coverage of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of article 15-18.
Section B List of certain assets
- Armament.
- Nuclear war material.
- Fire control equipment.
- Ammunition and explosives.
- Guided missiles.
- Aircraft and aircraft structure components.
- Components and accessories for aircraft.
- Equipment for takeoff, landing and ground handling of aircraft.
- Space vehicles.
- Boats, small structures, pangas and floating docks.
- Vessels and maritime equipment.
Annex 5 to Article 15-02 Services
Without prejudice to the coverage provided in Chapter X (General Principles on Trade in Services), this Chapter shall apply to all services no later than one year after the entry into force of the Agreement. For such purposes, the Parties will form a working group that will continue to review pertinent technical issues, including the review of the Common Classification System for Services.
Appendix to Annex 5 to Article 15-02 Common Classification System for Services
group = one digit
Subgroup = two digits
Class = four digits
A. Research and Development Definition of research and development contracts
Purchases of research and development services include the acquisition of specialized advice in order to increase scientific knowledge; apply advanced scientific knowledge or exploit the potential of scientific discoveries and technological improvements to advance existing technological knowledge; and systematically use increases in scientific knowledge and advances in existing technology to design, develop, test, or evaluate new products or services.
Research and Development Codes
Research and development codes are made up of two alphabetic digits. The first digit is always the letter A to identify Research and Development, the second code is alphabetical, from A to Z, to identify the main subgroup.
Annex 7 to Article 15-02 Indexation and Conversion of the Value of the Thresholds
1. The calculations referred to in literal c) of paragraph 1 of article 15-02, will be made according to the following:
a. the inflation rate of the United States of America will be determined based on the producer price index for finished goods published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States of America;
b. the first adjustment for inflation, which will take effect on January 1, 2000, will be calculated based on the period from November 1, 1997, to October 31, 1999;
c. all subsequent adjustments will be calculated over biennial periods beginning on November 1 and taking effect on January 1 of the year immediately following the end of the biennial period; Y
d. the inflationary adjustment will be estimated according to the following formula:
T0 x (1+pi)= T1
where: T0 = threshold value in the base period; Pi= accumulated inflation rate in the United States of America in the ith biennial period; and T1 = new threshold value.
2. The exchange rate for the determination of the value of the thresholds, for purposes of this chapter, will be the current value of the peso of the United Mexican States and the córdoba of the Republic of Nicaragua in relation to the dollar of the United States of America as of December 1 and June 1 of each year, or the first business day thereafter. The December 1 conversion rates will apply from January 1 to June 30 of the following year, and the June 1 conversion rate will apply from January 1 to December 31 of that year. The Parties will calculate and convert the value of the thresholds into their own currencies. It is understood that these calculations will be based on the official exchange rate of the Bank of Mexico and the Central Bank of Nicaragua.
Annex 8 to Article 15-02 Transition Mechanisms
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, annexes 1 to 6 of article 15-02 are subject to the following:
Mexico roster
Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), Federal Electricity Commission (CFE) and construction for the non-energy sector
1. Mexico may reserve from the obligations of this chapter for each year, as described in paragraph 2, the percentage defined in that paragraph of:
a. the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods, services and any combination thereof, and the construction services acquired by Pemex during the year, that exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in letter c) of paragraph 1 of article 02-15;
b. the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods, services and any combination thereof, and the construction services acquired by CFE during the year, that exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in letter c) of paragraph 1 of article 02-15;
c. the total value of the contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in literal c) of paragraph 1 of article 15-02, excluding contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired by Pemex and CFE.
2. The years to which paragraph 1 applies and the percentages for those years are as follows:
3. The value of purchase contracts that are financed by loans from multilateral and regional financial institutions shall not be included in the calculation of the total value of purchase contracts in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2. Purchase contracts that are financed for these loans will not be subject to any of the restrictions indicated in this chapter.
4. Mexico will ensure that the total value of the purchase contracts in the same class of products that are reserved by Pemex or CFE in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 for any year, does not exceed 10% of the total value of the purchase contracts that Pemex or CFE may reserve for that year.
pharmaceutical goods
5. This chapter will not apply, until January 1, 2002, to purchases of medicines made by the Ministry of Health, the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS), the Social Services Security Institute for State Workers (ISSSTE), the Ministry of National Defense and the Ministry of the Navy, which are not currently patented in Mexico or whose Mexican patents have expired. Nothing in this paragraph will impair the rights established in Chapter XVII (Intellectual Property).
Nicaraguan roster
Nicaraguan Electricity Company (ENEL) and the Nicaraguan Institute of Aqueducts and Sewers (INAA) and construction for the non-energy sector
1. Nicaragua may reserve from the obligations of this chapter for each year, as described in paragraph 2, the percentage defined in that paragraph of:
a) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of goods, services and any combination thereof, and the construction services acquired by ENEL; INAA and construction for the non-energy sector during the year, that exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in literal c) of paragraph 1 of article 15-02; Y
b) the total value of the contracts for the purchase of construction services acquired during the year, which exceed the value of the thresholds indicated in literal c) of paragraph 1 of article 15-02, excluding contracts for the purchase of services of construction acquired by ENEL and INAA.
2. The years to which paragraph 1 applies and the percentages for those years are as follows:
3. The value of purchase contracts that are financed by loans from multilateral and regional financial institutions shall not be included in the calculation of the total value of purchase contracts in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2. Purchase contracts that are financed for these loans will not be subject to any of the restrictions indicated in this chapter.
4. Nicaragua will ensure that the total value of purchase contracts in the same class of products that are reserved by ENEL and INAA or the non-energy sector with regard to construction in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 for any year, does not exceed 10% of the total value of the purchase contracts that ENEL and INAA or the non-energy sector may reserve for construction for that year.
pharmaceutical goods
5. This chapter will not apply, until January 1, 2002, to purchases of medicines made by the Ministry of Health, the Nicaraguan Social Security Institute and the Ministry of the Interior that are not currently patented in Nicaragua or whose Nicaraguan patents have expired. . Nothing in this paragraph will impair the rights established in Chapter XVII (Intellectual Property).
Thresholds applicable to the acquisition of goods and services from Central Government Entities
6. Nicaragua will apply the following thresholds expressed in United States dollars (dollars) for goods and services purchased by the entities listed in Annex 1 to article 15-02.
Mexico roster
1. This chapter does not apply to purchases made:
a. with a view to commercial resale by government stores;
b. in accordance with lending from regional or multilateral financial institutions to the extent that such institutions impose different procedures, except for local content requirements; either
c. between one entity and another in Mexico.
2. This chapter does not apply to the purchase of transportation services that are part of or related to a purchase contract.
3. National security exceptions include purchases made in support of safeguarding nuclear materials or technology.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, Mexico may reserve purchase contracts for the obligations of this chapter, in accordance with the following:
a. The total value of the reserved contracts that entities may assign, except Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) and Comisión Federal de Electricidad (CFE), may not exceed the equivalent in Mexican pesos to:
i) 1,000 million dollars of the United States of America (dollars) in each year until December 31, 2002; Y
ii) 1,200 million dollars in each year, as of January 1, 2003;
b. no contract may be reserved by Pemex or CFE pursuant to this paragraph before January 1, 2003;
c. the total value of the contracts reserved by Pemex and CFE pursuant to this paragraph may not exceed the equivalent in Mexican pesos of 300 million dollars, in each year starting on January 1, 2003;
d. the total value of contracts under the same Federal Supply Classification class (or other classification system agreed upon by the Parties) that may be reserved pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph in any year, shall not exceed 10% of the total value of the contracts that can be reserved in accordance with this paragraph for that year; Y
and. No entity subject to the provisions of subsection a) may reserve contracts in any year for a value greater than 20% of the total value of the contracts that may be reserved for that year.
The values that appear in literals a) and c) are for the year 1994. Therefore, they must be updated in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.
5. As of January 1, 2000, the values in terms of dollars referred to in paragraph 4 will be adjusted annually to the accumulated inflation, since November 1, 1997, based on the implicit price deflator for the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the United States of America or any successor index published by the Council of Economic Advisors in Economic Indicators . The value of the dollar adjusted for accumulated inflation up to January of each year after 1999 will be equal to the original values of the dollar by the quotient of:
a. the implicit price deflator for GDP or any successor index published by the Council of Economic Advisors in Economic Indicators , effective January of that year; Come in
b. the implicit price deflator for GDP or any successor index published by the Council of Economic Advisors in Economic Indicators , effective November 1, 1997, provided that the price deflators indicated in subparagraphs a) and b) have the same year base.
The resulting adjusted dollar values will be rounded to the nearest million dollars.
6. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, an entity may impose a local content requirement of not more than:
a. 40% for "turnkey" projects or larger, labor-intensive integrated projects; either
b. 25% for "turnkey" projects or larger, capital-intensive integrated projects.
For the purposes of this paragraph, a turnkey project or major integrated project will be understood, in general, as a construction, supply or installation project undertaken by a person in accordance with the right granted by an entity with respect to which:
c. the main contractor has the power to select the general contractors or subcontractors;
d. neither the government of Mexico nor its entities fund the project;
and. the person assumes the risk associated with non-performance; Y
F. the facility operated by an entity or through a purchase agreement from that same entity.
7. In the event that Mexico exceeds in a given year the total value of the contracts that it may reserve for that year in accordance with paragraph 4 or the purchase reserved in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 or 4 of Mexico's schedule in the Annex 8 to Article 15-02, Mexico will consult with the other Party in order to reach an agreement on the possibility of compensation through additional purchasing opportunities during the following year. Such consultations shall be without prejudice to the rights of either Party under Chapter XX (Dispute Settlement).
Nicaraguan roster
1. This chapter does not apply to purchases made:
a. with a view to commercial resale by government stores;
b. in accordance with lending from regional or multilateral financial institutions to the extent that such institutions impose different procedures, except for local content requirements; either
c. between one Nicaraguan entity and another.
2. This chapter does not apply to the purchase of transportation services that are part of or related to a purchase contract.
3. National security exceptions include purchases made in support of safeguarding nuclear materials or technology.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, Nicaragua may reserve purchase contracts from the obligations of this chapter, for an amount equivalent to 5.5% of its total annual purchases.
5. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, an entity may impose a local content requirement of not more than:
a. 40% for "turnkey" projects or larger, labor-intensive integrated projects; either
b. 25% for "turnkey" projects or larger, capital-intensive integrated projects.
For the purposes of this paragraph, a turnkey project or major integrated project will be understood, in general, as a construction, supply or installation project undertaken by a person in accordance with the right granted by an entity with respect to which:
c. the main contractor has the power to select the general contractors or subcontractors;
d. Neither the Nicaraguan government nor its entities fund the project;
and. the person assumes the risk associated with non-performance; Y
F. the facility operated by an entity or through a purchase agreement from that same entity.
6. In the event that Nicaragua exceeds in a given year the total value of the contracts that it may reserve for that year in accordance with paragraph 4 or the purchase reserved in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 or 4 of Nicaragua's schedule in the Annex 8 to Article 15-02, Nicaragua will consult with the other Party in order to reach an agreement on the possibility of compensation through additional purchasing opportunities during the following year. Such consultations shall be without prejudice to the rights of either Party under Chapter XX (Dispute Settlement).
Annex 1 to Article 15-19 Publications for Calls
Mexico roster
The specialized section of the Official Gazette of the Federation.
Nicaraguan roster
1. Two newspapers with national circulation.
2. Nicaragua will establish a specialized publication for the purposes of purchase calls, no later than 2 years after the entry into force of this Agreement. When this publication is established, it will supersede the one referred to in paragraph 1.
Annex 2 to Article 15-19 Publications for Measures 
Mexico roster
1. The Official Gazette of the Federation.
2. The Judicial Weekly of the Federation (only for jurisprudence).
Nicaraguan roster
1. The Gazette, Official Gazette.
2. Nicaragua will endeavor to establish a specialized publication for the purposes of the information referred to in paragraph 1 of article 15-19. When this publication is established, it will supersede the one referred to in paragraph 1.
Chapter XVI : Investment
Section A - Investment
Article 16-01 : Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
ICSID : the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes;
ICSID Convention : the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, concluded in Washington on March 18, 1965;
Inter- American Convention : the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, held in Panama on January 30, 1975;
New York Convention: the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, held in New York on June 10, 1958;
demand : the claim made by the disputing investor against a Party, whose foundation is an alleged violation of the provisions contained in this chapter;
enterprise of a Party : an enterprise of a Party and a branch located in the territory of that Party that carries on business activities therein;
investment , among others:
a. a company;
b. company actions;
c. debt instruments of a company:
i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; either
ii) when the original maturity date of the debt instrument is at least three years, but does not include a debt instrument of a State enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;
d. a loan to a company:
i) when the company is a subsidiary of the investor; either
ii) when the original maturity date of the loan is at least three years, but does not include a loan to a State enterprise, regardless of the original maturity date;
and. a share in a business, which allows the owner to share in the income or profits of the business;
F. a participation in a company, which grants the owner the right to participate in the social assets of that company in a liquidation, provided that this does not derive from an obligation or a loan excluded according to literals c) and d);
g. property;
h. other property, tangible or intangible, acquired or used for the purpose of obtaining economic benefit or for other business purposes;
Yo. benefits from allocating capital or other resources for the development of an economic activity in the territory of the other Party, among others, in accordance with:
i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of the other Party, including concessions, licenses, permits, construction and turnkey contracts; either
ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substantially on the production, income or profit of a company; and
j. a loan granted to a financial institution or a debt security issued by a financial institution that is treated as capital for regulatory purposes by the Party in whose territory the financial institution is located; will not be understood by investment:
k. pecuniary claims that do not entail the types of rights provided in the literals of the definition of investment derived exclusively from:
i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or company in the territory of one Party to a company in the territory of the other Party; either
ii) the granting of credit in relation to a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, except for a loan covered by the provisions of subparagraph d);
he. any other pecuniary claim that does not entail the types of rights provided in the literals of the definition of investment;
investment of an investor of a Party : the investment owned by or under the direct or indirect control of an investor of a Party;
investor of a Party : a Party or an enterprise thereof, or a national or enterprise of that Party, that intends to make, is making, or has made an investment;
disputing investor : an investor who makes a claim under the terms of section B;
Disputing Party : the Party against which a claim is made in arbitration under the terms of Section B;
disputing party means the disputing investor or the disputing Party;
disputing parties : the disputing investor and the disputing Party;
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules : the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), approved by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15, 1976;
Secretary General : the Secretary General of ICSID;
transfers : international remittances and payments;
tribunal : an arbitral tribunal established under article 16-21; Y
accumulation tribunal : an arbitral tribunal established under article 16-27.
Article 16-02: Scope of Application 1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
a. the investors of the other Party, in everything related to their investment;
b. investments of investors of the other Party made in the territory of the Party; Y
c. as regards article 16-05, all investments in the territory of the Party.
2. This chapter does not apply to:
a. the economic activities reserved to each Party, in accordance with their legislation in force on the date of signing this Agreement, which will be listed in the annex to this article within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of this Agreement. this Treaty;
b. the measures that a Party adopts or maintains in the field of financial services in accordance with Chapter XII (Financial Services), to the extent that they are subject to that Chapter; neither
c. the measures adopted by a Party to restrict the participation of the investments of investors of the other Party in its territory, for reasons of public order or national security.
Article 16-03: National Treatment 1. Each Party shall accord to investors of the other Party and to investments of investors of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in similar circumstances, to its own investors and to investments of said investors.
2. Each Party shall grant investors of the other Party, with respect to investments that suffer losses in its territory due to armed conflicts or civil strife, in the event of an act of God or force majeure, non-discriminatory treatment with respect to any measure that it adopts or maintains in force. related to those losses.
Article 16-04: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment 1. Each Party shall provide to investors of the other Party and to investments of investors of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that which it accords, in similar circumstances, to investors and investments of investors of the other Party or of a country that is not a Party, except as provided in paragraph 2.
2. If a Party has granted special treatment to investors or their investments, coming from a country that is not a Party, by virtue of agreements that establish free trade zones, customs unions, common markets, economic or monetary unions, and similar institutions and provisions to avoid double taxation, said Party shall not be obliged to grant special treatment to investors or investments of investors of the other Party.
Article 16-05: Performance Requirements 1. No Party may impose or compel compliance with the following requirements or commitments, in relation to any investment in its territory:
a. export a certain level or percentage of goods or services;
b. reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;
c. acquire or use or grant preference to goods produced or services provided in its territory, or acquire goods from producers or services from service providers in its territory;
d. relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment;
and. restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to foreign currency earnings that they generate;
F. transfer to a person in their territory, technology, production process or other reserved knowledge, except when the requirement is imposed by a judicial or administrative court or competent authority to repair an alleged violation of competition laws or to
g. act in a manner that is not inconsistent with other provisions of this Agreement; nor act as the exclusive supplier of the goods it produces or services it provides for a specific, regional or global market.
This paragraph does not apply to any other requirement than those indicated in it.
2. No Party may condition the receipt of an incentive or the continued receipt thereof, to the fulfillment of the following requirements, in relation to any investment in its territory:
a. acquire or use or grant preference to goods produced in its territory or to purchase goods from producers in its territory;
b. reach a certain degree or percentage of national content;
c. relate in any way the volume or value of imports with the volume or value of exports, or with the amount of foreign currency inflows associated with said investment; neither
d. restrict the sales in its territory of the goods or services that said investment produces or provides, relating in any way said sales to the volume or value of its exports or to foreign currency earnings that they generate.
This paragraph does not apply to any other requirement than those indicated in it.
3. Nothing in this article shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to impose, in relation to any investment in its territory, requirements for the geographic location of productive units, job creation or labor training, or performance of research and development activities.
Article 16-06: Employment and business management The limitations regarding the number or proportion of foreigners who can work in a company or perform management or administrative functions as provided by the legislation of each Party, may not prevent or hinder the exercise by a investor control of his investment.
Article 16-07: Reservations and exceptions 1. Articles 16-03 through 16-06 do not apply to any inconsistent measure maintained or adopted by a Party, regardless of the level of government. Within a period not exceeding one year from the entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties shall register these measures in their schedules in the annex to this article. Any inconsistent measure adopted by a Party after the entry into force of this Agreement may not be more restrictive than those in force at the time such measure is enacted.
2. Articles 16-03, 16-04 and 16-06 do not apply to:
a. purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; neither
b. subsidies or contributions, including government loans, guarantees and insurance granted by a Party or by a State enterprise, except as provided in paragraph 2 of article 16-03.
3. The provisions contained in:
a. Subparagraphs a), b) and c) of paragraph 1 and) and b) of paragraph 2 of article 16-05 do not apply in relation to the requirements for qualification of goods and services with respect to export promotion programs;
b. Subparagraphs b), c), f) and g) of paragraph 1 and) and b) of paragraph 2 of Article 16-05 do not apply to purchases made by a Party or by a State enterprise; Y
c. Subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 of Article 16-05 do not apply to the content requirements imposed by an importing Party on goods to qualify for preferential tariffs or quotas.
Article 16-08: Transfers 1. Each Party shall allow all transfers related to the investment of an investor of the other Party in the territory of the Party, to be made freely and without delay. Those transfers include:
a. profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments, administrative expenses, technical assistance and other expenses, profits in kind and other amounts derived from the investment;
b. products derived from the sale or liquidation, total or partial, of the investment;
c. payments made pursuant to a contract to which an investor or an investor's investment is a party;
d. payments derived from compensation for expropriation, in accordance with article 16-09; either
and. payments resulting from a dispute resolution procedure under section B.
2. Each Party shall allow transfers to be made in freely convertible currency at the prevailing market exchange rate on the transfer date for spot transactions of the currency to be transferred, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 13- 18.
3. No Party may require its investors to make transfers of their income, profits or profits or other amounts derived from investments carried out in the territory of another Party, or attributable to them.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, the Parties may prevent the making of transfers, through the equitable and non-discriminatory application of their laws in the following cases:
a. bankruptcy, insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors;
b. issuance, trading and operations of securities;
c. criminal or administrative offenses;
d. reports of currency transfers or other monetary instruments;
and. guarantee of compliance with judgments or awards in a contentious proceeding; either
F. Establishment of the necessary instruments or mechanisms to ensure the payment of income taxes by means such as withholding the amount related to dividends or other concepts.
Article 16-09: Expropriation and compensation 1. Neither Party may nationalize or expropriate, directly or indirectly, an investment of an investor of the other Party in its territory, or take any measure equivalent to the expropriation or nationalization of that investment ("expropriation "), unless it is:
a. for reasons of public utility;
b. on non-discriminatory grounds;
c. with adherence to the principle of legality; Y
d. by compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4.
2. The compensation will be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation measure was carried out (date of expropriation), and will not reflect any change in value due to the fact that the intention to expropriate was carried out. known in advance of the date of expropriation. The valuation criteria will include the declared fiscal value of tangible assets, as well as other criteria that are appropriate to determine the fair market value.
3. The payment of the compensation will be made without delay and will be fully payable. The amount paid shall not be less than the equivalent amount that would have been paid for compensation in a freely convertible currency in the international financial market, on the date of expropriation, and this currency would have been converted at the current market price on the date of expropriation. valuation, plus the interest that would have been generated at a reasonable commercial rate for said currency selected by the Party in accordance with international parameters up to the date of payment.
Article 16-10: Special formalities and information requirements 1. Nothing in Article 16-03 shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining a measure that prescribes special formalities related to the establishment of investments by investors of the other Party, such as investments being established in accordance with the Party's laws and regulations, provided that such formalities do not substantially impair the protection afforded by a Party under this Chapter.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 16-03 and 16-04, the Parties may require an investor of the other Party or of its investment, in its territory, to provide routine information regarding that investment exclusively for the purpose of information or statistics. The Party will protect the information that is confidential, from any disclosure that could adversely affect the competitive situation of the investment or of the investor.
Article 16-11: Relationship with other chapters In case of incompatibility between a provision of this chapter and a provision of another, the provision of the latter shall prevail to the extent of the incompatibility.
Article 16-12: Denial of benefits A Party, after prior notification and consultation with the other Party, may partially or totally deny the benefits derived from this chapter to an investor of the other Party that is an enterprise of said Party and to investments of such investor, when the Party determines that investors from a non-Party country own or control the company and the company does not have significant business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is constituted or organized.
Article 16-13: Extraterritorial application of the legislation of a Party 1. The Parties, in relation to the investments of their investors constituted and organized in accordance with the laws and regulations of the other Party, may not exercise jurisdiction or adopt any measure that has by effect the extraterritorial application of its legislation or the obstruction of trade between the Parties, or between a Party and a non-Party country.
2. If any of the Parties fails to comply with the provisions of paragraph 1, the Party where the investment has been constituted may, at its discretion, adopt the measures and exercise the actions it deems necessary, in order to render the legislation or the measure in question and the barriers to trade resulting therefrom.
Article 16-14: Measures related to the environment 1. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an impediment for a Party to adopt, maintain or implement any measure, compatible with this chapter, that it deems appropriate to ensure that investments in their territory observe the ecological legislation.
2. The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage investment by relaxing domestic measures applicable to health, safety or the environment. Consequently, neither Party shall eliminate or undertake to exempt from the application of these measures the investment of an investor, as a means to induce the establishment, acquisition, expansion or maintenance of the investment in its territory. If a Party believes that the other Party has encouraged an investment in such a way, it may request consultations with that other Party.
Article 16-15: Promotion of investments and exchange of information 1. With the intention of significantly increasing reciprocal investment participation, the Parties shall prepare documents promoting investment opportunities and design mechanisms for their dissemination; likewise, the Parties will maintain and improve financial mechanisms that make the investments of one Party viable in the territory of the other Party.
2. The Parties shall disclose detailed information on:
a. investment opportunities in its territory, which can be developed by investors of the other Party;
b. opportunities for strategic alliances between investors of the Parties, through research and gathering of interests and partnership opportunities; Y
c. investment opportunities in specific economic sectors that are of interest to the Parties and their investors, according to the express request made by any of the Parties.
3. The Parties shall keep each other informed and updated regarding:
a. the investment opportunities referred to in paragraph 2, including the dissemination of available financial instruments that help increase investment in the territory of the Parties;
b. the laws, regulations or provisions that, directly or indirectly, affect foreign investment, including exchange and fiscal regimes; Y
c. the behavior of foreign investment in their respective territories.
Article 16-16: Double taxation The Parties, with the aim of promoting investments within their respective territories, by eliminating obstacles of a tax nature and monitoring compliance with tax obligations through the exchange of tax information, will initiate Negotiations leading to the conclusion of agreements to avoid double taxation, according to the calendar established between the competent authorities of the Parties.
Section B - Settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of the other Party
Article 16-17: Objective This section establishes a mechanism for the settlement of disputes of a legal nature in investment matters that arise as a consequence of the violation of an obligation established in section A that arise between a Party and an investor of the other Party from the entry into force of this Agreement related to events that occurred from that moment, and which ensures both equal treatment between investors of the Parties in accordance with the principle of international reciprocity, as well as the due exercise of the guarantee of hearing and defense within a legal process before an impartial tribunal.
Article 16-18: Claim by an investor of a Party, on its own account or on behalf of a company 1. Pursuant to this section, the investor of a Party may, on its own account or on behalf of a company of the other Party that is a moral person owned or controlled directly or indirectly, to submit to arbitration a claim based on the fact that the other Party or a State company of that Party has violated an obligation established in section A, provided and when the investor or his investment have suffered losses or damages by virtue of the violation or as a consequence of it.
2. The investor may not file a claim under this section, if more than three years have elapsed from the date on which he knew or should have known of the alleged violation, as well as of the losses or damages suffered.
3. When an investor files a lawsuit on behalf of a company that is a legal person owned or controlled directly or indirectly, and in parallel an investor who does not have control of a company files a lawsuit on behalf of as a result of the same acts, or two or more claims are submitted to arbitration by virtue of the same action taken by a Party, a consolidation tribunal shall examine such claims jointly, unless the tribunal determines that the interests of a disputing party are they would be harmed.
4. An investment may not submit a claim to arbitration under this section.
Article 16-19: Settlement of disputes through consultation and negotiation The disputing parties will first attempt to settle the dispute through consultation and negotiation.
Article 16-20: Notification of the intention to submit the claim to arbitration The disputing investor shall notify the disputing Party in writing of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration, at least 90 days before the claim is formally filed. The notification will state the following:
a. the name and domicile of the disputing investor and, when the claim has been made on behalf of a company, the denomination or business name and domicile of the same;
b. the provisions of this Agreement allegedly breached and any other applicable provision;
c. the facts on which the claim is based; Y
d. the relief requested and the approximate amount of damages claimed.
Article 16-21: Submission of the claim to arbitration 1. As long as six months have elapsed since the actions giving rise to the claim, a disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration in accordance with:
a. the ICSID Convention, provided that both the disputing Party and the investor Party are State parties thereto;
b. the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, when the disputing Party or the investing Party, but not both, are States parties to the ICSID Convention; either
c. the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.
2. When a company of a Party that is a legal person owned by an investor of the other Party or that is under its direct or indirect control alleges, in proceedings before a judicial or administrative court, that the other Party has allegedly violated an obligation of section A, the investor(s) of that company may not allege the alleged violation in an arbitration under section B.
3. Except as provided in Article 16-27, and provided that both the disputing Party and the Party of the disputing investor are States parties to the ICSID Convention, any dispute between them shall be submitted in accordance with subparagraph a) of paragraph 1.
4. The rules selected for an arbitration established pursuant to this chapter shall apply to the arbitration, except to the extent modified by this section.
Article 16-22: Conditions Preceding the Submission of a Claim to Arbitration 1. A disputing investor for its own account and an investor on behalf of a company may submit a claim to arbitration in accordance with this section, only if:
a. in the case of the investor on his own account, he agrees to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures established in this section;
b. in the case of an investor representing a company, both the investor and the company agree to submit to arbitration under the terms of the procedures established in this section; Y
c. Both the investor and a company of the other Party waive their right to initiate proceedings before any judicial or administrative court of either Party, with respect to the measure allegedly in violation of the provisions of this chapter, unless remedies are exhausted. administrative proceedings before the executing authorities of the allegedly infringing measure provided for in the legislation of the disputing Party.
2. The consent and waiver required by this article shall be in writing, delivered to the disputing Party, and included in the submission of the claim to arbitration.
Article 16-23: Consent to arbitration 1. Each Party consents to submit claims to arbitration in accordance with the procedures and requirements indicated in this section.
2. The submission of a claim to arbitration by a disputing investor will comply with the requirements indicated in:
a. Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Center) and the ICSID Additional Facility Rules which require the written consent of the Parties;
b. Article II of the New York Convention, which requires a written agreement; Y
c. Article I of the Inter-American Convention, which requires an agreement.
Article 16-24: Number of arbitrators and method of appointment Except as provided in article 16-27, and notwithstanding that the disputing parties agree otherwise, the tribunal will be made up of three arbitrators. Each disputing party will appoint an arbitrator; the third arbitrator, who will be the president of the arbitral tribunal, will be appointed by the disputing parties by mutual agreement, but will not be a national of any of them.
Article 16-25: Composition of the tribunal in the event that a disputing party does not appoint an arbitrator or an agreement is not reached in the appointment of the president of the tribunal 1. The Secretary General shall appoint the arbitrators in arbitration proceedings, in accordance with this section.
2. When a tribunal, other than that established pursuant to Article 16-27, is not established within 90 days from the date the claim is submitted to arbitration, the Secretary General, at the request of either of the disputing parties will appoint, at its discretion, the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed, but not the president of the tribunal, who will be appointed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3.
3. The Secretary General shall appoint the president of the tribunal from among the arbitrators from the list referred to in paragraph 4, ensuring that the president of the tribunal is not a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an arbitrator available to preside over the tribunal is not found on the list, the Secretary-General shall designate, from the ICSID panel of arbitrators, the president of the tribunal, provided that he is of a different nationality from that of the disputing Party or that of the Party of the disputing investor.
4. As of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the Parties will establish and maintain a list of five arbitrators as possible presidents of the tribunal, who meet the qualities established in the ICSID Convention and in the rules contemplated in article 16-21. and who have experience in international law and investment matters. The members of the list will be appointed by consensus regardless of their nationality.
Article 16-26: Consent to Appointment of Arbitrators For purposes of Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Article 7 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, and without prejudice to objecting to an arbitrator based on paragraph 3 of article 16-25 or on a basis other than nationality:
a. the disputing Party accepts the appointment of each member of a tribunal established under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; Y
b. A disputing investor, whether on its own behalf or on behalf of a company, may submit a claim to arbitration or continue proceedings under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, only provided that the disputing investor and, if their case, the company they represent, express their consent in writing on the appointment of each of the members of the court.
Article 16-27: Consolidation of Proceedings 1. A consolidation tribunal established pursuant to this article shall be established in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of said rules, except as provided in this section.
2. When an accumulation tribunal determines that the claims submitted to arbitration under Article 16-22 raise issues of fact and law in common, the accumulation tribunal, in the interest of a fair and efficient resolution, and having heard the disputing parties, may assume jurisdiction, process and resolve:
a. all or part of the claims, jointly; either
b. one or more of the claims on the basis that it will contribute to the resolution of the others.
3. A disputing party that seeks consolidation to be determined under the terms of paragraph 2, shall request the Secretary General to set up a consolidation tribunal and shall specify in its request:
a. the name and address of the disputing parties against whom the accumulation agreement is sought;
b. the nature of the cumulation agreement requested; Y
c. the grounds on which the requested petition is based.
4. Within a period of 60 days from the date of the petition, the Secretary General will install a consolidation tribunal made up of three arbitrators. The Secretary General shall appoint from the list of arbitrators referred to in paragraph 4 of article 16-25, the president of the accumulation tribunal, who shall not be a national of the disputing Party or a national of the Party of the disputing investor. In the event that an available arbitrator is not found on the list to preside over the accumulation tribunal, the Secretary General shall designate, from the ICSID panel of arbitrators, the president of said tribunal, who shall not be a national of the disputing Party nor a national of the Part of the contending investor. The Secretary General will appoint the other two members of the accumulation tribunal from the list referred to in paragraph 4 of Article 16-25 and, when they are not available on said list, will select them from the ICSID panel of arbitrators; If there are no arbitrators available on that panel, the Secretary General will make the remaining appointments at his discretion. One of the members shall be a national of the disputing Party and the other member of the consolidation tribunal shall be a national of a Party of the disputing investors.
5. When an accumulation tribunal has been established, the disputing investor who has submitted a claim to arbitration, and has not been named in the application for accumulation made in accordance with paragraph 3, may request in writing the accumulation tribunal to include you in the joinder request made in accordance with paragraph 2, and specify in the joinder request:
a. the name and domicile of the disputing investor and, where appropriate, the name or business name and domicile of the company;
b. the nature of the cumulation agreement requested; Y
c. the grounds on which the petition is based.
6. The accumulation court will provide, at the expense of the interested investor, a copy of the accumulation petition to the disputing investors against whom the accumulation agreement is sought.
7. A tribunal established under section 16-21 shall not have jurisdiction to decide a claim, or part thereof, over which a consolidation tribunal has assumed jurisdiction.
8. At the request of a disputing party, a consolidation tribunal may, pending its decision pursuant to paragraph 2, order that the proceedings of a tribunal established pursuant to article 16-21 be stayed, pending a ruling on the origin of the accumulation.
Article 16-28: Notification to the Secretariat 1. A disputing Party shall deliver to the Secretariat, within 15 days from the date it is received by the disputing Party:
a. a request for arbitration made pursuant to paragraph 1 of article 36 of the ICSID Convention;
b. a notice of arbitration under Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules; either
c. a notice of arbitration under the terms provided by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.
2. A Party to the dispute shall deliver to the Secretariat a copy of the request made under the terms of paragraph 3 of Article 16-27:
a. within 15 days of receipt of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing investor; either
b. within 15 days from the date of the request, in the case of a request made by the disputing Party.
3. A disputing Party shall provide the Secretariat with a copy of a request made under the terms of paragraph 6 of Article 16-27 within 15 days from the date of receipt of the request.
4. The Secretariat will keep a public record of the documents referred to in this article.
Article 16-29: Notification to the other Party The disputing Party shall deliver to the other Party:
a. written notice of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration no later than 30 days after the date of submission of the claim to arbitration; Y
b. copies of all communications filed in the arbitration.
Article 16-30: Participation by a Party Upon written notice to the disputing parties, a Party may submit submissions to any tribunal established under this section on a question of interpretation of this Agreement.
Article 16-31: Documentation 1. A Party shall, at its own expense, be entitled to receive from the disputing Party a copy of:
a. evidence offered to any court established under this section; Y
b. written communications submitted by the disputing parties.
2. A Party receiving information pursuant to paragraph 1 shall treat the information as if it were a disputing Party.
Article 16-32: Seat of Arbitration The seat of arbitration shall be located in the territory of the disputing Party, unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, in which case any court established under this section shall conduct the arbitration proceeding in the territory of a Party that is a State party to the New York Convention, which shall be elected in accordance with:
a. the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those Rules or by the ICSID Convention; either
b. the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, if the arbitration is governed by those Rules.
Article 16-33: Applicable Law 1. Any tribunal established under this section shall decide disputes submitted to it in accordance with this Agreement and the applicable rules of international law.
2. The Commission's interpretation of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on any court established pursuant to this section.
Article 16-34: Interpretation of the annexes 1. When a Party alleges as a defense that a measure allegedly in violation falls within the scope of a reservation or exception inscribed in the annex to article 16-07, at the request of the disputing Party, any court established pursuant to this section shall request an interpretation from the Commission on that matter. The Commission, within a period of 60 days from the delivery of the request, will present its interpretation in writing to said court.
2. The Commission's interpretation submitted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be binding on any tribunal established pursuant to this section. If the Commission does not submit an interpretation within a period of 60 days, said court will decide on the matter.
Article 16-35: Provisional or Precautionary Measures A court established under this section may apply to domestic courts, or order disputing parties, provisional measures of protection to preserve the rights of the disputing party or to ensure that the jurisdiction of the court take full effect. That court may not order compliance with or suspension of the application of the presumably infringing measure referred to in article 16-18.
Article 16-36: Final Award 1. When a tribunal established pursuant to this section makes an award unfavorable to a Party, such tribunal may only order:
a. the payment of pecuniary damages and the corresponding interest; either
b. the restitution of the property, in which case the award will provide that the disputing Party may pay pecuniary damages, plus the applicable interest, instead of the restitution.
2. When the claim is made by an investor representing a company:
a. the award that provides for the restitution of the property will provide that the restitution be granted to the company; Y
b. the award that awards pecuniary damages and corresponding interest will provide that the sum of money be paid to the company.
3. The award will be rendered without prejudice to the rights that a third party with a legal interest may have regarding the reparation of the damages suffered, in accordance with the applicable legislation.
Article 16-37: Finality and Enforcement of the Award 1. The award rendered by any court established pursuant to this section shall be binding only on the disputing parties and only with respect to the specific case.
2. Subject to paragraph 3 and the review procedure applicable to an interim award, a disputing party shall abide by and comply with the award without delay.
3. A disputing party may request enforcement of a final award provided that:
a. in the case of a final award rendered under the ICSID Convention:
i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without any disputing party requesting its review or annulment; either
ii) the review or annulment procedures have been completed; Y
b. in the case of a final award under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:
i) three months have elapsed from the date the award was rendered without any disputing party having initiated a proceeding to review, dismiss or annul it; either
ii) a court of the disputing Party has dismissed or admitted a request for reconsideration or annulment of the award that one of the disputing parties has submitted to the national courts in accordance with its law, and this decision cannot be appealed.
4. Each Party shall provide for the due enforcement of an award in its territory.
5. When a disputing Party fails to comply with or does not comply with a final award, the Commission, upon receipt of a request from a Party whose investor was a party to the arbitration, shall form a tribunal in accordance with Chapter XX (Dispute Settlement). The requesting Party may invoke such procedures to obtain:
a. a determination that the breach or contempt of the terms of the final award is contrary to the obligations of this Agreement; Y
b. a recommendation that the Party conform to and observe the final award.
6. The disputing investor may resort to the enforcement of an arbitral award in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the New York Convention or the Inter-American Convention, regardless of whether or not the procedures contemplated in paragraph 5 have been initiated.
7. For the purposes of Article I of the New York Convention and Article I of the Inter-American Convention, the claim submitted to arbitration pursuant to this section shall be deemed to arise from a commercial relationship or operation.
Article 16-38: General Provisions Moment when the claim is considered submitted to arbitration
1. A claim is considered submitted to arbitration under the terms of this section when:
a. the request for arbitration under paragraph 1 of article 36 of the ICSID Convention has been received by the Secretary-General;
b. the notice of arbitration, pursuant to Article 2 of Part C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, has been received by the Secretary-General; either
c. the notice of arbitration provided for in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules has been received by the disputing Party.
Documents delivery
2. The notification and other documents will be delivered at the place designated by each Party, in accordance with the annex to this article.
Payments under insurance or guarantee contracts
3. In an arbitration under this section, a Party shall not adduce as a defense, counterclaim, right of set off, or otherwise, that the disputing investor received or will receive, pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract, indemnity or other compensation for all or part of the presumed damages for which restitution is requested.
Publication of awards
4. Final awards will be published only if there is a written agreement between the Parties.
Article 16-39: Exclusions The dispute resolution provisions of this section and those of Chapter XX (Dispute Resolution) shall not apply to the cases contained in the annex to this article.
Annex to Article 16-38: Delivery of Documents
The delivery of the notification and other documents will be made:
a. in the case of Mexico, to the General Directorate of Foreign Investment of the Secretariat of Commerce and Industrial Development, or any other place that the Secretariat itself designates, by notification to the other Party, and
b. in the case of Nicaragua, to its Secretariat.
Annex to Article 16-39: Exclusions of Mexico
The resolutions adopted by a Party by virtue of paragraph 2 of Article 16-02, nor the resolution adopted by a Party under paragraph 2 of Article 16-02, nor the resolution that prohibits or restricts the acquisition of an investment in its territory that is owned or controlled by nationals of that Party, by an investor of another Party, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Chapter XVII : Intellectual Property
Section A - General provisions and basic principles
Article 17-01: Definitions For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be understood as:
Brussels Convention : the Convention Relative to the Distribution of Program-Carrying Signals Transmitted by Satellite, 1974;
Rome Convention – The Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations, 1961; Berne Convention: the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 1971;
Geneva Convention : the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against Unauthorized Reproduction of their Phonograms, 1971;
Paris Convention : the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 1967; intellectual property rights: all categories of intellectual property that are protected by this chapter, in the terms indicated therein;
nationals of the other Party : with respect to the relevant intellectual property right, persons who would meet the eligibility criteria for protection under the Berne Convention, the Geneva Convention, the Rome Convention, the Brussels Convention and, in his case, the Paris Convention;
publicthat it has not been formed with the main purpose of receiving those executions and communications of works; Y
encrypted program-carrying satellite signal : one that is transmitted in a form by which auditory or visual characteristics, or both, are modified or altered to prevent reception by persons lacking equipment designed to eliminate the effects of that modification or alteration of the program carried on that signal.
Article 17-02: Protection of intellectual property rights 1. Each Party shall grant in its territory to the nationals of the other Party adequate and effective protection and defense of intellectual property rights and shall ensure that the measures aimed at defending such rights do not, in turn, become obstacles to legitimate trade.
2. Each Party may grant in its legislation a broader protection of intellectual property rights than that required in this chapter, provided that such protection is not incompatible with it.
3. The Parties may freely establish the appropriate method for applying the provisions of this Chapter, within the framework of their own legal system and practice.
Article 17-03: Provisions on the matter 1. In order to grant adequate and effective protection and defense of intellectual property rights, the Parties shall apply, at least, the provisions contained in this chapter and the substantive provisions of:
a. the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 1971 (Berne Convention);
b. the Geneva Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against the Unauthorized Reproduction of their Phonograms, 1971 (Geneva Convention);
c. the Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations, 1961 (Rome Convention);
d. the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property. 1967 (Paris Convention); Y
and. the Convention Relative to the Distribution of Program-Carrying Signals Transmitted by Satellite, 1974 (Brussels Convention)
2. In relation to subparagraphs a), b) and c) of paragraph 1, in the event that a Party is not a party to the aforementioned agreements and conventions, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the substantive provisions shall apply. of the same in accordance with the provisions of the annex to this article.
Article 17-04: National Treatment 1. Each Party shall grant to the nationals of the other Party, treatment no less favorable than that granted to its own nationals in matters of protection and defense of intellectual property rights contemplated in this chapter, including patents, utility models and industrial designs, and, where appropriate, plant varieties, subject to the exceptions already provided for in the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention, and the Paris Convention.
2. Neither Party may require the nationals of the other Party to comply with any formality or condition to acquire copyrights or related rights, as a condition for granting national treatment under this article.
Article 17-05: Exceptions Each Party may resort to the exceptions indicated in Article 17-04 in relation to judicial and administrative procedures for the protection and defense of intellectual property rights, including the designation of a legal domicile or the designation of an agent within the territory of the Party, provided that such exception:
a. it is necessary to ensure compliance with provisions that are not incompatible with those of this chapter; Y
b. is not applied in such a way as to constitute a disguised restriction on trade.
Article 17-06: Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment With respect to the protection of intellectual property, any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity that a Party grants to nationals of any other country shall be granted immediately and without conditions to nationals of the other part. Any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by a Party that:
a. are derived from international agreements on judicial assistance and law enforcement, of a general nature and not limited in particular to the protection of intellectual property;
b. have been granted in accordance with the provisions of the Berne Convention or the Rome Convention that authorize that the treatment granted is not based on national treatment but on the treatment given in the other country; Y
c. refer to the rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations that are not provided for in this chapter.
Article 17-07: Control of abusive or anti-competitive practices and conditions Each Party may apply appropriate measures, provided they are compatible with the provisions of this chapter, to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by their holders or the resource to practices that unreasonably limit trade or are detrimental to the international transfer of technology.
Article 17-08: Cooperation to eliminate trade in goods that infringe intellectual property rights The Parties shall cooperate with a view to eliminating trade in goods that infringe intellectual property rights. To that end, the Parties shall establish and publicize information centers dedicated to exchanging information relating to trade in those goods.
Section B - Trademarks
Article 17-09: Matter subject to protection 1. Any sign or combination of signs that make it possible to distinguish the goods or services of one person from those of another may constitute a trademark, as these are considered sufficiently distinctive or capable of identifying the goods or services to be applied, compared to those of the same species or class. The marks will include service and collective marks. Likewise, certification marks may be included. Each Party may establish, as a condition for the registration of a trademark, that the signs be visible or capable of graphic representation.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, each Party may deny, in accordance with its laws, the registration of marks that:
a. incorporate, among others, national symbols or those of other national or international public entities, signs, words or expressions contrary to morality, public order or good customs;
b. may be misleading as to their origin, nature or quality; either
c. suggest a connection with other brands that cause a risk of confusion or association.
3. The Parties may make the possibility of registration subject to use. However, the application for registration will not be subject to the condition of effective use of a trademark. No Party shall deny an application for registration solely on the grounds that the intended use has not occurred before the expiration of a period of three years, from the date of the application for registration.
4. The nature of the goods and services to which a trademark is applied will not be, in any case, an obstacle to its registration.
5. The Parties will publish each trademark before its registration or soon after it, in accordance with their legislation, offering interested persons a reasonable opportunity to oppose their registration or to request its cancellation.
Article 17-10 : Rights conferred The owner of a registered trademark shall have the right to prevent any third party without his consent from using identical or similar signs in commerce for goods or services that are identical or similar to those for which that the owner's trademark has been registered, when such use creates a probability of confusion. It will be presumed that there is a probability of confusion when an identical or similar sign is used for identical or similar goods or services. The aforementioned rights will be granted without prejudice to previously acquired rights and will not affect the possibility of the Parties to recognize rights based on use.
Article 17-11: Well-known marks 1. The Parties, ex officio if their legislation allows it, or at the request of the interested party, will refuse or invalidate the registration and will prohibit the use of a trademark or service mark that constitutes reproduction, imitation or translation, likely to create confusion, of a well-known mark and used for identical or similar goods. It shall be understood that a mark is well-known in a Party when a specific sector of the public or business circles of the Party knows the mark as a result of commercial activities carried out in a Party or outside it, by a person who uses that mark. in connection with your goods or services. In order to demonstrate the brand's notoriety,
2. The Parties will not register as a trademark those signs that are the same or similar to a well-known trademark, to be applied to any good or service, when the use of the trademark by the person requesting its registration could create confusion or a risk of association with the person. that uses that mark in connection with its goods or services; constitutes an unfair advantage of the prestige of the brand; or suggests a connection with it, and could harm the interests of said person. This provision shall not apply when the trademark applicant is the owner of the well-known trademark in a Party.
3. The person who initiates an action for nullity of a trademark registration granted in contravention of paragraph 2, must prove that he has applied in a Party for the registration of the well-known trademark whose ownership he claims.
Article 17-12: Exceptions The parties may establish limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as the correct use of descriptive terms, provided that the exceptions take into account the legitimate interests of the owner of the trademark and of third parties.
Article 17-13: Duration of protection The initial registration of a trademark will have a duration of ten years from the date of filing of the application or from the date of its granting and may be renewed indefinitely for successive periods of ten years. , provided the conditions for renewal are met.
Article 17-14: Use of the mark 1. Each Party shall require the use of a mark to maintain registration. It will be understood that a brand is in use when the goods or services that it distinguishes have been placed on the market or are available on the market with that brand, in the quantity and in the manner that normally corresponds, considering the nature of the goods. or services and the modalities according to which their commercialization is carried out in the market.
2. The registration may be canceled or declared expired due to lack of use, only after an uninterrupted period of non-use has elapsed for no more than five years immediately prior to the request for cancellation or declaration of expiration, unless the owner of the registration the trademark demonstrates valid reasons supported by the existence of obstacles to use. Circumstances arising, regardless of the will of the owner of the trademark, that constitute an obstacle to its use, such as import restrictions or other government requirements applicable to goods or services, will be recognized as valid reasons for non-use. identified by the brand.
3. For purposes of maintaining the record, the use of a trademark by a person other than the owner of the trademark will be recognized, when such use is subject to the control of the owner.
Article 17-15: Other requirements The use of a trademark shall not be hindered in commerce by special requirements, such as use that diminishes the function of the mark as an indication of origin, or use with another mark, or use in a manner that impairs the ability of the mark to distinguish the goods or services of one person from those of other persons.
Article 17-16: Licensing and assignment of trademarks Each Party may establish conditions for the licensing and assignment of trademarks. Compulsory trademark licenses will not be allowed. The owner of a registered trademark will have the right to assign it with or without the transfer of the company to which the trademark belongs. However, each Party may condition the assignment of the trademark when it forms part of the commercial name of the seller, in which case it may only be transferred with the company or establishment that that name identifies.
Section C - Geographical indications or origin and appellations of origin
Article 17-17: Protection of geographical indications or origin and denominations of origin 1. For the purposes of the provisions of this chapter, denomination of origin shall be understood as the geographical denomination of a country, region or a locality that serves to designate a good as originating in the territory of a country or a region or a locality of that territory, and whose quality or characteristics are due exclusively to the geographical environment, including natural factors and human factors.
2. For the same purposes, a geographical indication or origin shall be understood as the geographical name of a country, region or locality that is used in the presentation of a good to indicate its place of origin, provenance, production, collection or extraction.
3. Designations of origin protected in a Party shall not be considered common or generic to distinguish a good, while their protection subsists in the country of origin.
4. The Parties, ex officio if their legislation allows it, or at the request of an interested party, will deny or invalidate the registration of a trademark that contains or consists of a geographical indication or appellation of origin, with respect to goods not originating from the indicated territory, if the use of that indication in the mark for those goods, in that country, is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true place of origin.
Section D - Protection of Undisclosed Information
Article 17-18: Protection of undisclosed information 1. The Parties shall grant protection to industrial or commercial secrets, understood as those that incorporate information of industrial or commercial application that, kept confidential, means for a person to obtain or maintain a competitive advantage over third parties in carrying out economic activities.
2. Each Party shall ensure that the holder of an industrial or commercial secret has the legal means to prevent these secrets from being disclosed, acquired or used by third parties without the consent of the person who legally has control of the information, in a manner contrary to fair trade practices, such as breach of contract, breach of trust, incitement to infringe, and the acquisition of undisclosed information by third parties who knew, or negligently did not know, that the acquisition involved such practices , to the extent that:
a. the information is secret, in the sense that, as a whole or in the precise configuration and composition of its elements, it is not generally known or easily accessible to people in the circles that normally handle the type of information that is treat;
b. the information has a commercial value because it is secret; Y
c. in the given circumstances, the person legally in control has taken reasonable steps to keep it secret.
3. In order to grant protection, each Party may require that an industrial or commercial secret be recorded in documents, electronic or magnetic means, optical discs, microfilms, films or other similar instruments.
4. No Party may limit the duration of protection for industrial or commercial secrets, while the conditions described in subparagraphs a), b) and c) of paragraph 2 exist.
5. No Party shall discourage or prevent the voluntary licensing of trade or trade secrets by imposing excessive or discriminatory conditions on such licences, or conditions that dilute the value of trade or trade secrets.
6. If, as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmaceutical chemical goods or agrochemical goods using new chemical constituents, a Party requires the submission of unpublished experimental or other data necessary to determine the safe and effective use of those goods, that Party shall protect data submitted by individuals, where the generation of such data involves considerable effort, except where publication is necessary to protect the public or unless steps are taken to ensure protection of the data against any unfair commercial use.
Section E - Copyright
Article 17-19: Copyright 1. Each Party shall protect the works covered by Article 2 of the Berne Convention, including any others that incorporate an original expression in the sense that this term is conferred by that Convention, such as television programs. computing, or the compilations of data that for reasons of selection, compendium, arrangement or disposition of its content constitute creations of an intellectual nature.
2. The protection conferred on compilations of data shall not extend to the data or materials themselves, nor shall it be granted to the detriment of any copyright that exists in such data or materials.
3. Each Party shall grant authors or their successors in title the rights set forth in the Berne Convention, with respect to the works referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, including the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. the graphic edition;
b. translation into any language or dialect;
c. the adaptation and inclusion in phonograms, videograms, cinematographic films and other audiovisual works;
d. communication to the public;
and. reproduction by any means or in any form;
F. the first public distribution of the original and each copy of the work by sale, rental, loan or any other means;
g. the importation into the territory of a Party of copies of the work made without the authorization of the right holder; Y
h. any form of use, process or system known or to be known.
4. At least with respect to computer programs, the Parties shall grant authors and their successors the right to authorize or prohibit commercial leasing to the public of originals or copies of their works protected by copyright.
5. In the case of computer programs, the authorization of the author or beneficiary will not be necessary when the copy of the computer program does not constitute in itself the essential object of the lease.
6. Each Party shall provide that for copyright and related rights:
a. Any person who acquires or holds economic rights may, freely and separately, transfer them by contract for the purposes of exploitation and enjoyment by the assignee; Y
b. Any person who acquires or holds these economic rights by virtue of a contract, including employment contracts that imply the creation of any type of work and phonograms, has the capacity to exercise those rights in their own name and to fully enjoy the derived benefits. of those rights.
7. Each Party shall circumscribe the limitations or exceptions to the rights established in this article to determined special cases that do not impede the normal exploitation of the work or cause unreasonable prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder.
8. Copyright is permanent for the life of the copyright. After his death, those who have legitimately acquired rights will enjoy them for a term of at least 50 years. When the duration of the protection of a work is calculated on a basis other than the life of a natural person, that duration will be:
a. not less than 50 years counted from the end of the calendar year of the publication or authorized disclosure of the work; either
b. in the absence of its publication or authorized disclosure, 50 years from the end of the year in which the work was carried out.
Section F - Related Rights
Article 17-20: Performers 1. Each Party shall grant performers the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. the fixation of their unfixed performances and the reproduction of that fixation;
b. communication to the public, transmission and retransmission by wireless means; Y
c. any other form of use of their interpretations or performances.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply once a performer has consented to their performance being incorporated into a visual or audiovisual fixation.
Article 17-21: Producers of Phonograms 1. Each Party shall grant to the producer of a phonogram the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. direct or indirect reproduction of the phonogram;
b. the importation into the territory of the Party of copies of the phonogram made without the authorization of the producer; Y
c. the first public distribution of the original and of each copy of the phonogram by sale, lease or any other means.
2. Each Party shall confer on producers of phonograms and all other holders of rights over phonograms, as determined by its legislation, the right to authorize or prohibit commercial leasing to the public of originals or copies of protected phonograms. However, if upon the entry into force of this Agreement, a Party applies a system of equitable remuneration of right holders with regard to the leasing of phonograms, it may maintain that system, provided that such leasing is not causing material impairment. of the exclusive rights of reproduction of the holders of those rights.
Article 17-22: Broadcasting Organizations 1. Each Party shall grant to broadcasting organizations the right to authorize or prohibit:
a. the fixation and reproduction of the fixations of their broadcasts;
b. the retransmission, the subsequent distribution, as well as the communication to the public of its broadcasts; Y
c. the receipt, in connection with commercial activities, of their broadcasts.
2. Violations of the rights mentioned in paragraph 1 will be cause for civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with the legislation of each Party.
Article 17-23: Term of protection of neighboring rights The duration of the protection granted under this chapter to performers and phonogram producers may not be less than 50 years, counted from the end of the calendar year. in which the fixation was made or the performance took place. The duration of the protection granted to broadcasting organizations may not be less than 20 years, counted from the end of the calendar year in which the broadcasting took place.
Article 17-24: Limitations or exceptions to neighboring rights 1. The protection provided for in this chapter, with regard to the rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organizations, will not affect in any way the protection of copyright on literary or artistic works, nor can it be interpreted in detriment of said protection.
2. Each Party shall circumscribe the limitations or exceptions to the rights established in this article, to determined special cases, which do not impede the normal exploitation of the phonogram, nor cause unjustified prejudice to the legitimate interests of the right holder to the extent permitted by the Convention. from Rome.
Article 17-25: Miscellaneous Provisions 1. Each Party may grant protection to rights over:
a. titles or heads of a newspaper, magazine, cinematographic newsreel and, in general, any periodical publication or diffusion;
b. fictitious or symbolic characters in literary works, comic strips or in any periodical publication, when they have marked originality and are regularly or periodically used;
c. characterization human characters used in artistic performances, artistic names, as well as artistic denominations;
d. original graphic features that are distinctive to the work or collection in its use; Y
and. characteristics of advertising promotions when a marked originality is presented, except for commercial advertisements.
2. The duration of the protection of these rights shall be determined by the legislation of each Party.
Section G - Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights
Article 17-26 : General Provisions 1. Each Party shall guarantee that its legislation establishes procedures for the enforcement of intellectual property rights, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 17-27 to 17-30 that allow the adoption of effective measures. against any infringing action of the intellectual property rights referred to in this chapter, including expeditious resources to prevent infringements and resources that constitute an effective means of dissuading new infringements. These procedures will be applied in such a way as to avoid the creation of obstacles to legitimate trade and will provide safeguards against its abuse.
2. Procedures relating to the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and equitable. These procedures will not be unnecessarily complicated or burdensome, nor will they involve unreasonable time limits or undue delay.
3. Decisions on the merits of a case will be formulated in writing and will contain the reasons on which they are based. Such decisions shall at least be made available to the parties to the dispute, without undue delay, and shall be based only on evidence about which the parties have been given an opportunity to be heard.
4. The parties to the dispute shall be given the opportunity for a review by a judicial authority of the final administrative decisions and of at least the legal aspects of all first instance judicial decisions on the merits of the case, subject to the provisions in matter of jurisdiction of the national laws relative to the importance of a case. However, it will not be mandatory to give them the opportunity to review the acquittals issued in criminal cases.
5. It is understood that the application of intellectual property rights does not impose any obligation to establish a judicial system for the enforcement of intellectual property rights different from the one already existing for the application of legislation in general. Likewise, it does not create any obligation with respect to the distribution of resources between the means destined to achieve the observance of intellectual property rights and those destined to the observance of laws in general.
Article 17-27: Specific procedural aspects and remedies in civil and administrative proceedings 1. Each Party shall make civil judicial proceedings available to rights holders for the defense of any intellectual property right included in this chapter and shall provide that:
a. Defendants have the right to receive timely written notice stating in sufficient detail the basis for the claim;
b. the parties in a proceeding are authorized to be represented by an independent lawyer;
c. the proceedings do not impose excessive requirements for mandatory personal appearances;
d. all parties to a proceeding are duly empowered to substantiate their claims and present relevant evidence; Y
and. procedures include means to identify and protect confidential information.
2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to:
a. order that, when a party to a proceeding has presented sufficient evidence to which it reasonably has access as a basis for its allegations, and has identified any pertinent evidence to substantiate its allegations that is under the control of the other party, the latter provide that proof, subject, where appropriate, to the conditions that guarantee the protection of confidential information;
b. issue preliminary or final resolutions, of a positive or negative nature, in the event that one of the parties to a proceeding, voluntarily and without valid reason, denies access to evidence or does not provide relevant evidence under its control within a reasonable period of time or obstructs the significantly a procedure related to a case of defense of intellectual property rights. Those resolutions will be issued based on the evidence presented, including the claim or the arguments presented by the party that adversely affects the denial of access to the evidence, provided that the parties are granted the opportunity to be heard regarding the allegations. or the tests;
c. order a party to a proceeding to desist from the alleged infringement until the final resolution of the case, including to prevent imported goods that imply infringement of an intellectual property right from entering the commercial circuits of its jurisdiction. This order shall be put into effect at least immediately after the customs clearance of those goods;
d. order the infringer of an intellectual property right to pay the right owner adequate damages as compensation for damages the right owner suffered as a result of the infringement, when the infringer knew that he was engaged in infringing activity; or had reasonable grounds to know;
and. order an infringer of an intellectual property right to cover the right holder's expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees; Y
F. order a party to a proceeding, at whose request action has been taken and who has abused defense proceedings, to provide adequate compensation to any party wrongly subjected or restrained in the proceeding, for damages suffered, to cause of that abuse and to pay that party's expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees.
3. With regard to the power indicated in subparagraph c) of paragraph 2, no Party shall be obliged to grant that power with respect to the matter object of protection that had been acquired and ordered by a person before that person knew that when dealing with with that matter would imply the infringement of an intellectual property right or had reasonable grounds to know so.
4. With respect to the power indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 2, each Party may, at least with regard to works protected by copyright and phonograms, grant the judicial authorities the power to order the recovery of profits or the payment of previously determined damages, or both, even if the infringer did not know that he was engaged in infringing activity or had no reasonable basis to know.
5. Each Party shall provide that, in order to effectively deter violations, its judicial authorities have the power to order that:
a. the assets that they have determined to infringe intellectual property rights are withdrawn from commercial circuits without compensation of any kind in such a way as to avoid any damage to the owner of the right, or are destroyed as long as it is not contrary to the current constitutional provisions; Y
b. the materials and instruments that have been used predominantly for the production of goods subject to infringements are, without compensation of any kind, withdrawn from commercial circuits in such a way that the risks of subsequent infringements are reduced to a minimum.
6. In considering the issuance of the orders referred to in paragraph 5, the judicial authorities of each Party shall take into account the proportionality between the seriousness of the offense and the measures ordered, as well as the interests of other persons, including those of the right holder. Regarding counterfeit goods, the simple removal of the illicitly adhered mark will not be enough to allow customs clearance of the goods, except in exceptional cases such as those in which the authority orders their donation to charitable institutions.
7. With respect to the application of any law related to the protection or defense of intellectual property rights, each Party shall only exempt the authorities and public officials from the responsibility that the appropriate corrective measures give rise to, when the actions have been adopted or disposed of in good faith during the administration of those laws.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 17-26 to 17-30, when a Party is sued for infringement of an intellectual property right as a result of the use, by it or on its behalf, of that right, that Party may establish as the only recourse available against it, the payment of adequate compensation to the owner of the right, according to the circumstances of the case, taking into account the economic value of the use.
9. Each Party shall provide that where relief of a civil nature may be ordered as a result of administrative proceedings on the merits of a matter, those proceedings conform to principles that are essentially equivalent to those set forth in this Article.
10. Subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 and paragraph 9 will be applied taking into account the provisions of the annex to this article.
Article 17-28: Precautionary Measures 1. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order prompt and effective precautionary measures to:
a. prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right and, in particular, prevent the introduction of allegedly infringing goods into commerce within its jurisdiction, including measures to prevent the entry of imported goods at least immediately after customs clearance; Y
b. retain relevant evidence related to the alleged infringement.
2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order the applicant for precautionary measures to present any evidence to which it reasonably has access and which those authorities consider necessary to determine, with a sufficient degree of certainty, whether:
a. the applicant is the owner of the right;
b. the applicant's right is being infringed, or that such infringement is imminent; Y
c. any delay in issuing such measures is likely to cause irreparable damage to the right holder or if there is a verifiable risk that evidence will be destroyed.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order the applicant to post a bond or equivalent guarantee that is sufficient to protect the interests of the respondent and to prevent abuse.
4. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order an applicant for precautionary measures to provide any information necessary for the identification of the relevant assets by the authority executing the precautionary measures.
5. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities have the power to order precautionary measures in which the counterparty is not given a hearing, in particular, when there is a probability that any delay will cause irreparable damage to the holder of the right or when there is a verifiable risk of the evidence being destroyed.
6. Each Party shall provide that when precautionary measures are taken by the judicial authorities of that Party in which the other party is not given a hearing:
a. the affected person is notified of those measures without delay and at the latest immediately after the execution of the measures; Y
b. the respondent, upon request, obtain judicial review of the measures by the judicial authorities of that Party, in order to decide, within a reasonable period of time after notification of those measures, whether they will be modified , revoked or confirmed.
7. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 6, each Party shall provide that, at the request of the respondent, its judicial authorities revoke or otherwise render ineffective the precautionary measures taken on the basis of paragraphs 1 through 5, if the proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case are not initiated:
a. within a reasonable period of time determined by the judicial authority ordering the measures, where the law of that Party so permits; either
b. in the absence of such determination, within a period not exceeding 20 business days or 31 days, whichever is longer.
8. Each Party shall provide that, when the precautionary measures are revoked, when they expire by action or omission of the applicant or when the judicial authority subsequently determines that there was no infringement or threat of infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities have the power to order the applicant, at the request of the defendant, to provide the latter with adequate compensation for any damage caused by these measures.
9. Each Party shall provide that, when a precautionary measure may be ordered as a result of administrative procedures, those procedures conform to principles that are essentially equivalent to those established in this article.
Article 17-29: Criminal Procedures and Penalties 1. Each Party shall provide criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in cases of willful counterfeiting of trademarks or copies protected by copyright on a commercial scale. Each Party shall provide that the applicable sanctions include imprisonment or fines, or both, which are sufficient as a deterrent and are compatible with the level of sanctions applied to crimes of comparable gravity.
2. Each Party shall provide that its judicial authorities may order the confiscation and destruction of the infringing property and any of the materials and instruments that have been predominantly used for the commission of the crime.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, the judicial authorities shall take into account, when considering the issuance of such orders, the proportionality between the seriousness of the infringement and the measures ordered, as well as the interests of other persons including those of the right holder. As for counterfeit goods, the simple removal of the illegally affixed mark will not be enough to allow customs clearance of the goods, except in exceptional cases, such as those in which the authority orders their donation to charitable institutions.
4. Each Party may provide for the application of criminal procedures and sanctions in cases of infringement of intellectual property rights other than those referred to in paragraph 1, when committed intentionally and on a commercial scale.
Article 17-30: Defense of intellectual property rights at the border 1. Each Party shall adopt, in accordance with this Article, procedures that allow a right holder who has valid grounds to suspect that the importation of counterfeit or pirated goods related to trademarks or copyrights may occur, to submit a written request before the competent authorities, whether administrative or judicial, so that the customs authority suspends the free circulation of those goods. Neither Party shall be required to apply these procedures to goods in transit. Each Party may authorize the submission of a request of this nature with respect to goods that imply other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the requirements of this article are met.
2. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order any applicant initiating proceedings pursuant to paragraph 1 to submit adequate evidence to:
a. that the competent authorities of the importing Party ensure that an infringement of intellectual property rights can be presumed in accordance with their legislation; Y
b. to provide a sufficiently detailed description of the goods to make them easily recognizable to the customs authorities.
3. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities notify the plaintiff, within a reasonable period, if they have accepted the claim and, when those competent authorities establish it, the period for action by the customs authorities.
4. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order an applicant under paragraph 1 to post a bond or equivalent guarantee that is sufficient to protect the respondent and the competent authorities, and to prevent abuse. This bond or equivalent guarantee must not unduly deter the applicant from resorting to these procedures.
5. Each Party shall provide that the owner, importer or consignee of goods that contain industrial or commercial secrets, have the right to obtain customs clearance thereof, after depositing a bond or equivalent guarantee for a sufficient amount to protect the right holder against any infringement, provided that:
a. as a consequence of a claim filed in accordance with the procedures of this article, the customs authorities have suspended the clearance for the free circulation of those goods, based on a resolution not issued by a judicial authority or by another independent authority;
b. the period stipulated in paragraphs 8, 9, 10 and 11 has expired without the competent authority having issued a measure of provisional suspension; and the other conditions for importation have been met.
6. The payment of the bond or guarantee referred to in paragraph 5, shall be understood without prejudice to any other resource that is available to the holder of the right, and shall be returned if the holder of the right does not exercise his action within a reasonable period of time. .
7. Each Party shall provide that its competent authority promptly notifies the importer and the applicant of the suspension of customs clearance of the goods, in accordance with paragraph 1.
8. Each Party shall provide that its customs authority proceed to the customs clearance of the goods provided that all other conditions for the importation or exportation of the goods have been met, if within a period not exceeding ten business days from the that the suspension has been notified to the applicant, the customs authorities have not been informed that:
a. a party other than the defendant has initiated proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the matter; either
b. the competent authority empowered for this purpose has adopted provisional measures that prolong the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods.
9. For the purposes of paragraph 8, each Party shall provide that its customs authorities have the power to extend, where applicable, the suspension of the customs clearance of the goods for another ten business days.
10. If the procedure leading to obtaining a decision on the merits of the matter has been initiated, at the request of the defendant, a review will be carried out within a reasonable period of time. This review will include the defendant's right to be heard, in order to decide whether those measures should be modified, revoked or confirmed.
11. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 8, 9 and 10, when the suspension of customs clearance is carried out or continued pursuant to a precautionary judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 7 of article 17-28 shall apply.
12. Each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order the applicant, in accordance with paragraph 1, to pay the importer, the consignee and the owner of the goods adequate compensation for any damages they have suffered because of from improper retention of property or from the retention of property that has been released in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 8 and 9.
13. Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to grant:
a. sufficient opportunity for the holder of the right to have any property detained by the customs authorities inspected in order to substantiate his claim; Y
b. an equal opportunity for the importer to have those goods inspected.
14. When the competent authorities have issued a favorable ruling on the merits of the matter, each Party may grant those authorities the power to provide the right holder with the names and addresses of the consignor, the importer, and the consignee, as well as the quantity of the goods in question.
15. When a Party requires its competent authorities to act on their own initiative and suspend the customs clearance of goods for which they have evidence that, prima facie, suggests that they infringe an intellectual property right:
a. the competent authorities may at any time require the holder of the right any information that may assist them in the exercise of that power;
b. the importer and the holder of the right shall be promptly notified of the suspension by the competent authorities of the Party. When the importer has requested a reconsideration of the suspension before the competent authorities, said suspension will be subject, with the appropriate modifications, to the provisions of paragraphs 8, 9, 10 and 11; Y
c. the Party shall only exempt the authorities and public officials from the responsibility that the appropriate corrective measures give rise to in the case of acts carried out or arranged in good faith.
16. Without prejudice to the other actions that correspond to the holder of the right and subject to the right of the defendant to request a review before a judicial authority, each Party shall provide that its competent authorities have the power to order the destruction or elimination of the property subject to violations in accordance with the principles established in paragraphs 5 and 6 of article 17-27. With regard to counterfeit goods, the authorities will not allow them to be re-exported in the same state, except in exceptional circumstances, nor will they submit them to a different customs procedure.
17. Each Party may exclude from the application of paragraphs 1 to 16, small quantities of goods that are not of a commercial nature and are part of the personal baggage of travelers or are sent in small, non-repeated batches. This article will be applied taking into account the provisions of the annex to it.
Article 17-31: Protection of satellite signals carrying programs Within the year following the entry into force of this Agreement, each Party shall consider, as a cause of civil liability, jointly or not with criminal liability, in accordance with its legislation, the manufacturing, importing, selling, leasing or any act that allows having a device or system that is of essential help to decipher an encrypted satellite signal carrying programs, without the authorization of the legitimate distributor of that signal.
Section H - Technical cooperation
Article 17-32 : Technical cooperation The Parties shall grant technical cooperation under the terms of the annex to this article.
Annex to Article 17-03: Agreements on Intellectual Property
Nicaragua will make its best effort to adhere, as soon as possible, to the following agreements and will do so within a period of 18 months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement:
a. the Berne Convention;
b. the Rome Convention; Y
c. the Geneva Convention.
Annex to Article 17-04: Plant Varieties
This provision may not be interpreted in the sense of obliging any Party to grant protection to plant varieties, as long as that Party has not legislated on this matter.
Annex to Article 17-27: Application of Intellectual Property Rights
Nicaragua will make its best effort to implement the measures contemplated in subparagraphs a) and b) of paragraph 2 and paragraph 9 of article 17-27, which will take place no later than July 1, 2000.
Annex to Article 17-30: Defense of Intellectual Property Rights at the Border
Nicaragua will make its best effort to implement the measures contemplated in Article 17-30, which will take place no later than July 1, 2000.
Annex to Article 17-32: Technical Cooperation
1. In order to facilitate the application of this chapter, Mexico, in coordination with other international cooperation programs, will provide, upon request and under mutually agreed terms and conditions, technical assistance to Nicaragua. That assistance will include:
a. support in adapting procedures and regulations for the application of the Paris Convention;
b. exchange of patent documents;
c. training in procedures for the granting and registration of patents, industrial designs and utility models;
d. consultancy in the field of plant varieties;
and. advice and training on automated search and trademark registration procedures;
F. exchange of information on Mexico's experience in establishing the Mexican Institute of Industrial Property;
g. exchange of information on updating the legislative framework on intellectual property rights;
h. advice on copyright and related rights; Y
Yo. advice on automation for the granting of registrations and conservation of industrial property rights.
2. The technical assistance referred to in paragraph 1 shall not imply any commitment of financial support from Mexico.
Chapter XVIII : Transparency
Article 18-01 : Information Center 1. Each Party shall designate a unit or office as an information center to facilitate communication between the Parties on any matter covered by this Agreement.
2. When requested by a Party, the information center of the other Party will indicate the agency or official responsible for the matter and will provide the support required to facilitate communication with the requesting Party.
Article 18-02: Publication 1. Each Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application; that refer to any matter included in this Agreement, are published promptly or made available for the knowledge of the Parties and any interested party.
2. To the extent possible, each Party:
a. publish in advance any measure it proposes to take; Y
b. provide individuals and the other Party a reasonable opportunity to comment on the proposed measures.
Article 18-03: Notification and provision of information 1. Each Party shall, to the extent possible, notify the other Party of any current or proposed measure that the Party considers could affect or substantially affect the interests of that other Party. under the terms of this Agreement.
2. Each Party, at the request of the other Party, shall provide information and prompt responses to its questions regarding any current or proposed measure, notwithstanding that Party has been previously notified of that measure. The notification or supply of information referred to in this article will be carried out without prejudging whether or not the measure is compatible with this Agreement.
Article 18-04: Hearing, legality and due legal process guarantees 1. The Parties reaffirm the hearing, legality and due legal process guarantees enshrined in their respective laws.
2. Each Party shall maintain tribunals and judicial or administrative procedures for the review and, when appropriate, the correction of the final acts related to this Agreement.
3. Each Party shall ensure that in the judicial and administrative procedures related to the application of any measure that affects the operation of this Agreement, the essential formalities of the procedure are observed and the legal cause of the same is founded and motivated.
Chapter XIX : Administration of the Treaty
Article 19-01 : Administrative Commission 1. The Parties establish the Administrative Commission, made up of the officials referred to in Annex 1 to this article or by the persons they designate.
2. The Commission will have the following functions:
a. ensure compliance and correct application of the provisions of this Treaty;
b. evaluate the results achieved in the application of this Agreement and monitor its development;
c. resolve disputes that arise regarding its interpretation or application;
d. supervise the work of all the committees established in this Agreement and included in annex 2 to this article; Y
and. hear about any other matter that could affect the operation of this Agreement, or any other that is entrusted to it by the Parties.
3. The Commission may:
a. establish and delegate responsibilities to ad hoc or permanent committees of experts;
b. request the advice of persons or groups without governmental ties; Y
c. if agreed by the Parties, adopt any other action for the exercise of its functions.
4. The Commission will take all its decisions unanimously.
5. The Commission will meet at least once a year. The meetings will be chaired successively by each Party.
Article 19-02: Secretariat 1. Each Party shall designate an official office or dependency to serve as the Secretariat of that Party and shall communicate to the other Party: The name and title of the official responsible for its Secretariat; and the address of its Secretariat to which communications should be addressed.
2. The Commission shall oversee the coordinated functioning of the secretariats of the Parties.
3. It will correspond to the Secretariats:
a. provide assistance to the Commission;
b. provide administrative support to arbitral tribunals;
c. on instructions from the Commission, support the work of the committees established under this Agreement; \
d. the remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators and experts appointed in accordance with this Treaty, as provided in the annex to this article; Y
and. fulfill the other functions entrusted to it by the Commission.
Annex 1 to Article 19-01: Officials of the Administrative Commission
The officials referred to in article 19-01 are:
a. in the case of Mexico, the Secretary of Commerce and Industrial Development, or his successor; Y
b. in the case of Nicaragua, the Minister of Economy and Development, or his successor.
Annex 2 to Article 19-01: Committees
Committees:
- Committee on Agricultural Trade - Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures - Committee on Rules of Origin - Committee on Customs Procedures - Committee on Temporary Entry - Committee on Financial Services - Committee on Measures Related to Standardization - Committee on Micro, Small and Medium Industry
Subcommittees:
- Subcommittee on Measures Related to Health Standardization - Subcommittee on Measures Related to Standardization in Labeling, Packaging, and Packaging - Subcommittee on Measures Related to Telecommunications Standardization
Annex to Article 19-02: Remuneration and Payment of Expenses
1. The Commission will set the amounts of remuneration and expenses that must be paid to the arbitrators and experts.
2. The remuneration of the arbitrators, experts and their assistants, their transportation and accommodation expenses, and all the general expenses of the arbitral tribunals will be covered in equal portions by the Parties.
3. Each arbitrator and expert will keep a record and submit a final account of their time and expenses, and the arbitral tribunal will keep a similar record and render a final account of all general expenses.
Chapter XX : Settlement of Disputes
Article 20-01 : Cooperation The Parties shall always endeavor to reach agreement on the interpretation and application of this Agreement through cooperation and consultation, and shall always endeavor to reach a mutually satisfactory solution to any matter that could affect its operation.
Article 20-02: Scope of application Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the procedure of this chapter shall apply:
a. to the prevention or settlement of all disputes between the Parties relating to the application or interpretation of this Agreement; Y
b. when a Party considers that a current or proposed measure of another Party is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or could cause nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to this article.
Article 20-03: Settlement of disputes in accordance with the provisions of the WTO Agreement 1. Disputes arising in relation to the provisions of this Agreement and the WTO Agreement may be resolved in one or the other forum, at the option of the complaining Party.
2. Once a dispute settlement procedure has been initiated pursuant to Article 20-06 or one pursuant to the provisions of the WTO Agreement, the selected forum will be exclusive of any other.
3. For the purposes of this article, dispute settlement procedures shall be considered initiated in accordance with the provisions of the WTO Agreement when a Party requests the integration of a panel, in accordance with article 6 of the Understanding on the Rules and Procedures governing the WTO Dispute Settlement.
Article 20-04: Perishable Goods In matters related to perishable goods, the Parties, the Commission and the arbitral tribunal will do everything possible to expedite the procedure as much as possible. For this purpose, the Parties will try to reduce by mutual agreement the terms established in this chapter.
Article 20-05: Consultations 1. Any Party may request in writing to the other Party consultations regarding any measure adopted or proposed, or regarding any other matter that it considers could affect the operation of this Agreement in the terms of the Agreement. article 20-02.
2. The Party initiating consultations under paragraph 1 shall deliver the request to its Secretariat and to the other Party.
3. The Parties:
a. they will provide the information that allows examining the way in which the adopted or projected measure, or any other matter, could affect the operation of this Agreement; Y
b. shall treat confidential information exchanged during consultations in the same manner as the Party that provided it.
Article 20-06: Intervention of the Commission, Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation
1. Any Party may request in writing that the Commission meet whenever a matter is not resolved pursuant to Article 20-05 within a period of 45 days after delivery of the request for consultations.
2. A Party may also request, in writing, that the Commission meet when consultations have been held pursuant to Articles 5-14 and 14-18.
3. The Party initiating the procedure shall mention in the request the measure or any other matter that is the subject of the complaint, shall indicate the provisions of this Agreement that it considers applicable, and shall deliver the request to its Secretariat and to the other Party.
4. The Commission will meet within ten days following the delivery of the request and, in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution to the dispute, it may:
a. convene technical advisers or create expert committees that it deems necessary;
b. resort to good offices, conciliation, mediation or other dispute resolution procedures; either
c. make recommendations.
Article 20-07: Request for integration of the arbitral tribunal 1. When the Commission has met in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 20-06 and the matter has not been resolved within 45 days after the meeting, any Party may request in writing the establishment of an arbitral tribunal. The requesting Party shall deliver the request to its Secretariat and to the other Party.
2. Upon delivery of the application, the Commission will establish an arbitral tribunal.
3. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, the arbitral tribunal will be constituted and will perform its functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 20-08: List of arbitrators 1. The Commission will integrate a list of up to 20 people who have the necessary qualities and willingness to be arbitrators. The members of the list will be designated by mutual agreement, for periods of three years, and may be reelected.
2. The members of the list:
a. they will have specialized knowledge or experience in law, international trade, other matters related to this Agreement, or in the settlement of disputes arising from international trade agreements;
b. they will be elected strictly based on their objectivity, reliability and good judgment;
c. they will be independent, will not be linked to the Parties and will not receive instructions from them; Y
d. They will comply with the code of conduct established by the Commission.
3. The list shall include experts who are not nationals of the Parties.
Article 20-09: Qualities of the arbitrators Article 20-09: Qualities of the arbitrators. 1. All referees must meet the qualities stipulated in paragraph 2 of article 20-08.
2. The persons who have intervened in a controversy, under the terms of paragraph 4 of article 20-06, may not be arbitrators for the same controversy.
Article 20-10: Constitution of the arbitral tribunal 1. The arbitral tribunal shall be made up of five members.
2. The Parties shall seek to designate the president of the arbitral tribunal within 15 days following the delivery of the request for its integration. In the event that the Parties do not reach an agreement within this period, one of them, chosen by lot, will designate it within a period of 5 days. In case of not doing so, the other Party must designate it. The president of the arbitral tribunal may not be of the nationality of the Party that appoints him.
3. Within 15 days of the election of the chair, each Party shall select two arbitrators who are nationals of the other Party.
4. If a Party does not select an arbitrator within that period, the arbitrator shall be selected by lot from among the members of the list who are nationals of the other Party.
5. The arbitrators will preferably be selected from the list. Within 15 days following the day on which the proposal is made, any Party may challenge, without explanation, any person not on the list who is proposed as an arbitrator by a Party.
6. When a Party considers that an arbitrator has committed a violation of the code of conduct, the Parties will hold consultations and, if they agree, they will remove that arbitrator and choose a new one in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Article 20-11: Model Rules of Procedure 1. The Commission shall establish model rules of procedure, in accordance with the following principles:
a. the procedures will guarantee the right to a hearing before the arbitral tribunal, as well as the opportunity to present arguments and replies in writing; Y
b. The hearings before the arbitral tribunal, the deliberations and the preliminary decision, as well as all the writings and communications with it, will be confidential.
2. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, the procedure before the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Model Rules of Procedure.
3. The mission of the arbitral tribunal, contained in the mission statement, shall be: "To examine, in light of the applicable provisions of the Treaty, the matter submitted for its consideration in the terms of the request for the meeting of the Commission, and issue decisions referred to in articles 20-13 and 20-14".
4. If the complaining Party alleges that a matter has been the cause of nullification or impairment of benefits within the meaning of the annex to article 20-02, the mission statement must indicate so.
5. When a Party requests that the arbitral tribunal formulate conclusions on the degree of adverse commercial effects that the measure that is judged inconsistent with this treaty or has caused nullification or impairment in the sense of the annex to article 20 has generated for any Party- 02, the mission certificate must indicate it.
Article 20-12: Function of the experts At the request of a Party, or ex officio, the arbitral tribunal may request the information and technical advice of the persons or groups it deems pertinent.
Article 20-13: Preliminary Decision 1. The arbitral tribunal shall issue a preliminary decision based on the arguments and communications presented by the Parties and on any information it has received pursuant to Article 20-12.
2. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, within 90 days following the appointment of the last arbitrator, the arbitral tribunal will submit to the Parties a preliminary decision that will contain:
a. findings of fact, including any resulting from a request under paragraph 5 of Article 20-11;
b. the determination of whether the measure in question is or may be incompatible with the obligations derived from this Agreement, or is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to article 20-02; Y
c. the draft decision.
3. The arbitrators will be able to formulate particular votes on questions regarding which there is no unanimous decision.
4. The Parties may make written observations to the arbitral tribunal on the preliminary decision within 14 days of its presentation.
5. In this case, and after examining the written observations, the arbitral tribunal may, ex officio or at the request of any Party:
a. perform any diligence it deems appropriate; Y
b. reconsider your preliminary decision.
Article 20-14: Final decision 1. The arbitral tribunal will submit to the Commission a final decision, agreed upon by majority and, where appropriate, individual votes on issues for which there has not been a unanimous decision, within a period of 30 days from the presentation of the preliminary decision.
2. The preliminary decision and the final decision will not reveal the identity of the arbitrators who have voted with the majority or with the minority.
3. The final decision of the arbitral tribunal will be published 15 days after its communication to the Commission.
Article 20-15: Compliance with the final decision 1. The final decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be binding on the Parties in the terms and within the terms that it orders.
2. When the final decision of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is inconsistent with this Agreement, the Party complained against, whenever possible, will refrain from executing the measure or will derogate from it.
3. When the decision of the arbitral tribunal declares that the measure is cause for nullification or impairment in the sense of the annex to article 20-02, it shall determine the level of nullification or impairment and may suggest adjustments mutually satisfactory to the Parties.
Article 20-16: Non-compliance - suspension of benefits 1. The complaining Party may suspend the application of benefits of equivalent effect to the defendant Party if the arbitral tribunal decides:
a. that a measure is inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement and the Party complained against does not comply with the final resolution within the term that the arbitral tribunal has set; either
b. that a measure is cause for nullification or impairment within the meaning of the annex to Article 20-02 and the Parties do not reach a mutually satisfactory agreement on the dispute within the term that the arbitral tribunal has established.
2. The suspension of benefits will last until the defendant Party complies with the final decision of the arbitral tribunal or until the Parties reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute, as the case may be.
3. In considering the benefits to be suspended pursuant to paragraph 1:
a. the complaining Party shall seek, first, to suspend the benefits within the same sector or sectors that are affected by the measure, or by another matter that the arbitral tribunal has considered incompatible with the obligations derived from the Treaty, or that has been cause for annulment or impairment within the meaning of the annex to article 20-02; Y
b. the complaining Party that considers that it is not feasible or effective to suspend benefits in the same sector or sectors may suspend benefits in other sectors.
4. At the written request of either Party, notified to the other Party and its Secretariat, the Commission shall set up an arbitral tribunal to determine whether the level of benefits that the complaining Party has suspended in accordance with paragraph 1 is manifestly excessive.
5. The proceedings before the arbitral tribunal constituted for the purposes of paragraph 4 shall be processed in accordance with the Model Rules of Procedure. The arbitral tribunal will present its final decision within 60 days following the election of the last arbitrator, or in any other term that the Parties agree.
Article 20-17: Proceedings before domestic judicial and administrative instances 1. When a question of interpretation or application of this Agreement arises in a domestic judicial or administrative proceeding of one Party and the other Party considers that it merits its intervention, or when a court or administrative body of a Party requests the opinion of the other Party, the Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall notify the other Party and its Secretariat. The Commission will try, as soon as possible, to agree on an appropriate response.
2. The Party in whose territory the court or administrative body is located shall present to them any interpretation agreed upon by the Commission, in accordance with the procedures of that forum.
3. When the Commission fails to reach an agreement, either Party may submit its own opinion to the court or administrative body, in accordance with the procedures of said forum.
Article 20-18: Alternative means for the solution of controversies 1. To the extent possible, each Party shall promote and facilitate the use of arbitration and other alternative means for the solution of international commercial controversies between individuals.
2. To this end, each Party shall have adequate procedures to ensure compliance with arbitration agreements and the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards pronounced in those disputes.
3. The Parties shall be deemed to be in compliance with the provisions of paragraph 2 if they are party to and comply with the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards of 1958 (New York Convention) or of the Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration of 1975 (Panama Convention).
4. The Commission may establish a Private Business Dispute Advisory Committee composed of persons who have specialized knowledge or experience in the resolution of international business disputes of a private nature. The committee will submit reports and recommendations to the Commission on the existence, use, and effectiveness of arbitration and other procedures for the settlement of such disputes.
Annex to Article 20-02: Nullification and Impairment
1. The Parties may resort to the dispute settlement mechanism of this chapter when, by virtue of the application of a measure that does not contravene this Agreement, they consider that the benefits that they could reasonably have expected to receive from the application of the provisions are nullified or impaired. following provisions:
a. the second part (Trade in Goods);
b. Chapter X (General Principles on Trade in Services);
c. the fourth part (Technical Barriers to Trade);
d. the fifth part (Public Sector Purchases); Y
and. of the seventh part (Intellectual Property).
2. Paragraph 1 shall apply even if the Party against which the appeal is filed invokes a general exception provided for in Article 21-01, except in the case of an exception applicable to cross-border trade in services.
Chapter XXI : Exceptions
Article 21-01 : General Exceptions 1. Article XX of the GATT 1994 and its interpretative notes are incorporated into this Agreement and form an integral part thereof, for the purposes of:
a. the second part (Trade in Goods), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services or investment; Y
b. the fourth part (Technical Barriers to Trade), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to services.
2. None of the provisions of the fourth part (Technical Barriers to Trade) and chapters X (General Principles on Trade in Services) and XI (Telecommunications), except to the extent that any of its provisions apply to goods, shall be construed to prevent any Party from adopting or putting into effect the measures necessary to:
a. protect morality or maintain public order;
b. protect the life and health of people and animals or to preserve plants, or
c. secure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to:
i) prevention of deceptive and fraudulent practices or means of coping with the effects of breach of service contracts;
ii) the protection of the privacy of individuals in relation to the processing and dissemination of personal data and the protection of the confidential nature of individual records and accounts; Y
iii) security.
Provided that such measures are not applied in a manner that constitutes a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
Article 21-02: National Security 1. Other than the provisions of Article 21-01, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as meaning:
a. compel a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests;
b. prevent a Party from taking any measure it deems necessary to protect its essential security interests:
i) regarding the trade in arms, ammunition and war materiel and trade and operations on goods, materials, services and technology that are carried out with the direct or indirect purpose of providing supplies to a military institution or other defense establishment ;
ii) adopted in time of war or other emergencies in international relations; Y
iii) regarding the application of national policies or international agreements on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, or
c. prevent any Party from taking measures in accordance with its obligations under the United Nations Charter for the Maintenance of International Peace and Security.
Article 21-03: Exceptions to the disclosure of information Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as obliging a Party to provide or give access to information the disclosure of which may impede compliance with or be contrary to its Political Constitution or its laws in what refers to the protection of the privacy of people, financial affairs and bank accounts of individual clients of financial institutions, among others, or be contrary to the public interest.
Chapter XXII : Final Provisions
Article 22-01 : Annexes The annexes to this Agreement constitute an integral part thereof.
Article 22-02 : Amendments 1. The Parties may agree to any modification or addition to this Agreement.
2. The agreed modifications and additions will enter into force once they are approved according to the corresponding legal procedures of each Party and will constitute an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 22-03: Entry into force This Agreement shall enter into force on July 1, 1998, once the communications certifying that the necessary legal formalities have been completed are exchanged.
Article 22-04: Reservations This Agreement may not be subject to reservations or interpretative declarations at the time of its ratification.
Article 22-05: Accession 1. Any country or group of countries may join this Agreement subject to the terms and conditions agreed between that country or group of countries and the Commission, and once its accession has been approved accordingly. with the applicable legal procedures of each country.
2. This Agreement shall not be in force between a Party and any country or group of countries that join, if at the time of accession either of them does not give its consent.
3. The accession will enter into force once the communications certifying that the legal formalities have been completed are exchanged.
Article 22-06: Denunciation 1. Any Party may denounce this Agreement. The denunciation will take effect 180 days after it is communicated to the other Party, without prejudice to the fact that the Parties may agree on a different term.
2. In the event of the accession of a country or group of countries in accordance with the provisions of Article 22-05, notwithstanding that a Party has denounced the Treaty, it shall remain in force for the other Parties.
Article 22-07: Evaluation of the Agreement The Parties will periodically evaluate the development of this Agreement in order to seek its improvement and consolidate the integration process in the region, promoting an active participation of the productive sectors.
Signed in the city of Managua, on December 18, 1997, in equally authentic original copies.- The President of the United Mexican States, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de León.- Signature.- The President of the Republic of Nicaragua, Arnoldo Alemán.- Signature.

