FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
AND
MONTENEGRO
PREAMBLE
DESIROUS to develop and strengthen friendly relations, especially in the fields
of economic co-operation and trade, with an aim to contribute to the progress of
economic co-operation between the two countries and to increase the scope of
mutual trade exchange,
The Republic of Turkey and Montenegro (hereinafter referred to as ''the Parties"
or "Turkey" and "Montenegro" where appropriate);
CONFIRMING their intention to participate actively in the process of economic
integration in Europe expressing their preparedness to co-operate in seeking
ways and means to strengthen this process;
TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION the "Agreement Establishing an
Association between the Republic of Turkey and the European Economic
Community" and the "Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the
European Communities and their Member States and Montenegro";
HAVING regard to the experience gained from the co-operation developed
between the Parties to this Agreement as well as between them and their main
trading partners;
DECLARING their readiness to undertake activities with a view to promoting
harmonious development of their trade as well as to expanding and diversifYing
their mutual co-operation in the fields of joint interest, including fields not
covered by this Agreement, thus creating a framework and supportive
environment based on equality, non discrimination, and a balance of rights and
obligations;
REFERRING to the mutual interest of the Parties in the continual reinforcement
of the multilateral trading system and considering that the provisions and
instruments of the General Agreement on Taritfs and Trade 1994 (hereinafter
"GATT 1994") and the World Trade Organization (hereinafter "WTO")
constitute a basis for their foreign trade policy;
RESOL VED to lay down for this purpose provisions aimed at the progressive
abolition of the obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the
provisions of these instruments, in particular those concerning the establishment
of free trade areas;
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the follDwing
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement"). 
ARTICLE 1
Objectives
1. The Parties, by taking into account Turkey's obligations arising from the
Customs Union with the EU and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement
between Montenegro and the EU, shall gradually establish a free trade area
between them on substantially all their trade over a transitional period lasting
a maximum of five years starting from the date of entry into force of this
Agreement in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and in
conformity with Article XXIV of the GAIT 1994 and the other multilateral
agreements on trade in goods annexed to the Agreement establishing the
WTO.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
a) to increase and enhance the economic cooperation between the Parties and
raise the living standard of the population of the two countries;
b) to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods;
c) to promote, through the expansion of reciprocal trade, the harmonious
development of the economic relations between the Parties;
d) to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Parties;
e) to contribute by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade;
f) to create conditions for further encouragement of investments particularly
for the development of joint investments in both countries;
g) to promote trade and cooperation between the Parties in third country
markets.
ARTICLE 2
Basic Duties
1. In trade between the Parties covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall
apply their respective Customs Tariffs on the classification of goods for
imports into them.
2. For each product the basic duty to which successive reductions set out in this
Agreement are to be applied shall be the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) duty
that was in force in the Parties on the date of entry into force. of this
Agreement. 
3. If after entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is applied on
an erga omnes basis, in particular, reductions resulting from the tariff
negotiations in the WTO, such reduced duties shall replace the basic duties
referred to in paragraph 2 as from that date when such reductions are applied.
4. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective basic duties.
CHAPTER I
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 3
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products originating in the Parties
falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of Harmonized Commodity Description and
Coding System with the exception of the products listed in Annex I of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 4
Customs Duties on Imports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. No new customs duties on imports or charges having equivalent effect shall
be introduced in trade between the Parties from the date of entry into force of
this Agreement.
2. Customs duties on imports into Turkey of goods originating in Montenegro
shall be abolished upon the entry into force of this Agreement.
3. Customs duties on imports into Montenegro of goods originating in Turkey
other than those listed in Annex II shall be abolished upon the entry into force
of this Agreement.
4. Customs duties on imports into Montenegro of goods originating in Turkey,
which are listed in Annex II shall be progressively abolished in accordance
with the timetable laid down thereof.
5. Turkey and Montenegro shall abolish in trade between themselves any
charges having equivalent effect to customs duties on imports upon the entry
into force of this Agreement. 
6. For products listed in Annex II originating in Turkey, Montenegro shall
accord treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like products
originating in the European Union. In case of any favourable change in the
treatment accorded to the European Union for the products listed in Annex II,
Montenegro shall automatically reflect these changes to the products listed in
this Annex originating in Turkey and promptly notify Turkey thereof.
ARTICLE 5
Customs Duties of a Fiscal Nature
The provisions concerning the abolition of customs duties on imports shall also
apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
ARTICLE 6
Customs Duties on Exports and Charges Having Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of the entry into force of this Agreement no new customs duties
on exports or charges having equivalent effect shall be introduced in trade
between the Parties.
2. All customs duties on exports and any charges having equivalent effect shall
be abolished between the Parties upon entry into force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 7
Quantitative Restrictions on Exports and Imports and Measures Having
Equivalent Effect
1. From the date of the entry into force of this Agreement no new quantitative
restrictions on exports and imports or measures having equivalent effect shall
be introduced.
2. All quantitative restrictions on exports and imports in the Parties and
measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished on the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8
Technical Barriers to Trade
1. The rights and obligations of the Parties relating to standards or technical
regulations and related measures shall be governed by the WTO Agreement
on Technical Barriers to Trade. 
2. The Parties shall cooperate and exchange information in the field of
standardization, metrology, conformity assessment and accreditation, with the
aim of eliminating technical barriers to trade.
3. Each Party, upon request from the other Party, shall submit information on
particular individual cases of standards, technical rules or similar measures.
CHAPTER II
AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
ARTICLE 9
Scope
1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to basic agricultural, processed
agricultural and fishery products originating in the territory of each Party.
2. The term "basic agricultural, processed agricultural and fishery products"
(hereinafter referred to as agricultural products) means, for the purpose of this
agreement, the products falling within Chapters 01 to 24 of the Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System and including the products listed
in Annex I of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 10
Exchange of Concessions
1. The Parties to this Agreement shall mutually allocate concessions set forth in
Protocol I in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Taking into account the role of agriculture in their respective economies, the
development of trade in agricultural products, the high sensitivity of
agricultural products and the rules of their respective agricultural policy, the
Parties shall examine in the Joint Committee the possibilities of granting
further concessions to each other in trade in agricultural products.
ARTICLE 11
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Parties shall apply their domestic regulations in the fields of veterinary,
sanitary and phytosanitary control in accordance with the WTO Agreement
on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures. 
2. Measures, concerning veterinary and phytosanitary control among the Parties,
shall be harmonized on the basis of the ED legislation.
3. The Parties commit themselves not to introduce discriminatory measures or
other measures, which lead to unduly restricting the flow of information about
the level of sanitary and phytosanitary protection of animals, plants and
products.
ARTICLE 12
Specific Safeguards
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement, and in particular Article 21,
given the particular sensitivity of the agricultural products, if imports of products
originating in a Party, which are the subject of concessions granted under this
Agreement, cause serious disturbance to the markets or to their domestic
regulatory mechanisms, in the other Party, both Parties shall enter into
consultations immediately to find an appropriate solution. Pending such solution,
the Party concerned may take the measures it deems necessary in accordance
with the relevant WTO rules.
CHAPTER III
SERVICES AND INVESTMENTS
ARTICLE 13
1. The Parties to this Agreement recognize the growing importance of services
and investments. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden their cooperation, in particular in the context of the European integration, they will
co-operate with the aim of further promoting investments and achieving a
progressive liberalization and mutual opening of their markets for
. investments and trade in services, taking into account the relevant provisions
of the General Agreement on Trade and Services (GATS).
2. The Parties will discuss in the Joint Committee this co-operation with the aim
of developing and deepening of their relations in conformity with this Article. 
CHAPTER IV
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 14
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from, and abolish where existing, any measure or
practice of an internal fiscal nature establishing, whether directly or
indirectly, discrimination between the products of one Party and like products
originating in the other Party.
2. Products exported to the territory of either of the Parties shall not qualify for
refunds of internal indirect taxation which exceed amount of the indirect
taxation directly or indirectly imposed on those products.
ARTICLE 15
Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas and Cross-Border Arrangements
1. This Agreement shall not prevent the maintenance or establishment of
customs unions, free trade areas or arrangements for cross-border trade of the
Parties with third countries to the extent that these do not negatively affect the
trade regime and in particular the provisions concerning rules of origin
provided for by this Agreement.
2. Exchange of information shall take place, upon request of either Party, within
the Joint Committee concerning agreements establishing such customs unions
or free trade areas.
ARTICLE 16
Structural Adjustment
1. Exceptional measures of limited duration, which derogate from the provisions
of Article 4, may be taken by Montenegro in the form of increased customs
duties.
2. These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors
undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where
these difficulties produce important social problems. 
3. Customs duties on imports applicable in Montenegro to products originating
in Turkey introduced by these measures may not exceed the level of the basic
duty referred in Article 2 for the concerned product and shall maintain an
element of preference for products originating in Turkey. The total value of
imports of the products which are subject to these measures may not exceed
15% of total imports of industrial products from Turkey as defined in Article
3, during the last year for which statistics are available.
4. These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding five years unless a
longer duration is authorized by the Joint Committee.
5. No such measures can be introduced in respect of a product if more than three
years have elapsed since the elimination of all duties and quantitative
restrictions or charges or measures having an equivalent effect concerning
that product.
6. Montenegro shall inform the Joint Committee of any exceptional measures
they intend to take and, at the request of Turkey, consultations shall be held in
the Joint Committee on such measures and the sectors to which they apply
before they are applied. When taking such measures Montenegro shall
provide the Joint Committee with a schedule for the elimination of the
customs duties introduced under this Article. This schedule shall provide for a
phasing out of these duties starting at the latest two years after their
introduction, at equal rates. The Joint Committee may decide on a different
schedule.
ARTICLE 17
Dumping and Subsidy
1. None of the provisions in this Agreement prevent either Party from taking
trade defence action in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article.
2. If one of the Parties finds that dumping and/or countervailable subsidisation is
taking place in trade with the other Party, that Party may take appropriate
measures against this practice in accordance with the WTO Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
1994 and theWTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
and its own related intemallegislation. 
ARTICLE 18
General Safeguards
Each Party retains its rights and obligations under Article XIX of GATT 1994
and the WTO Agreement on Safeguard Measures. This Agreement does not
confer any additional rights or obligations on the Parties with regard to safeguard
measures.
ARTICLE 19
Re-export and Serious Shortage
1. Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 6 and 7 leads to:
a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party to this
Agreement maintains for the product concerned quantitative export
restrictions, export duties or measures or charges having equivalent effect;
or
b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting
Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to
major difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate
measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid
down in Article 21 of this Agreement.
2. Measures taken as a result of the situation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
applied in a non-discriminatory manner and be eliminated when conditions no
longer justify their maintenance.
ARTICLE 20
State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall progressively adjust any state monopoly of a commercial
character so as to ensure that by the end of the fourth year following the entry
into force of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions
. under which goods are procured and marketed will exist between nationals of
the Parties.
2. The Joint Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to
implement this objective. 
ARTICLE 21
Notifications and Consultations Procedure
for the Application of Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of any measures set out in
Articles 12, 19, 24 and 32, the Parties to this Agreement shall endeavour to
solve any differences between themselves through direct consultations, and
shall inform the other Party thereof.
2. A Party which is considering to resort to measures shall promptly notify the
Joint Committee thereof. The Party concerned shall provide the Joint
Committee with all relevant information and give it the assistance required to
examine the case. Consultations between the Parties shall take place without
delay in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable
solution.
3. If, within one month of the matter being referred to the Joint Committee, the
Party in question fails to put an end to the practice objected to or to the
difficulties notified and in the absence of a decision by the Joint Committee in
the matter, the concerned Party may adopt the measures it considers necessary
to remedy the situation.
4. The measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Joint Committee.
They shall be restricted, with regard to their extent and to their duration, to
what is strictly necessary in order to rectify the situation, giving rise to their
application and shall not be in excess of the damage caused by the practice or
the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures that will
least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.
'5. The measures taken shall be the subject of regular consultations within the
Joint Committee with a view to their relaxation, or abolition when conditions
no longer justify their maintenance.
6. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior
examination impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 12,
19,24 and 32 apply forthwith the precautionary measures strictly necessary to
remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified without delay to the Joint
Committee and consultations between the Parties to this Agreement shall take
place within the Joint Committee. 
ARTICLE 22
Rules of Origin and Cooperation between the Customs Administrations
1. The Parties agree to apply the European preferential rules of origin in trade
between them, including all existing and further amendments. In case these
rules of origin are amended, the Joint Committee shall initiate procedure of
amending rules of origin.
2. Protocol II to this Agreement lays down the rules of origin and related
methods of administrative co-operation.
ARTICLE 23
Payments
1. Payments in freely convertible currencies relating to commercial transactions
within the framework of this Agreement between the Parties and the transfer
of such payments to the territory of the Party where the creditor resides, shall
be free from any restrictions.
2. The Parties shall refrain from exchange or administrative restrictions other
than existing in the current legislation of the Parties on the grant repayment or
acceptance of short and medium term credits related to commercial
transactions in which a resident of a Party participates.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, any measures concerning
current payments connected with the movement of goods shall be in
conformity with the conditions laid down under Article VIII of the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund.
ARTICLE 24
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings, State Aid
1. The following are incompatible with the proper implementation of this
Agreement, in so far as they may affect trade between the Parties:
a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of
undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have
as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of
competition;
b) abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the
territories of the Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof; 
c) any concentration that would create a dominant position and prevent fair
competition;
d) any state aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by
favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods.
2. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid. Upon request by
one Party, the other Party shall provide information on particular individual
cases of state aid.
3. If any Party considers that a particular practice is incompatible with the terms
of the first paragraph of this Article, and:
a) is not adequately dealt with under the implementing rules referred to in
paragraph 4 of this Article, or
b) in the absence of such rules, and if such practice causes or threatens to
cause serious prejudice to the interest of the other Party or material injury
to its domestic industry, including its services industry,
it may take appropriate measures after consultation within the Joint
Committee or after thirty working days following referral for such
consultation.
4. In the case of practices incompatible with paragraph l.c) of this Article, such
appropriate measures may, where the WTO/GATT 1994 applies thereto, only
be adopted in conformity with the procedures and under the conditions laid
down by the WTO/GA TT 1994 and any other relevant instrument negotiated
under its auspices which are applicable between the Parties.
5. In case of a competition investigation conducted by one Party against the
undertakings based in the territory of the other Party, if the investigating Party
requests for a cooperation in the communication of the official documents
relevant to the investigation from the other Party, the requested Party will do
its best to ensure the requested communication to be served in a timely
manner through its competent governmental agencies.
6. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary adopted in conformity with
this Article, the Parties shall exchange information taking into account the
limitations imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy. 
ARTICLE 25
Balance of Payments Difficulties
1. The Parties shall endeavour wherever possible to avoid the imposition of
restrictive measures, including measures relating to imports, for balance of
payments purposes. A Party adopting such measures shall present as soon as
possible to the other Party a timetable for their removal.
2. Where Turkey or Montenegro is in serious balance of payments difficulties,
or under imminent threat thereof, Turkey or Montenegro, as the case may be,
may, in accordance with the conditions established under the WTO
Agreement, adopt restrictive measures, including measures relating to
imports, which shall be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is
strictly necessary to remedy the balance of payments situation. Turkey or
Montenegro, as the case may be, shall inform the other Party forthwith.
3. Any restrictive measures shall not apply to transfers related to investment and
in particular to the repatriation of amounts invested or reinvested or any kind
of revenues stemming there from.
ARTICLE 26
Intellectual Property Rights
1. The Parties to this Agreement shall grant and ensure adequate, effective and
nori-discriminatory protection of intellectual property rights, including
measures for the enforcement of such rights against infringement thereof,
counterfeiting and' piracy, in accordance with the provisions of this Article
and the relevant international agreements.
2. The Parties to this Agreement shall accord to each other's nationals treatment
no less favourable than that they accord to their own nationals. Exemption
from this obligation must be in accordance with the substantive provisions of
Article 3 of the TRIPS Agreement.
3. The Parties to this Agreement shall grant to each other's nationals treatment
no less favourable than that accorded to nationals of any other country.
Exemptions from this obligation must be in accordance with the substantive
provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, in particular Articles 4 and 5 thereof.
4. The implementation of this Article shall be regularly reviewed by the Parties.
If problems in the area of intellectual property affecting trading conditions
were to occur, urgent consultations shall be undertaken, at the request of
either Party, with a view to reaching mutually satisfactory solutions. 
ARTICLE 27
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the liberalization of their respective public procurement
markets as an objective of this Agreement. The Parties aim at opening up of
the award of public contracts on the basis of non-discrimination and
reciprocity .
2. The Parties will progressively develop their respective rules, conditions and
practices on public procurement with a view to granting suppliers of the other
Party access to contract award procedures on their respective public
procurement markets not less favourable than that accorded to companies of
any country or territory.
3. The Joint Committee shall examine developments related to the achievement
of the objectives of this Article and may recommend practical modalities of
implementing the provisions of paragraph 2 so as to ensure. free access,
transparency and mutual opening of their respective public procurement
markets.
4. During the examination referred to in paragraph 3, the Joint Committee may
consider, especially in the light of international developments and regulations
in this area, the possibility of extending the coverage and/or the degr~e of the
market opening provided for in paragraph 1.
5. The Parties shall endeavour to accede to the relevant Agreements negotiated
under the auspices of the GATT 1994 and the Marrakesh Agreement,
establishing the WTO.
ARTICLE 28
Establishment of the Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee is hereby established in which each Party shall be
represented. The Joint Committee shall be responsible for the administration
of this Agreement and shall ensure its proper implementation.
2. For the purpose of the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Parties
shall exchange information and, at the request of either Party, shall hold
consultations within the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall keep
under review the possibility of further removal of the obstacles to trade
between the Parties.
3. The Joint Committee may, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3
of Article 29, take decisions in the cases provided for in this Agreement. On
other matters the Joint Committee may make recommendations. 
ARTICLE 29
Procedures of the Joint Committee
1. For the proper implementation of this Agreement, the Joint Committee shall
meet at an appropriate level whenever necessary upon request but at least
once a year. Either Party may request a meeting be held.
2. The Joint Committee shall decide by consensus.
3. If a representative in the Joint Committee of a Party to this Agreement has
accepted a decision subject to reservation of the fulfillment of internal legal
requirements the decision shall enter into force, if no later date is contained
therein, on the date of the receipt of the written notification stating that such
requirements have been fulfilled.
4. The Joint Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure which shall, inter alia,
contain provisions for convening meetings and for the designation of the
Chairperson and his/her term of office.
5. The Joint Committee may decide to set up such sub-committees and working
groups as it considers necessary to assist it in accomplishing its tasks.
ARTICLE 30
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties from taking any measures,
which it considers necessary:
a) to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security
interests;
b) for the protection of its essential security interests or for the implementation
of international obligations or national policies:
i) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to
such traffic in other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly
or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
ii) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons,
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or
iii) in time of war or other serious international tension constituting threat of
war. 
ARTICLE 31
General Exceptions
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports
or goods in transit, justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or
public security, the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants and
environment; the protection of domestic treasures possessing artistic, historic or
archaeological value; the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial
property, or rules relating to gold or silver or the conservation of exhaustible
natural resources, if such measures are made effective in conjunction with
restrictions on domestic production or consumption. Such prohibitions or
restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a
disguised restriction on trade between the Parties.
ARTICLE 32
Fulfillment of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the
objectives of this Agreement and the fulfillment of their obligations under this
Agreement.
2. If either Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfill an obligation
under this Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures
under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in
Article 21 of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 33
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where either Party considers that it would be useful and in the interest of the
economies of the Parties to develop the relations established by this
Agreement by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a
reasoned request to the other Party. The Parties may instruct the Joint
Committee to examine this request and, where appropriate, to make
recommendations to them, particularly with a view to opening negotiations.
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be
subject to ratification or approval by the Parties to this Agreement in
accordance with their national legislation. 
ARTICLE 34
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement, as well as to its Annexes and Protocols, shall
enter into force on the date of receipt of the latter written notification through
diplomatic channels, by which the Parties inform each other that all necessary
requirements foreseen by their national legislation for the entry into force of this
Agreement, have been fulfilled.
ARTICLE 35
Protocols and Annexes
Protocols and Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. The
Joint Committee may decide to amend the Protocols and Annexes in accordance
with the national legislation of the Parties.
ARTICLE 36
Validity and Withdrawal
1. This Agreement is concluded for an unlimited period.
2. Each Party to this Agreement may withdraw from this Agreement by a
written notification to the other Party. The termination shall take effect on the
first day of the seventh month following the date on which the notification
was received by the other Party.
3. The Parties agree that, in case of accession of one of the Parties to this
Agreement to the European Union, the Agreement will be terminated on the
previous day before the date of the accession to the EU.
ARTICLE 37
Entry into Force
The Parties shall ratity this Agreement in accordance with their own procedures.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month,
following the date of the receipt of the latter written notification through
diplomatic channels, by which the Parties inform each other that all necessary
requirements foreseen by their national legislation for the entry into force of this
Agreement, have been fulfilled. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorised thereto, have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Istanbul, on 26th of October, 2008, in two originals, each in the
Turkish, Montenegrin and English languages, all texts being equally authentic. In
case of differences of interpretation, the English text shall prevail

ANNEX TEXT:
PROTOCOL II
Concerning the definition of the concept of "originating products"
and methods of administrative co-operation
TITLE I
Article 1
TITLE II
Article 2
Article 3
Article 4
Article 5
Article 6
Article 7
Article 8
Article 9
Article 10
Article 11
TITLE III
Article 12
Article 13
Article 14
TITLEIV
Article 15
TITLE V
Article 16
Article 17
Article 18
Article 19
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Definitions
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING
PRODUCTS"
General requirements
Cumulation in Turkey
Cumulation in Montenegro
Wholly obtained products
Sufficiently worked or processed products
Insufficient working or processing
Unit of qualification
Accessories, spare parts and tools
Sets
Neutral elements
TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Principle of territoriality
Direct transport
Exhibitions
DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
PROOF OF ORIGIN
General requirements
Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.l
Movement certificates EUR.l issued retrospectively
Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.l 
Article 20
Article 21
Article 22
Article 23
Article 24
Article 25
Article 26
Article 27
Article 28
Article 29
Article 30
Article 31
TITLE VI
Article 32
Article 33
Article 34
Article 35
Article 36
TITLE VII
Article 37
Article 38
Article 39
List of Annexes
Annex I:
Annex II:
Annex III:
Annex· IV:
Annex V:
Issue of movement certificates EUR.l on the basis of a proof of origin
issued or made out previously
Accounting segregation
Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
Approved exporter
Validity of proof of origin
Submission of proof of origin
Importation by instalments
Exemptions from proof of origin
Supporting documents
Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
Discrepancies and formal errors
Amounts expressed in euro
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
Mutual assistance
Verification of proofs of origin
Dispute settlement
Penalties
Free zones
FINAL PROVISIONS
Goods in transit and storage
Annexes
Amendments to the Protocol
Introductory notes to the list in Annex II
List of working or processing required to be carried out on nonoriginating materials in order that the product manufactured can obtain
originating status
Specimens of movement certificate EUR.l and application for a
movement certificate EUR.l
Text of the invoice declaration
Products excluded from the cumulation provided for in Article 3 and
Article 4
Joint Declaration 
TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
For the purposes of this Protocol:
Article 1
Definitions
(a) "manufacture" means any kind of working or processing including assembly or
specific operations;
(b) "material" means any ingredient, raw material, component or part, etc., used in
the manufacture of the product;
(c) "product" means the product being manufactured, even if it is intended for later
use in another manufacturing operation;
(d) "goods" means both materials and products;
(e) "customs value" means the value as determined in accordance with the
1994 Agreement on implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (WTO Agreement on customs valuation);
(f) "ex-works price" means the price paid for the product ex works to the
manufacturer in Turkey or in Montenegro in whose undertaking the last working
or processing is carried out,. provided the price includes the value of all the
materials used, minus any internal taxes which are, or may be, repaid when the
product obtained is exported;
(g) "value of materials" means the customs value at the time of importation of the
non-originating materials used, or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained,
the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in Turkey or in Montenegro;
(h) "value of originating materials" means the value of such materials as defined in
(g) applied mutatis mutandis;
(i) "value added" shall be taken to be the ex-works price minus the customs value of
each of the materials incorporated which originate in the other countries referred
to in Articles 3 and 4 or, where the customs value is not known or cannot be
ascertained, the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in Turkey or in
Montenegro;
G) 11 chapters " and "headings" mean the chapters and the headings (four-digit codes)
used in the . nomenclature which makes up the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding System, referred to in this Protocol as "the Harmonized
System" or "RS";
(k) lIclassified" refers to the classification of a product or material under a particular
heading; 
(1) "consignment" means products which are either sent simultaneously from one
exporter to one consignee or covered by a single transport document covering
their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or, in the absence of such a
document, by a single invoice;
(m) "territories" includes territorial waters.
TITLE II
DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF "ORIGINATING PRODUCTS"
Article 2
General requirements
1. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be
considered as originating in Turkey:
(a) products wholly obtained in Turkey within the meaning of Article 5;
(b) products obtained in Turkey incorporating materials which have not been wholly
obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient working or
processing in Turkey within the meaning of Article 6;
2. For the purpose of implementing this Agreement, the following products shall be
considered as originating in Montenegro :
(a) products wholly obtained in Montenegro within the meaning of Article 5;
(b) products obtained ih Montenegro incorporating materials which have not been
wholly obtained there, provided that such materials have undergone sufficient
working or processing in Montenegro within the meaning of Article 6. 
Article 3
Cumulation in Turkey
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2 (l), products shall be considered
as originating in Turkey if such products are obtained there, incorporating materials
originating in Montenegro, in Turkey, or in any country or territory participating in
the European Union's Stabilisation and Association process! or incorporating the
materials originating in the Community to which the Decision n01/95 of the ECTurkey Association Council of 22 December 19952 applies provided that the working
or processing carried out in Turkey goes beyond the operations referred to in Article
7. It shall not be necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working or
processing.
2. Where the working or processing carried out in Turkey does not go beyond the
operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as
originating in Turkey only where the value added there is greater than the value of the
materials used originating in anyone of the other countries or territories referred to in
paragraph 1. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as originating in
the country or territory which accounts for the highest value of originating materials
used in the manufacture in Turkey.
3. Products, originating in one of the countries or territories referred to in paragraph
1, which do not undergo any working or processing in Turkey, retain their origin if
. exported into one of these countries or territories.
4. The cumulation provided for in this Artic]e may be applied only provided that:
(a) a preferential trade agreement in accordance with Article XXIV of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is applicable between the countries
or territories involved in the acquisition of the originating status and the
country of destination;
(b) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of
rules of origin identical to those given in this Protocol;
and
(c) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply
cumulation have been published in the Official Gazette of Turkey and in
Montenegro according to its own procedures.
As defmed in the Conclusions of the General Affairs Council in April 1997 and Commission
Communication of May 1999 on the establishment of the Stabilisation and Association
process with Western Balkan countries.
Decision n01l95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of 22 December 1995 applies to
products other than agricultural products as defmed in the Agreement establishing an
Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey and other than coal and
steel products as defmed in the Agreement between the European Coal and Steel Community
and the Republic of Turkey on trade in products covered by the treaty establishing the
European Coal and Steel Community. ~ 
Turkey shall provide Montenegro, with details of the Agreements, including their
dates of entry into force, and their corresponding rules of origin, which are applied
with the other countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1.
The products in Annex V shall be excluded from the cumulation provided for in this
Article.
Article 4
Cumulation in Montenegro
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 2(2), products shall be considered
as originating in Montenegro if such products are obtained there, incorporating
materials originating in Turkey, in Montenegro, or in any country or territory
participating in the European Union's Stabilisation and Association Process3 or
incorporating the materials originating in the Community to which the Decision
nOl/95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of 22 December 19954 applies,
provided that the working or processing carried out in Montenegro goes beyond the
operations referred to in Article 7. It shall not be necessary that such materials have
undergone sufficient working or processing.
2. Where the working or processing carried out in Montenegro does not go beyond
the operations referred to in Article 7, the product obtained shall be considered as
originating in Montenegro only where the value added there is greater than the value
of the materials used originating in anyone of the other countries or territories
referred to in paragraph 1. If this is not so, the product obtained shall be considered as
originating in the country or territory which accounts for the highest value of
originating materials used in the manufacture in Montenegro.
3. Products, originating in one of the countries or territories referred to in paragraph
1, which do not undergo' any working or processing in Montenegro, retain their origin
if exported into one of these countries or territories.
As defined in the Conclusions of the General Affairs Council in April 1997 and Commission
Communication of May 1999 on the establishment of the Stabilisation and Association
process with Western Balkan countries.
Decision n01l95 of the EC-Turkey Association Council of 22 December 1995 applies to
products other than agricultural products as defIned in the Agreement establishing an
Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey and other than coal and
steel products as defmed in the Agreement between the European Coal and Steel Community
and the Republic of Turkey on trade in products covered by the treaty establishing the
European Coal and Steel Community. 
4. The cumulation provided for in this Article may be applied only provided that:
(a) a preferential trade agreement in accordance with Article XXIV of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is applicable between the countries
or territories involved in the acquisition of the originating status and the
country of destination;
(b) materials and products have acquired originating status by the application of
rules of origin identical to those given in this Protocol;
and
(c) notices indicating the fulfilment of the necessary requirements to apply
cumulation have been published in the Official Gazette of Turkey and in
Montenegro according to its own procedures.
Montenegro shall provide Turkey, with details of the Agreements, including their
dates of entry into force, and their corresponding rules of origin, which are applied
with the other countries or territories referred to in paragraph 1.
The products in Annex V shall be excluded from the cumulation provided for in this
Article.
Article 5
Wholly obtained products
1. The following shall be considered as wholly obtained in Turkey or in
Montenegro:
(a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from their seabed;
(b) vegetable products harvested there;
(c) live animals born and raised there;
(d) products from live animals raised there;
( e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;
(f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from the sea outside the
territorial waters of Turkey or of Montenegro by their vessels;
(g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively from products referred to
in (f);
(h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery of raw materials, including
used tyres fit only for retreading or for use as waste;
(i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations conducted there; 
(D products extracted from marine soil or subsoil outside their territorial waters
provided that they have sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;
(k) goods produced there exclusively from the products specified in (a) to 0).
2. The terms "their vessels" and "their factory ships" in paragraph 1(t) and (g) shall
apply only to vessels and factory ships:
(a) which are registered or recorded in Turkey or in Montenegro;
(b) which sail under the flag of Turkey or of Montenegro;
(c) which are owned to an extent of at least 50 per cent by nationals of Turkey or of
Montenegro, or by a company with its head office in one of these States, of
which the manager or managers, Chairman of the Board of Directors or the
Supervisory Board, and the majority of the members of such boards are nationals
of Turkey or of Montenegro and of which, in addition, in the case of partnerships
or limited companies, at least half the capital belongs to those States or to public
bodies or nationals of the said States;
(d) of which the master and officers are nationals of Turkey or of Montenegro;
and
(e) of which at least 75 per cent of the crew are nationals of Turkey or of
Montenegro .
Article 6
Sufficiently worked or processed products
1. For the purposes of Article 2, products which are not wholly obtained are
considered to be sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in the
list in Annex II are fulfilled.
The conditions referred to above indicate, for all products covered by the Agreement,
the working or processing which must be carried out on non-originating materials
used in manufacturing and apply only in relation to such materials. It follows that if a
product which has acquired originating status by fulfilling the conditions set out in the
list is used in the manufacture of another product, the conditions applicable to the
product in which it is incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of
the non-originating materials which may have been used in its manufacture.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, non-originating materials which, according to the
conditions set out in the list, should not be used in the manufacture of a product may
nevertheless be used, provided that:
(a) their total value does not exceed 10 per cent of the ex-works price of the product;
(b) any of the percentages given in the list for the maximum value of non-originating
materials are not exceeded through the application of this paragraph. 
This paragraph shall not apply to products. falling within Chapters 50 to 63 of the
Harmonized System.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply subject to the provisions of Article 7.
Article 7
Insufficient working or processing
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the following operations shall be considered as
insufficient working or processing to confer the status of originating products,
whether or not the requirements of Article 6 are satisfied:
(a) preserving operations to ensure that the products remain in good condition
during transport and storage;
(b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;
(c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint or other coverings;
(d) ironing or pressing of textiles;
(e) simple painting and polishing operations;
(f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and glazing of cereals and rice;
(g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;
(h) peeling, stoning and shelling, of fruits, nuts and vegetables;
(i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
G) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading, matching; (including the
making-up of sets of articles);
(k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases, boxes, fixing on cards or
boards and all other simple packaging operations;
(1) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other like distinguishing signs on
products or their packaging;
(m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds; mixing of sugar
with any other material;
(n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a complete article or
disassembly of products into parts;
(0) a combination oftwo or more operations specified in (a) to (n);
(P) slaughter of animals. 
2. All operations carried out either in Turkey or in Montenegro on a given product
shall be considered together when determining whether the working or processing
undergone by that product is to be regarded as insufficient within the meaning of
paragraph 1.
Article 8
Unit of qualification
1 ~ The unit of qualification for the application of the provisions of this Protocol
shall be the particular product which is considered as the basic unit when determining
classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonized System.
It follows that:
(a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of articles is classified under
the terms of the Harmonized System in a single heading, the whole constitutes
the unit of qualification;
(b) when a consignment consists of a number of identical products classified under
the same heading of the Harmonized System, each product must be taken
individually when applying the provisions of this Protocol.
. 2. Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonized System, packaging is included
with the product for classification purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of
determining origin.
Article 9
Accessories, spare parts and tools
Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a piece of equipment, machine,
apparatus or vehicle, which are part of the normal equipment and included in the price
thereof or which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with the piece
of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in question.
Article 10
Sets
Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonized System, shall be regarded as
originating when all component products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is
composed of· originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole shall be
regarded as originating, provided that the value of the non-originating products does
not exceed 15 per cent of the ex-works price of the set. 
Article 11
Neutral elements
In order to detennine whether a product originates, it shall not be necessary to
determine the origin of the following which might be used in its manufacture:
(a) energy and fuel;
(b) plant and equipment;
(c) machines and tools;
(d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended to enter into the final
composition of the product.
TITLE III
TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Article 12
Principle of territoriality
1. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4 and paragraph 3 of this Article, the
conditions for acquiring originating status set out in Title II must be fulfilled without
interruption in Turkey or in Montenegro.
2. Except as provided for in Articles 3 and 4, where originating goods. exported
from Turkey or from Montenegro to another country return, they must be considered
as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs
authorities that:
(a) the returning goods are the same as those exported;
and
(b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that necessary to preserve them in
good condition while in that country or while being exported.
3. The acquisition of originating status in accordance with the conditions set out in
Title II shall not be affected by working or processing done outside Turkey or
Montenegro on materials exported from Turkey or from Montenegro and
subsequently re-imported there, provided:
(a) the said materials are wholly obtained in Turkey or in Montenegro or have
undergone working or processing beyond the operations referred to in Article 7
prior to being exported;
and
(b) it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that: 
i) the re-imported goods have been obtained by working or processing the
exported materials;
and
ii) the total added value acquired outside Turkey or Montenegro by
applying the provisions of this Article does not exceed 10 per cent of
the ex-works price of the end product for which originating status is
claimed.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the conditions for acquiring originating status
set out in Title II shall not apply to working or processing done outside Turkey or
Montenegro. But where, in the list in Annex II, a rule setting a maximum value for all
the non-originating materials incorporated is applied in determining the originating
status of the end product, the total value of the non-originating materials incorporated
in the territory of the party concerned, taken together with the total added value
acquired outside Turkey or Montenegro by applying the provisions of this Article,
shall not exceed the stated percentage.
5. For the purposes of applying the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4, 'total added
value' shall be taken to mean all costs arising outside Turkey or Montenegro,
including the value of the materials incorporated there.
6. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products which do not
fulfil the conditions set out in the list in Annex II or which can be considered
sufficiently worked or processed only if the general tolerance fixed in Article 6(2) is
applied.
7. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 shall not apply to products of Chapters 50
to 63 of the Harmonized System.
8. Any working or processing of the kind covered by the provisions of this Article
and done outside Turkey or Montenegro shall be done under the outward processing
arrangements, or similar arrangements.
Article 13
Direct transport
1. The preferential treatment provided for under the Agreement applies only to
products, satisfYing the requirements of this Protocol, which are transported directly
between Turkey and Montenegro or through the territories of the other countries or
territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4. However, products constituting one single
consignment may be transported through other territories with, should the occasion
arise, trans-shipment or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they
remain under the surveillance of the customs authorities in the country of transit or
warehousing and do not undergo operations other than unloading, reloading or any
operation designed to preserve them in good condition.
Originating products may be transported by pipeline across territory other than that of
Turkey or Montenegro. 
2. Evidence that the conditions set out in paragraph 1 have been fulfilled shall be
supplied to the customs authorities of the importing country by the production of:
( a) a single transport document covering the passage from the exporting country
through the country of transit; or
(b) a certificate issued by the customs authorities of the country of transit:
(i) giving an exact description of the products;
(ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of the products and, where
applicable, the names of the ships, or the other means of transport used;
and
(iii) certifying the conditions under which the products remained in the
transit country; or
(c) failing these, any substantiating documents.
Article 14
Exhibitions
. 1. Originating products, sent for exhibition in a country or territory other than those
referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and sold after the exhibition for importation in Turkey
or in Montenegro shall benefit on importation from the provisions of the Agreement
provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that:
(a) an exporter has consigned these products from Turkey or from Montenegro to the
country in which the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there;
(b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of by that exporter to a person
in Turkey or in Montenegro;
(c) the products have been consigned during the exhibition or immediately thereafter
in the state in which they were sent for exhibition;
and
(d) the products have not, since they were consigned for exhibition, been used for any
purpose other than demonstration at the exhibition.
2. A proof of origin must be issued or made out in accordance with the provisions
of Title V and submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country in the
normal manner. The name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon.
Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the conditions under which
they have been exhibited may be required. 
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to any trade, industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition,
fair or similar public show or display which is not organised for private purposes in
shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign products, and during
which the products remain under customs control.
TITLE IV
DRAWBACK OR EXEMPTION
Article 15
Prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs duties
1. Non-originating materials used in the manufacture of products originating in
Turkey, in Montenegro or in one of the other countries or territories referred to in
Articles 3 and 4 for which a proof of origin is issued or made out in accordance with
the provisions of Title V shall not be subject in Turkey or in Montenegro to drawback
of, or exemption from, customs duties of whatever kind.
2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall apply to any arrangement for refund,
remission or non-payment, partial or complete, of customs duties or charges having an
equivalent effect, applicable in Turkey or in Montenegro to materials used in the
manufacture, where such refund, remission or non-payment applies, expressly or in
effect, when products obtained from the said materials are exported and not when they
are retained for home use there.
3. The exporter of products covered by a proof of origin shall be prepared to submit
at any time, upon request from the customs authorities, all appropriate documents
proving that no drawback has been obtained in respect of the non-originating
materials used in the manufacture of the products concerned and that all customs
duties or charges having equivalent effect applicable to such materials have actually
been paid.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 shall also apply in respect of packaging
within the meaning of Article 8(2), accessories, spare parts and tools within the
meaning of Article 9 and products in a set within the meaning of Article 10 when such
items are non-originating.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall apply only in respect of materials which
are of the kind to which the Agreement applies. Furthermore, they shall not preclude
the application of an export refund system for agricultural products, applicable upon
export in accordance with the provisions of the Agreement. 
TITLE V
PROOF OF ORIGIN
Article 16
General requirements
1. Products originating in Turkey shall, on importation into Montenegro and
products originating in Montenegro shall, on importation into Turkey benefit from the
Agreement upon submission of either:
(a) a movement certificate EUR.I, a specimen of which appears in Annex Ill; or
(b) in the cases specified in Article 22(1), a declaration, subsequently referred to as
the "invoice declaration", given by the exporter on an invoice, a delivery note or
any other commercial document which describes the products concerned in
sufficient detail to enable them to be identified; the text of the invoice declaration
appears in Annex IV.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, originating products within the meaning of this
Protocol shall, in the cases specified in Article 27, benefit from the Agreement
without it being necessary to submit any of the documents referred to above.
Article 17
Procedure for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.l
1. A movement certificate EUR.I shall be issued by the customs authorities of the
exporting country on application having been made in writing by the exporter or,
under the exporter's responsibility, by his authorised representative.
2. For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised representative shall fill out both
the movement certificate EUR.I and the application form, specimens of which appear
in Annex III. These forms shall be completed in one of the languages in which this
Agreement is drawn up and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of
the exporting country. If they are hand-written, they shall be completed in ink in
printed characters. The description of the products must be given in the box reserved
for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where the box is not completely
filled, a horizontal line must be drawn below the last line of the description, the empty
space being crossed through.
3. . The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.I shall be
prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities of the
exporting country where the movement certificate EUR.I is issued, all appropriate
documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the
fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. 
4. A movement certificate EURI shall be issued by the customs authorities of
Turkey or of Montenegro if the products concerned can be considered as products
originating in Turkey~ Montenegro or in one of the other countries or territories
referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements of this Protocol.
5. The customs authorities issuing movement certificates EURI shall take any steps
necessary to verifY the originating status of the products and the fulfilment of the
other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call
for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any
other check considered appropriate. They shall also ensure that the forms referred to
in paragraph 2 are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space
reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to
exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
6. The date of issue of the movement certificate EURI shall be indicated in Box 11
of the certificate.
7. A movement certificate EURI shall be issued by the customs authorities and
made available to the exporter as soon as actual exportation has been effected or
ensured.
Article 18
Movement certificates EUR.l issued retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 17(7), a movement certificate EURI may exceptionally
be issued after exportation of the products to which it relates if:
(a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary
omissions or special circumstances;
or
(b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that a movement
certificate EURI was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical
reasons.
2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his
application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the movement
certificate EUR.I relates, and state the reasons for his request.
3. The customs authorities may issue a movement certificate EURI retrospectively
only·after verifying that the information supplied in the exporter's application agrees
with that in the corresponding file.
4. Movement certificates EUR.l issued retrospectively must be endorsed with the
following phrase in English:
"ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY", 
5~ The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be inserted in the "Remarks"
box of the movement certificate EUR.l.
Article 19
Issue of a duplicate movement certificate EUR.l
1. In the event of theft, loss or destruction of a movement certificate EUR.l, the
exporter may apply to the customs authorities which issued it for a duplicate made out
on the basis of the export documents in their possession.
2. The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed with the following word in
English:
"DUPLICATE"
3. The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be inserted in the "Remarks"
box of the duplicate movement certificate EURI.
4. The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of the original movement
certificate EURl, shall take effect as from that date.
Article 20
Issue of movement certificates EUR.l on the basis of a proof of origin issued or
made out previously
"When originating products are placed under the control of a customs office in Turkey
or in Montenegro, it shall be possible to replace the original proof of origin by one or
more movement certificates EURI for the purpose of sending all or some of these
products elsewhere within Turkey or Montenegro. The replacement movement
certificate(s) EUR.I shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the
products are placed.
Article 21
Accounting segregation
I. "Where considerable cost or material difficulties arise in keeping separate stocks
of originating and non-originating materials which are identical and interchangeable,
the customs authorities may, at the written request of those concerned, authorise the
so-called "accounting segregation" method to be used for managing such stocks.
2. This method must be able to ensure that, for a specific reference-period, the
number of products obtained which could be considered as "originating" is the same
as that which would have been obtained if there had been physical segregation of the
stocks.
3. The customs authorities may grant such authorisation, subject to any conditions
deemed appropriate. 
4. This method is recorded and applied on the basis of the general accounting
principles applicable in the country where the product was manufactured.
5. The beneficiary of this facilitation may issue or apply for proofs of origin, as the
case may be, for the quantity of products which may be considered as originating. At
the request of the customs authorities, the beneficiary shall provide a statement of
how the quantities have been managed.
6. The customs authorities shall monitor the use made of the authorisation and may
withdraw it at any time whenever the beneficiary makes improper use of the
authorisation in any manner whatsoever or fails to fulfil any of the other conditions
laid down in this Protocol.
Article 22
Conditions for making out an invoice declaration
1. An invoice declaration as referred to in Article 16(1 )(b) may be made out;
(a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23,
or
(b) by any exporter for any consignment conslstmg of one or more packages
containing originating products whose total value does not exceed EUR 6,000.
2. An invoice declaration may be made out if the products concerned can be
considered as products originating in Turkey, in Montenegro or in one of the other
countries or territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements
of this Protocol.
3. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall be prepared to submit at any
time, at the request of the customs authorities of the exporting country, all appropriate
documents proving the originating status of the products concerned as well as the
fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
4. An invoice declaration shall be made out by the exporter by typing, stamping or
printing on the invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document, the
declaration, the text of which appears in Annex IV, using one of the' linguistic
versions set out in that Annex and in accordance with the provisions of the domestic
law of the exporting country. If the declaration is hand-written, it shall be written in
ink in printed characters.
5. Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature of the exporter in
manuscript. However, an approved exporter within the meaning of Article 23 shall not
be required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the customs authorities of
the exporting country a written undertaking that he accepts full responsibility for any
invoice declaration which identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him. 
6. An invoice declaration may be made out by the exporter when the products to
which it relates are exported, or after exportation on condition that it is presented in
the importing country no longer than two years after the importation of the products to
which it relates.
Article 23
Approved exporter
1. The customs authorities of the exporting country may authorise any exporter,
hereinafter referred to as 'approved exporter', who makes frequent shipments of
products under this Agreement to make out invoice declarations irrespective of the
value of the products concerned. An exporter seeking such authorisation must offer to
the satisfaction of the customs authorities all guarantees necessary to verify the
originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of
this Protocol.
2. The customs authorities may grant the status of approved exporter subject to any
conditions which they consider appropriate.
3. The customs authorities shall grant to the approved exporter a customs
authorisation number which shall appear on the invoice declaration.
. 4. The customs authorities shall monitor the use of the authorisation by the
approved exporter.
5. The customs authorities may withdraw the authorisation at any time. They shall
do so where the approved exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in
paragraph I, no longer fulfils the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 or otherwise
makes an incorrect use of the authorisation.
Article 24
Validity of proof of origin
1. A proof of origin shall be valid for four months from the date of issue in the
exporting country, and must be submitted within the said period to the customs
authorities of the importing country.
2. Proofs of origin which are submitted to the customs authorities of the importing
country after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 1 may be accepted
for the purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to submit these
documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.
3. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities of the importing
country may accept the proofs of origin where the products have been submitted
before the said final date. 
Article 25
Submission of proof of origin
Proofs of origin shall be submitted to the customs authorities of the importing country
in accordance with the procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may
require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the import declaration to
be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the products meet
the conditions required for the implementation of the Agreement.
Article 26
Importation by instalments
Where, at the request of the importer and on the conditions laid down by the customs
authorities of the importing country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the
meaning of General Rule 2( a) of the Harmonized System falling within Sections XVI
and XVII or headings 7308 and 9406 of the Harmonized System are imported by
instalments, a single proof of origin for such products shall be submitte4 to the
customs authorities upon importation of the first instalment.
Article 27
Exemptions from proof of origin
1. Products sent as small packages from private persons to private persons or
forming part of travellers' personal luggage shall be admitted as originating products
without requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such products are
not imported by way of trade and have been declared as meeting the requirements of
this Protocol and where there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In
the case of products sent by post, this declaration can be made on the customs
.declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper annexed to that document.
2. Imports which are occasional and consist solely of products for the personal use
of the recipients or travellers or their families shall not be considered as imports by
way of trade if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that no
commercial purpose is in view.
3. Furthermore, the total value of these products shall not exceed EUR 500 in the
case of small packages or EUR 1,200 in the case of products forming part of
travellers' personal luggage. 
Article 28
Supporting documents
The documents referred to in Articles 17(3) and 22(3) used for the purpose of proving
that products covered by a movement certificate EUR.l or an invoice declaration can
be considered as products originating in Turkey, in Montenegro or in one of the other
countries or territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements
of this Protocol may consist inter alia of the following:
(£i) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the exporter or supplier to obtain
the goods concerned, contained for example in his accounts or internal bookkeeping;
(b) documents proving the originating status of materials used, issued or made out in
Turkey or in Montenegro where these documents are used in accordance with
domestic law;
(c) documents proving the working or processing of materials in Turk~y or in
Montenegro, issued or made out in Turkey or in Montenegro, where these
documents are used in accordance with domestic law;
(d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoice declarations proving the originating
status of materials used, issued or made out in Turkey or in Montenegro in
accordance with this Protocol, or in one of the other countries or territories
referred to in Articles 3 and 4, in accordance with rules of origin which are
identical to the rules in this Protocol.
(e) appropriate evidence concerning working or processing undergone outside Turkey
or Montenegro by application of Article 12, proving that the requirements of that
Article have been satisfied.
Article 29
Preservation of proof of origin and supporting documents
1. The exporter applying for the issue of a movement certificate EUR.l shall keep
for at least three years the documents referred to in Article 17(3).
2. The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall keep for at least three years
a copy of this invoice declaration as well as the documents referred to in
Article 22(3).
3. The customs authorities of the exporting country issuing a movement
certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the application form referred to in
Article 17(2).
4. The customs authorities of the importing country shall keep for at least
three years the movement certificates EUR.l and the invoice declarations submitted to
them. 
Article 30
Discrepancies and formal errors
L The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the proof
of origin and those made in the documents submitted to the customs office for the
purpose of carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso facto
render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly established that this document
does correspond to the products submitted.
2. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof of origin should not cause
this document to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning
the correctness of the statements made in this document.
Article 31
Amounts expressed in euro
L For the application of the provisions of Article 22(1 )(b) and Article 27(3) in cases
where products are invoiced in a currency other than euro, amounts in the· national
currencies of Turkey, of Montenegro and of the other countries or territories referred
to in Articles 3 and 4 equivalent to the amounts expressed in euro shall be fixed
annually by each of the countries concerned.
2. A consignment shall benefit from the provisions of Article 22(1 )(b) or Article
27(3) by reference to the currency in which the invoice is drawn up, according to the
amount fixed by the country concerned.
3. The amounts to be used in any given national currency shall be the equivalent in
that currency of the amounts expressed in euro as at the first working day of October.
The Parties shall communicate the amounts to each other by 15 October and they shall
apply them from 1 January the following year.
4.A country may round up or down the amount resulting from the conversion into
its national currency of an amount expressed in euro. The rounded-off amount may
not differ from the amount resulting from the conversion by more than 5 per cent. A
country may retain unchanged its national currency equivalent of an amount
expressed in euro if, at the time of the annual adjustment provided for in paragraph 3,
the conversion of that amount, prior to any rounding-off, results in an increase of less
than 15 per cent in the national currency equivalent. The national currency equivalent
may be retained unchanged if the conversion would result in a decrease in that
equivalent value.
5 . The amounts expressed in euro shall be reviewed by the Joint Committee at the
request of Turkey or of Montenegro. When carrying out this review, the Joint
Committee shall consider the desirability of preserving the effects of the limits
concerned in real terms. For this purpose, it may decide to modify the amounts
expressed in euro. 
TITLE VI
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CO-OPERATION
Article 32
Mutual assistance
1. The customs authorities of Turkey and of Montenegro shall provide each other
through the competent customs administrations with specimen impressions of stamps
used in their customs offices for the issue of movement certificates EUR.1 and with
the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for verifYing those certificates
and invoice declarations.
2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, Turkey and Montenegro
shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking
the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.1 or the invoice declarations and
the correctness of the information given in these documents.
Article 33
Verification of proofs of origin
1. Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or
. whenever the customs authorities of the importing country have reasonable doubts as
to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned
or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol.
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs
authorities of the importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR.1 and
the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration, or a copy of these
documents, to the customs authorities of the exporting country giving, where
appropriate, the reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained
suggesting that the information given on the proof of origin is incorrect shall be
forwarded in support of the request for verification.
3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting
country. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to
carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered
appropriate.
4. If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting
of preferential treatment to the products concerned while awaiting the results of the
verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any
precautionary measures judged necessary. 
5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the
results of this verification as soon as possible. These results must indicate clearly
whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be
considered as products originating in Turkey, in Montenegro or in one. of the other
countries or territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4 and fulfil the other requirements
of this Protocol.
6. If in ca1?es of reasonable doubt therc is no reply within ten months of the date of
the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to
determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the
products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional
circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.
Article 34
Dispute settlement
Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 33 which
cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the
customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification or where they raise a
question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Joint
Committee.
In all cases the settlement of disputes between the importer and the customs
authorities of the importing country shall be under the legislation of the said country.
Article 35
Penalties
Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a
document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a
preferential treatment for products.
Article 36
Free zones
1. Turkey and Montenegro shall take all necessary steps to ensure that products
traded under cover of a proof of origin which in the course of transport use a free zone
situated in their territory, are not substituted by other goods and do not undergo
handling other than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.
2. By means of an exemption to the provisions contained in paragraph 1, when
products originating in Turkey or in Montenegro are imported into a free zone under
cover of a proof of origin and undergo treatment or processing, the authorities
concerned shall issue a new movement certificate EUR.l at the exporter's request, if
the treatment or processing undergone is in conformity with the provisions of· this
ProtocoL
TITLE VII
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 37
Goods in transit and storage
Goods which conform to the provisions of Title II and which on the date of entry into
force of the Agreement are either being transported or are being held in Turkey or in
Montenegro in temporary storage, in bonded warehouses or in free zones, may be
accepted as originating products subject to the submission, within four months from
that date, to the customs authorities of the importing country of proof of origin, drawn
up retrospectively, and of any documents that provide supporting evidence of the
conditions of transport. 
Article 38
Annexes
Annex I, II, III, IV and V to this Protocol shall form an integral part thereof.
Article 39
Amendments to the Protocol
The Joint Committee may decide to amend the provisions of this ProtocoL