                     GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS 
                     
                                                AGREEMENT 
                     
                                                 11.10.77 
                     
                          BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST 
                             THE REPUBLICS AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC 
                              OF THE REPUBLIC ON SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION 
                                IN THE FIELD OF UPPER ATMOSPHERE STUDIES 
                     
                       The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and 
                    The Government of the Mongolian People's Republic, 
                       attaching importance to the research of physical and chemical 
                    processes occurring in the upper atmosphere and observations of 
                    changes in its parameters, 
                       Considering that cooperation in the field of upper-level studies 
                    the atmosphere is mutually beneficial and that for its development there are 
                    real opportunities, 
                       Convinced that such cooperation will be 
                    to contribute to the further development of relations between the two 
                    Countries 
                       Recognizing the principles and conditions governed by the existing 
                    General conditions for the implementation of scientific and technical cooperation 
                    between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Mongolian Republic 
                    The People's Republic has agreed to conclude this Agreement 
                    on scientific and technical cooperation in the field of upper education 
                    Layers of the atmosphere and appointed their plenipotentiary representatives: 
                       (surnames of commissioners followed). 
                       Designated representatives of Parties by exchanging data 
                    Have agreed as follows: 
                     
                                                 Article 1 
                     
                       Cooperation in the study of the upper atmosphere over 
                    the territory of the Mongolian People's Republic has its main 
                    To: 
                       1.1. establishment of the Mongolian People's Republic on the territory of 
                    joint station of rocket sounding of the atmosphere; 
                       1.2. organization and conduct of joint
                    research works and experiments in the studied 
                    Area; 
                       1.3. mutual secondment of specialists to participate in 
                    joint scientific developments, conferences and symposia and for 
                    familiarization with scientific and technological achievements; 
                       1.4. exchange of scientific and technical information on the issues of study 
                    upper atmosphere; 
                       1.5. mutual transfer of primary observations and 
                    research and the results of completed work; 
                       1.6. joint and separate publication of the results 
                    mutually agreed research; 
                       1.7. assistance in training and advanced training 
                    Specialists; 
                       1.8. assistance in the provision of technical assistance by supplying 
                    equipment, secondment and reception of specialists; 
                       1.9. full assistance to the development of multilateralism
                    cooperation of the socialist countries within the framework of the Council 
                    Mutual Economic Assistance, Intercosmos Council, Conference 
                    Directors of Hydrometeorological/Meteorological Services 
                    socialist countries and the effective implementation of the Basic 
                    the principles of international socialist integration; 
                       1.10. mutual coordination of  participation in the activities of the World
                    meteorological organization and other international organizations. 
                     
                                                 Article 2 
                     
                       In order to unite the efforts of both countries and increase 
                    effectiveness of cooperation in the study of the upper atmosphere 
                    The Parties shall establish on the territory of the Mongolian People's Republic 
                    joint station of rocket sounding of the atmosphere with the following tasks: 
                       2.1. obtaining information about the vertical distribution 
                    temporal variability of the main parameters of the atmosphere; 
                       2.2. research of physical and physico-chemical processes, 
                    occurring in the upper atmosphere; 
                       2.3. studying the composition of the upper atmosphere and  , first of all,
                    aerosols, ozone and other small components. 
                       At the joint station of rocket sounding of the atmosphere will be 
                    operational launches of meteorological missiles and 
                    additional launches for research purposes on 
                    a mutually agreed programme. 
                     
                                                 Article 3 
                     
                       The Soviet Party in the organization and functioning of the joint 
                    the rocket sounding station of the atmosphere provides for its 
                    account: 
                       3.1. supply of ground equipment for meteorological 
                    missile system, including radar station included 
                    with radio-transparent shelter, telemetry equipment, 
                    instrumentation and calibration devices for preparation 
                    scientific equipment for launch, devices for primary processing 
                    Data Rocket Sensing, Launcher, Metal 
                    starting hangar with a sliding roof; 
                       3.2. annual delivery of the relevant quantity
                    Meteorological rockets complete with onboard scientific 
                    Equipment; 
                       3.3. transportation of technological equipment and meteoraket 
                    on the territory of the Soviet Union; 
                       3.4. Secondment to the Mongolian  People's Republic up to 10 
                    Soviet specialists for a period of up to one year for installation, 
                    installation and adjustment of joint technological equipment 
                    stations, as well as training Mongolian specialists on various 
                    sections of its activities; 
                       3.5. implementation of scientific, technical and methodological 
                    leadership, participation in the conduct of rocket sounding of the atmosphere 
                    and special experiments, for which he sent to the Mongolian 
                    People's Republic of three or four Soviet specialists for a time 
                    the operation of the Agreement; 
                       3.6. replenishment of spare parts of the main technological 
                    Equipment. 
                     
                                                 Article 4 
                     
                       Equipment supplied by the Soviet Side upon completion 
                    works provided for in this Agreement shall be refundable, 
                    unless the Parties decide otherwise. 
                     
                                                 Article 5 
                     
                       Mongolian Side in the organization and functioning of 
                    a joint atmospheric sounding rocket station provides 
                    at your own expense: 
                       5.1. allocation of buildings and areas for the installation of ground 
                    apparatus, instruments and equipment and the creation of the required conditions 
                    their technical operation; 
                       5.2. alienation of the corresponding zone for the fall of spent 
                    stages of meteorological missiles; 
                       5.3. allocation of the required amount of scientific and technical and 
                    Attendants; 
                       5.4. implementation of rocket sounding of the atmosphere, primary 
                    processing and transmission of data via communication channels to the Soviet Side 
                    Observations; 
                       5.5. unloading and delivery to places of storage and use 
                    meteorological rockets coming from the Soviet Union together with 
                    charges and pyrotechnic means, as well as other 
                    equipment and materials; 
                       5.6. allocation of service and living space for Soviet 
                    specialists and the creation of the necessary conditions for their residence and 
                    works, including the provision of transport. 
                     
                                                 Article 6 
                     
                       The Parties shall take the necessary security measures when 
                    operation of the joint rocket sounding station 
                    atmosphere, in particular, when launching missiles, transportation, 
                    storage of missiles and charges for them. 
                     
                                                 Article 7 
                     
                       The Contracting Parties shall ensure the commencement of regular launches 
                    meteorological rockets no later than 1979. 
                     
                                                 Article 8 
                     
                       Damage caused by the activities of the joint station 
                    rocket sounding of the atmosphere to personnel or property, 
                    shall be reimbursed by the injured Party, even if the responsibility for 
                    this damage shall be attributable to the other Party except 
                    intentional acts committed by the latter Party. 
                     
                                                 Article 9 
                     
                       Data on the structural parameters of the atmosphere obtained at 
                    Joint rocket sounding, will be transmitted to 
                    operational basis and to be used as Contracting Parties 
                    Parties, and for international exchange in the interests of the World 
                    weather services on the basis of mutual agreement of the Parties. 
                       Results of joint scientific research obtained on 
                    based on rocket sounding of the atmosphere, including those performed 
                    at the level of inventions, will belong to the Union of Soviet 
                    the Socialist Republics and the Mongolian People's Republic and 
                    can be used in the territory of each of these countries in 
                    in accordance with their national legislation. 
                       Transfer of the results of joint scientific research, 
                    obtained on the basis of rocket sounding of the atmosphere, thirdly 
                    the country is carried out only with the mutual consent of the Parties. 
                     
                                                Article 10 
                     
                       Implementation of joint research work with 
                    use of joint rocket sounding materials 
                    atmosphere over the territory of the Mongolian People's Republic of the Party 
                    carry out according to agreed plans, which provide for 
                    topics of cooperation, forms of work, goals, stages and 
                    forms of completion of work, organizations - executors, types, volumes and 
                    terms of mutual secondment and reception of specialists and list 
                    mutually transmitted technical documentation.  Suggestions for 
                    the parties shall send directly to each other 
                    not later than four months before the beginning of the planned period. 
                       Proposals by Parties to amend and supplement plans 
                    scientific and technical cooperation shall be considered by the Parties to 
                    expeditiously.  Mutually agreed amendments and additions 
                    are provisionally accepted by the Parties for execution and finally 
                    shall enter into force after their inclusion in the Minutes of the Next Meeting 
                    representatives of Parties. 
                     
                                                Article 11 
                     
                       Representatives of the Parties hold meetings to summarize the results 
                    cooperation and coordination of joint work plans for 
                    the following period, as well as for the consideration of proposals, 
                    aimed at improving and increasing efficiency 
                    Cooperation. Meetings are held at least once every two years, 
                    alternately in both countries. 
                       The costs of organizing the meeting shall be borne by the Party in the territory 
                    which is being met. 
                     
                                                Article 12 
                     
                       The Parties will promote publication  in their journals
                    articles devoted to scientific problems in the field of this 
                    Cooperation. 
                     
                                                Article 13 
                     
                       The parties will exchange experience and results of work 
                    research institutions in the field of upper learning 
                    layers of the atmosphere through the mutual transfer of scientific and technical 
                    information, referral of its specialists to other institutions 
                    Parties to familiarize themselves with the ongoing studies, 
                    replenishment of knowledge, consultations, participation in scientific 
                    activities, as well as for any other purposes representing 
                    mutual interest in the framework of cooperation. 
                     
                                                Article 14 
                     
                       Short-term secondments of specialists will be 
                    be carried out on the terms of currency-free exchange.  At the same time, the Parties 
                    3 months before the referral of specialists will inform the program, 
                    the date of their arrival and the length of their stay. 
                     
                                                Article 15 
                     
                       The Parties will consult and assist in 
                    procurement of instruments and equipment, as well as in the receipt of materials and 
                    literature necessary for scientific research. 
                     
                                                Article 16 
                     
                       Reports, lectures or any other scientific work, 
                    carried out by invited specialists, will not be additional 
                    Paid. 
                     
                                                Article 17 
                     
                       The Parties shall authorize the Main Directorate of the Hydrometeorological Service to 
                    The Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics <*> and 
                    Main Directorate of the Hydrometeorological Service of the Council of Ministers of mongolia 
                    The People's Republic shall cooperate and adopt 
                    necessary measures related to the implementation of the provisions arising from 
                    of this Agreement. 
                        -------------------------------- 
                       <*> decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR of March 30, 1978 
                    G.  transformed into the State Committee for Hydrometeorology and 
                    control of the natural environment of the USSR. 
                     
                                                Article 18 
                     
                       Organizational, economic and legal issues arising 
                    as a result of the activities of the joint missile station 
                    sounding of the atmosphere not provided for in this Agreement, 
                    will be resolved on the basis of mutual agreement 
                    organizations authorized by this Agreement in agreement  with 
                    the competent authorities of the Parties. 
                     
                                                Article 19 
                     
                       This Agreement shall not be construed as conflicting 
                    legislation of each Party, previously concluded agreements 
                    between the Parties, as well as any international 
                    the commitments undertaken by each of the Parties. 
                     
                                                Article 20 
                     
                       This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of its signature and 
                    is concluded for 5 years. 
                       The Agreement is automatically extended upon expiration 
                    of this period, unless either Party notifies in writing 
                    of your intention to denounce this Agreement. 
                       The agreement expires after six months 
                    from the moment of notification by one of the Parties of its denunciation. 
                     
                       Done in two copies at the town of  Moscow 11 October 1977, 
                    each in Russian and Mongolian, with both texts having 
                    equal force. 
                     
                                                                             (Signatures) 

