PROTOCOL
for the prevention of pollution of the Mediterranean Sea by dumping from ships and
aircraft
THE CONTRACTING PARTIES TO THE PRESENT PROTOCOL,
BEING PARTIES to the Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution,
RECOGNIZING the danger posed to the marine environment by pollution caused by the dumping
or wastes or other matter from ships and aircraft,
CONSIDERING that the coastal States of the Mediterranean Sea have a common interest in
protecting the marine environment from this danger,
BEARING IN MIND the Convention on the prevention of marine pollution by dumping of
wastes and other matter, adopted in London in 1972,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS :
Article 1
The Contracting Parties to this Protocol (hereinafter
referred to as 'the Parties') shall take all appropriate
measures to prevent and abate pollution of the
Mediterranean Sea area caused by dumping from
ships and aircraft.
Article 2
The area to which this Protocol applies shall be the
Mediterranean Sea area as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean
Sea against pollution (hereinafter referred to as 'the
Convention').
Article 3
For the purposes of this Protocol :
1 . 'ships and aircraft' means waterborne or airborne
craft of any type whatsoever. This expression
includes air-cushioned craft and floating craft,
whether self-propelled or not, and platforms and
other man-made structures at sea and their
equipment.
2. 'Wastes or other matter' means material and
substances of any kind, form or description.
3 . 'Dumping means :
(a) any deliberate disposal at sea of wastes or
other matter from ships or aircraft;
(b) any deliberate disposal at sea of ships or
aircraft.
4. 'Dumping' does not include :
(a) the disposal at sea of wastes or other matter
incidental to, or derived from, the normal
operations of vessels, or aircraft and their
equipment, other than wastes or other matter
transported by or to vessels or aircraft,
operating for the purpose of disposal of such
matter, or derived from the treatment of such
wastes or other matter on such vessels or
aircraft;
(b) placement of matter for a purpose other than
the mere disposal thereof, provided that such
placement is not contrary to the aims of this
Protocol.
5. 'Organization' means the body referred to in
Article 13 of the Convention.
Article 4
The dumping into the Mediterranean Sea area of
wastes or other matter listed in Annex I to this
Protocol is prohibited.
Article 5
The dumping into the Mediterranean Sea area of all
wastes or other matter listed in Annex II to this
Protocol requires, in each case, a prior special permit
from the competent national authorities.
Article 6
The dumping into the Mediterranean Sea area of all
other wastes or other matter requires a prior general
permit from the competent national authorities.
Article 7
The permits referred to in Articles 5 and 6 above
shall be issued only after careful consideration of all
the factors set forth in Annex III to this Protocol.
The Organization shall receive records of such
permits.
Article 8
The provisions of Articles 4, 5 and 6 shall not apply Article 11
in case of force majeure due to stress of weather or
any other cause when human life or the safety of a
ship or aircraft is threatened. Such dumpings shall
immediately be reported to the Organization and
either through the Organization or directly, to any
Party or Parties likely to be affected, together with
full details of the circumstances and of the nature and
quantities of the wastes or other matter dumped.
Article 9
If a Party in a critical situation of an exceptional
nature considers that wastes or other matter listed in
Annex I to this Protocol cannot be disposed of on
land without unacceptable danger or damage, above
all for the safety of human life, the Party concerned
shall fortwith consult the Organization. The
Organization, after consulting the Parties to this
Protocol, shall recommend methods of storage or the
most satisfactory means of destruction or disposal
under the prevailing circumstances. The Party shall
inform the Organization of the steps adopted in
pursuance of these recommendations. The Parties
pledge themselves to assist one another in such
situations.
Article 10
1 . Each Party shall designate one or more competent
authorities to :
(a) issue the special permits provided for in Article 5;
(b) issue the general permits provided for in Article
6;
(c) keep records of the nature and quantities of the
wastes or other matter permitted to be dumped
and of the location, date and method of
dumping.
2. The competent authorities of each Party shall
issue the permits provided for in Articles 5 and 6 in
respect of the wastes or other matter intended for
dumping:
(a) loaded in its territory;
(b) loaded by a ship or aircraft registered in its
territory or flying its flag, when the loading
occurs in the territory of a State not Party to this
Protocol.
Article 11
1 . Each Party shall apply the measures required to
implement this Protocol to all:
(a) ships and aircraft registered in its territory or
flying its flag;
(b) ships and aircraft loading in its territory wastes
or other matter which are to be dumped;
(c) ships and aircraft believed to be engaged in
dumping in areas under its jurisdiction in this matter.
2. This Protocol shall not apply to any ships or
aircraft owned or operated by a State Party to this
Protocol and used for the time being only on
Government noncommercial service. However, each
Party shall ensure by the adoption of appropriate
measures not impairing the operations or operational
capabilities of such ships or aircraft owned or
operated by it, that such ships and aircraft act in a
manner consistent, so far as is reasonable and
practicable, with this Protocol.
Article 12
Each Party undertakes to issue instructions to its
maritime inspection ships and aircraft and to other
appropriate services to report to its authorities any
incidents or conditions in the Mediterranean Sea area
which give rise to suspicions that dumping in
contravention of the provisions of this Protocol has
occurred or is about to occur. That Party shall, if it
considers it appropriate, report accordingly to any
other Party concerned.
Article 13
Nothing in this Protocol shall affect the right of each
Party to adopt other measures, in accordance with
international law, to prevent pollution due to
dumping.
Article 14
1 . Ordinary meetings of the Parties to this
Protocol shall be held in conjunction with ordinary
meetings of the Contracting Parties to the
Convention held pursuant to Article 14 of the
Convention. The Parties to this Protocol may also
hold extraordinary meetings in conformity with
Article 14 of the Convention.
2. It shall be the function of the meetings of the
Parties to this Protocol :
(a) to keep under review the implementation of this
Protocol, and to consider the efficacy of the
measures adopted and the need for any other
measures, in particular in the form of Annexes;
(b) to study and consider the records of the permits
issued in accordance with Articles 5, 6 and 7 and
of the dumping which has taken place;
(c) to review and amend as required any Annex to
this Protocol ;
(d) to discharge such other functions as may be
appropriate for the implementation of this
Protocol.
3. The adoption of amendments to the Annexes to
this Protocol pursuant to Article 17 of the
Convention shall require a three-fourths majority
vote of the Parties.
Article IS
1 . The provisions of the Convention relating to
any Protocol shall apply with respect to the present
Protocol.
2. The rules of procedure and the financial rules
adopted pursuant to Article 18 of the Convention
shall apply with respect to this Protocol, unless the
Parties to this Protocol agree otherwise.
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective Governments,
have signed this Protocol.
Done at Barcelona on 16 February 1976 in a single copy in the Arabic, English, French
and Spanish languages, the four texts being equally authoritative.



ANNEX 1
A. The following substances and materials are listed for the purpose of Article 4 of the Protocol.
1 . Organohalogen compounds and compounds which may form such substances in the marine
environment, excluding those which are non-toxic or which are rapidly converted in the
sea into substances which are biologically harmless, provided that they do not make edible
marine organisms unpalatable.
2. Organosilicon compounds and compounds which may form such substances in the marine
environment, excluding those which are non-toxic or which are rapidly converted in the
sea into substances which are biologically harmless, provided that they do not make edible
marine organisms unpalatable.
3 . Mercury and mercury compounds.
4. Cadmium and cadmium compounds.
5 . Persistent plastic and other persistent synthetic materials which may materially interfere
with fishing or navigation, reduce amenities, or interfere with other legitimate uses of the
sea .
6. Crude oil and hydrocarbons which may be derived from petroleum, and any mixtures
containing any of these, taken on board for the purpose of dumping.
7. High-, medium- and low-level radioactive wastes or other high-, medium- and low-level
radioactive matter to be defined by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
8. Acid and alkaline compounds of such composition and in such quantity that they may
seriously impair the quality of sea water. The composition and quantity to be taken into
consideration shall be determined by the Parties in accordance with the procedure laid
down in Article 14 (3) of this Protocol .
9. Materials in whatever form (e.g. solids, liquids, semi-liquids, gases, or in a living state)
produced for biological and chemical warfare, other than those rapidly rendered harmless
by physical, chemical or biological processes in the sea , provided that they do not :
(i) make edible marine organisms unpalatable ; or
(ii) endanger human or animal health.
B. This Annex does not apply to wastes or other materials, such as sewage sludge and dredge
spoils, containing the substances referred to in paragraphs 1 to 6 above as trace contaminants.
The dumping of such wastes shall be subject to the provisions of Annexes II and III as appropriate.
ANNEX II
The following wastes and other matter, the dumping of which requires special care, are listed for
the purposes of Article 5.
1. (i) arsenic, lead, copper, zinc, beryllium, chromium, nickel, vanadium, selenium, antimony
and their compounds ;
(ii) cyanides and fluorides ;
(iii) pesticides and their by-products not covered in Annex I ;
(iv) synthetic organic chemicals, other than those referred to in Annex I, likely to produce
harmful effects on marine organisms or to make edible marine organisms unpalatable ;
2. (i) acid and alkaline compounds the composition and quantity of which have not yet been
determined in accordance with the procedure referred to in Annex I A (8) ;
(ii) acid and alkaline compounds not covered by Annex I, excluding compounds to be
dumped in quantities below thresholds which shall be determined by the Parties in
accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 14 (3) of this Protocol.
3. Containers, scrap metal and other bulky wastes liable to sink to the sea bottom which may
present a serious obstacle to fishing or navigation.
4. Substances which, though of a non-toxic nature may become harmful owing to the quantities
in which they are dumped, or which are liable to reduce amenities seriously or to endanger
human life or marine organisms or to interfere with navigation.
5 . Radioactive waste or other radioactive matter which will not be included in Annex I. In the
issue of permits for the dumping of this matter, the Parties should take full account of the
recommendations of the competent international body in this field, at present the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
ANNEX 111
The factors to be considered in establishing criteria governing the issue of permits for the
dumping of matter at sea taking into account Article 7 include :
A. Characteristics and composition of the matter
1 . Total amount and average compositions of matter dumped (e.g. per year).
2. Form (e.g. solid, sludge, liquid or gaseous).
3. Properties : physical (e.g. solubility and density), chemical and biochemical (e.g. oxygen
demand, nutrients) and biological (e.g. presence of viruses, bacteria, yeasts, parasites).
4. Toxicity.
5 . Persistence : physical, chemical and biological.
6. Accumulation and biotransformation in biological materials or sediments.
7. Susceptibility to physical, chemical and biochemical changes and interaction in the aquatic
environment with other dissolved organic and inorganic materials.
8. Probability of production of taints or other changes reducing marketability of resources
(fish, shellfish, etc.).
B. Characteristics of dumping site and method of deposit
1 . Location (e.g. coordinates of the dumping area, depth and distance from the coast),
location in relation to other areas (e.g. amenity areas, spawning, nursery and fishing areas
and exploitable resources).
2. Rate of disposal per specific period (e.g. quantity per day, per week, per month).
3. Methods of packaging and containment, if any.
4. Initial dilution achieved by proposed method of release, particularly the speed of the ship .
5 . Dispersal characteristics (e.g. effects of currents, tides and wind on horizontal transport
and vertical mixing).
6. Water characteristics (e.g. temperature, pH, salinity, stratification, oxygen indices of pollution
- dissolved oxygen (DO), chemical oxygen demand (COD), biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), nitrogen present in organic and mineral form, including ammonia, suspended
matter, other nutrients and productivity).
7. Bottom characteristics (e.g. topography, geochemical and geological characteristics and biological
productivity).
8 . Existence and effects of other dumpings which have been made in the dumping area (e.g.
heavy metal background reading and organic carbon content).
9. When issuing a permit for dumping, the Contracting Parties shall endeavour to determine
whether an adequate scientific basis exists for assessing the consequences of such dumping
in the area concerned, in accordance with the foregoing provisions and taking into
account seasonal variations.
C. General considerations and conditions
1 . Possible effects on amenities (e.g. presence of floating or stranded material, turbidity, objectionable
odour, discoloration and foaming).
2. Possible effects on marine life, fish and shellfish culture, fish stocks and fisheries, seaweed
harvesting and culture.
3. Possible effects on other uses of the sea (e.g. impairment of water quality for industrial use,
underwater corrosion of structures, interference with ship operations from floating materials,
interference with fishing or navigation through deposit of waste or solid objects on the
sea floor and protection of areas of special importance for scientific or conservation
purposes).
4. The practical availability of alternative land-based methods of treatment, disposal or elimination
or of treatment to render the matter less harmful for sea dumping.
