CONVENTION ON THE PROTECTION OF THE RHINE AGAINST POLLUTION BY
CHLORIDES 

Adopted at Bonn on 3 December 1976


      The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany,
      The Government of the French Republic,
      The Government of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,
      The Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
      and the Government of the Swiss Confederation,

      Referring to the Agreement of April 29, 1963 concerning the
International Commission for the Protection of the Rhine against
Pollution,

      Considering the present amount of chloride ions in the Rhine,

      Aware of the damage that could result therefrom,

      Referring to the findings and results of the Conference of
Ministers on the Pollution of the Rhine, which took place at The Hague
on October 25-26, 1972, during the course of which the desire was
expressed to improve progressively the quality of the waters of the
Rhine so that at the German-Netherlands border the chloride ion
content will not be greater than 200 mg/l,

      Have agreed on the following:


Article 1

1.    The Contracting Parties will strengthen their co-operation for
the purpose of fighting against the pollution of the Rhine by chloride
ions on the basis, during an initial stage, of the provisions of this
Convention.

2.    Annex A to the Convention specifies what the Contracting Parties
understand by the term "Rhine" for the purposes of the application of
the aforementioned Convention.


Article 2

1.    The discharge of chloride ions into the Rhine will be reduced by
at least 60 kg/s of chloride ions (annual average). This objective
will be achieved gradually and in French territory.

2.    In order to achieve the objective indicated in the preceding
paragraph, the French Government will, under the conditions set forth
in Annex I of this Convention, install an injection system in the sub-
soil of Alsace in order to reduce over a period of ten years the
discharges from the Alsace Potassium Mines by an initial quantity of
20 kg/s of chloride ions. The installation shall be constructed as
soon as possible, no later than 18 months after the entry into force
of the Convention. The French Government will report regularly to the
International Commission for the Protection of the Rhine against
Pollution (herein-after designated "the International Commission").

3.    The Contracting Parties are agreed that the French Government
will after consideration of the results obtained during the initial
stage described in paragraph 2, take all steps necessary to achieve
before January 1, 1980 the objective set forth in paragraph 1, by
injection into the Alsatian sub-soil or by other means, subject to an
agreement on the technical terms and conditions of the project and on
the financing of the costs relating thereto.

4.    The French Government will present an over-all plan on the
technical terms and conditions and the costs of the measures to be
taken pursuant to paragraph 3.


Article 3

1.    The Contracting Parties will take in their own territory, the
necessary measures to prevent an increase in the amounts of chloride
ions discharged into the Rhine basin. The national concentration
figures are shown in Annex II.

2.    An increase in the amounts of chloride ions from isolated
discharges shall be admissible only to the extent that the Contracting
Parties concerned will offset such concentration in their respective
territories or if a general method of offsetting it is found within
the framework of the International Commission. This provision shall
not hinder the application of Article 6.

3.    A Contracting Party may, in exceptional cases and for imperative
reasons, after having requested the opinion of the International
Commission, authorize an increase in concentration without immediately
offsetting it.

4.    The Contracting Parties will control all discharges of chloride
ions greater than 1 kg/s in the basin of the Rhine in their territory.

5.    Each Contracting Party will send an annual report to the
International Commission which shall indicate as precisely as possible
the increase in the chloride-ion concentration in the waters of the
Rhine. This report shall be based on all significant data from
pertinent national programs and shall distinguish discharges greater
than 1 kg/s from other discharges. Should such a distinction be
impossible to make, it must be reported to the International
Commission.

6.    The Annex mentioned previously in paragraph 1 as well as the
maximum concentration of 1 kg/s of chloride ions shall be reviewed
each year by the International Commission as the situation develops.
If necessary, the International Commission shall propose changes in
the Annex to the Governments.


Article 4

1.    The French Government, on its own initiative or at the request of
another Contracting Party may have the process of injection or
resorption of chloride ions halted when there is evidence of serious
danger to the environment and particularly to the water table.

2.    The French Government, or any other requesting Party, will
immediately inform the International Commission of the situation and
will provide data on the extent and nature of the danger.

3.    The French Government will immediately take the steps rendered
necessary by the situation and will report them to the International
Commission. When the situation is no longer considered dangerous, the
chloride-ion injection or resorption process is to be resumed without
delay.

4.    The Contracting Parties will, at the request of one of them
consult among themselves within the International Commission if the
need for additional measures should arise.


Article 5

      If the process of injection or resorption of chloride ions causes
damage for which compensation cannot be guaranteed fully or in part by
the constructors of the works or by third parties, the Contracting
Parties will consult among themselves at the request of one among them
regarding a possible contribution that may be paid to the French
Government.


Article 6

      The International Commission shall present to the Contracting
Parties within four years of the entry into force of the Convention
proposals concerning the means to achieve progressively a new
chloride-ion concentration limitation over the entire course of the
Rhine.


Article 7

1.    The expenses resulting from injection as provided in Article 2
paragraph 2 and from the preparatory works will be assumed by the
French Party.

2.    The Contracting Parties mentioned below will contribute to the
total cost of 132 million French francs by means of a lump sum
payment, prorated as follows:

      Federal Republic of Germany      30%
      Kingdom of the Netherlands        34%
      Swiss Confederation                6%

The payments shall be made no later than three months after the entry
into force of this Convention.

3.    The Contracting Parties will deliberate following the
presentation of the over-all plan provided for in Article 2 (4) and at
the request of the French Government, on the financing of the measures
to be carried out in application of Article 2 (3) on the basis of the
prorating given in paragraph 2 above. The costs of preliminary
research particularly relating to studies and exploration, and,
in addition, the unforeseen expenses not covered by the financing of
the first stage shall likewise be included in the financing plan.


Article 8

      The payments specified in Article 7 (2) shall be made in French
francs to account No. 440-09/line 1 in the Central Accounting Agency
of the French Treasury.


Article 9

      When, following the entry into force of this Convention, the
International Commission ascertains that at one of the measuring
points the load and concentration of chloride ions shows a continuing
tendency to increase, it shall request each contracting Party in whose
territory the cause of this increase is located to take the necessary
steps to halt it.


Article 10

1.    If any difficulties should result from the application of Article
9, and a period of six months has gone by since such difficulties were
noted by the International Commission, the latter, in order to present
a report to the Governments, may call upon the services of an
independent expert at the request of a Contracting Party.

2.    The expenses relating to the inquiry, including the expert's fee,
shall be divided among the Contracting Parties mentioned below, as
follows:

      Federal Republic of Germany      two sevenths (2/7) 
      French Republic                  two sevenths (2/7) 
      Kingdom of the Netherlands       two sevenths (2/7) 
      Swiss Confederation              one seventh (1/7)

      The International Commission may, in certain cases, establish a
different method for dividing the expenses.


Article 11

      When a Contracting Party notes a sudden and sizeable increase in
chloride ions in the waters of the Rhine or has knowledge of an
accident that may seriously endanger the quality of those waters, it
will report it without delay to the International Commission and to
the Contracting Parties likely to be affected, according to a
procedure to be established by the International Commission.


Article 12

1.    Each Contracting Party concerned will be responsible at the
appropriate measuring stations for the installation and operation of
the measuring equipment and systems serving to check the concentration
of chloride ions in the waters of the Rhine.

2.    The chloride-ion concentrations shall be determined on the basis
of the measurements carried out according to the recommendations of
the International Commission. 

3.    The Contracting Parties will report to the International
Commission regularly and at least every six months the results of the
checks carried out pursuant to paragraph 1 above.


Article 13

      Any dispute between the Contracting Parties regarding the
interpretation or application of the present Convention that cannot be
settled by negotiation shall, except when the Parties to the dispute
decide otherwise, be subject, at the request of one of them, to
arbitration in accordance with the provisions of Annex B . The latter,
as well as Annexes A, I, and II, shall form an integral part of this
Convention.


Article 14

      Each Signatory Party will notify the Government of the Swiss
Confederation of the execution of the procedures required for the
entry into force of this Convention. It shall enter into force on the
first day of the second month following receipt of the last
notification.


Article 15

      At the end of three years following its entry into force, this
Convention may be denounced at any time by any of the Contracting
Parties by means of a statement addressed to the Government of the
Swiss Confederation. The denunciation shall take effect, for the
denouncing Party, six months following receipt of the statement by the
Government of the Swiss Confederation. This shall not have the effect
of compromising the continued execution of tasks for which
international financing has been obtained.


Article 16

      The Government of the Swiss Confederation will inform the
Contracting Parties of the date of receipt of any notification or
statement received pursuant to Articles 14 and 15.


Article 17

1.    If the April 29, 1963 Agreement concerning the International
Commission for the Protection of the Rhine Against Pollution is
denounced by one of the Parties to the aforementioned Agreement, the
Contracting Parties will consult without delay on the measures
necessary to ensure the continued execution of the tasks that,
according to this Convention, are the responsibility of the
International Commission.

2.    If an agreement is not reached in the six months following the
opening of discussions, each of the Contracting Parties may denounce
this Convention at any time in accordance with Article 15, without
waiting for the three-year period to elapse.


Article 18

      This Convention, drawn up in a single copy in German, French and
Dutch, the three texts being equally authentic, shall be deposited in
the Archives of the Government of the Swiss Confederation which shall
transmit a certified copy to each of the Contracting Parties.


Done at Bonn on December 3, 1976.



Annex A

      For the purposes of this Convention, the Rhine begins at the
outlet from the lower lake and includes the branches of the river up
to the fresh-water limit from which its waters flow freely into the
North Sea including the Ijssel up to Kampen.

      The fresh-water limit is the area where at low tide and at a time
when the discharge of fresh water is low, a sizeable increase in the
chloride content is noted owing to the presence of sea water. This
area is, for the Nieuwe Maas, 1000 kilometers downstream from the
Constance Bridge over the Rhine. The other fresh-water limit points
shall be established by the International Commission, bearing in mind
the methods for determining the limit as defined above.



Annex B

ARBITRATION

1.    Unless the parties to the dispute decide otherwise, the procedure
for arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
contained in this annex.

2.    The Arbitral Tribunal shall be composed of three members. Each of
the parties to the dispute shall name an arbitrator and the two
arbitrators thus appointed shall designate by common accord a third
arbitrator, who will become the Chief Arbitrator of the Tribunal.

      If at the end of two months following the designation of the
second arbitrator the Chief Arbitrator of the Tribunal has not been
designated, the President of the European Court of Human Rights shall,
at the request of the most diligent party, appoint one within a new
two-month period.

3.    If, within two months following the receipt of the request
referred to in Article 13 of the Convention one of the parties to the
dispute does not appoint a member of the Tribunal, the other party may
request the President of the European Court of Human Rights to appoint
the Chief Arbitrator of the Arbitral Tribunal within a new two-month
period. Upon his designation, the Chief Arbitrator of the Arbitral
Tribunal shall request the party that has not named an arbitrator to
do so within two months. If no action has been taken during that time,
he shall then request the President of the European Court of Human
Rights to make the appointment within a new two-month time limit.

4.    If, in the cases referred to in the preceding paragraphs, the
President of the European Court of Human Rights is unable to do so or
if he is a national of one of the parties to the dispute, the
designation of the Chief Arbitrator of the Arbitral Tribunal or the
naming of an arbitrator shall fall to the Vice-President of the Court,
or to the oldest member of the Court who is able to do so and who is
not a national of one of the parties to the dispute.

5.    The foregoing provisions shall apply according to the case, in
order to fill seats that have become vacant.

6.    The Arbitral Tribunal shall hand down a decision according to the
rules of international law and, in particular, according to the
provisions of this Convention.

7.    The decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal, on procedure as well as
on the merits of the case, shall be adopted by a majority vote of its
members, the absence or abstention of one of the members of the
tribunal designated by the parties not precluding a decision on the
part of the Tribunal. In the event of a tie vote, the Chief
Arbitrator's vote shall prevail. The decisions of the Tribunal shall
be binding on the parties. The latter shall bear the expenses of the
arbitrator they have designated and shall divide the other expenses
equally among themselves. On other points, the Arbitral Tribunal
itself shall decide the procedure it will follow.



Annex I

TECHNICAL FACTORS INVOLVED IN THE INSTALLATION OF THE INJECTION SYSTEM
REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 2, PARAGRAPH 2

      The injection of residual brines into the sub-soil is to be made
into a layer of limestone called "Great Oolite" at a depth of 1500 to
2000 m, to the southwest of Mulhouse.

      Taking into account the studies and tests already made, injection
is to be carried out by means of an installation which conforms to the
following description:

1.    A concentrated brine manufacturing plant located within the
perimeter of the surface installations of the Amelie Mine and capable
of supplying a volume of brine equivalent to 20 kg/s of chloride ions
(annual average);

2.    Watertight storage basins for concentrated brine and the waste
water extracted;

3.    A network of pipes to conduct the waste material from the basin
to the injection wells, over a distance of approximately 10 km, with a
corresponding pumping station located downstream from the waste
storage basin;

4.    Two new injection wells which, together with the Schweighouse
well, will be equipped with a double system permitting the injection
of brine either by simple gravity or by means of a pump;

5.    Three extraction wells equipped with pumps sunk at great depth
for extracting the waste water;

6.    A network of pipes for carrying the extracted water over a
distance of approximately 20 km from the extraction wells to the
storage basin for such waters;

7.    A remote-control network, required for conducting and supervising
the operation. The operation of the installation includes the
injection of chloride ions under the conditions provided for by the
Convention, the supply of energy, and the maintenance and supervision
of the underground reservoir.



Annex II

NATIONAL CONCENTRATIONS RESULTING FROM CHLORIDE-ION DISCHARGES GREATER
THAN 1 KG/S IN DIFFERENT SECTIONS OF THE RIVER

Sections of the  in Switzerland  in France   in Germany    in the
River                                                      Netherlands      


                  Av.    Max.    Av.   Max.  Av.   Max.    Av. Max.
                  (1)    (2)    (1)    (2)   (1)   (2)     (1)  (2)


Stein am Rhein    10
 - Kembs

Kembs - Seltz/                  130(3)       4.2    4.2 
Maxau

Seltz/Maxau -                               15.8    17.5                    
Mainz

Mainz -                                      9.9    10.0                    
Braubach/
Coblenz

Braubach/                         38(4)   105      123.6
Coblenz  -
Bimmen/Lobith

Bimmen/Lobith    10            168(3)      134.9
- mouth of the 
river


(1)   Long-term average annual concentration after steps taken
      regarding discharges. 
(2)   Maximum admissible concentration (reached from time to time, for
      example at a time of increased flow). 
(3)   This value diminishes as the measures referred to in Article 2
      are carried out. 
(4)   The chloride-ion discharges are modulated so that the
      concentration resulting from discharges greater than 1 kg/s of
      chloride ions does not exceed 400 mg/l of chloride ions at the
      Hauconcourt measuring station on the Moselle river. The indicated
      annual average load must not be exceeded.

