CONVENTION REGARDING THE REGIME OF
NAVIGATION ON THE DANUBE. SIGNED AT BEL
GRADE, ON 18 AUGUST 1948
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the People's Republic of Bulgaria,
the Hungarian Republic, the People's Republic of Romania, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, the Republic of Czechoslovakia and the Federal
People's Republic of Yugoslavia,
Whereas the Council of Foreign Ministers on 12 December 1946 decided
to convene a conference, composed of representatives of the States mentioned,
to work out a new convention regarding the regime of navigation on the
Danube, and
Desirous of providing for free navigation on the Danube in accordance
with the interests and sovereign rights of the Danubian States and in order to
strengthen the economic and cultural relations of the Danubian States among
themselves and with other nations,
Have resolved to conclude a Convention regarding the regime of navigation
on the Danube and for that purpose have appointed the undersigned
plenipotentiaries who, after presentation of their full powers, found in good
and due form, have agreed on the following:
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Navigation on the Danube shall be free and open for the nationals, vessels
of commerce and goods of all States, on a footing of equality in regard to port
and navigation charges and conditions for merchant shipping. The foregoing
shall not apply to traffic between ports of the same State.
Article 2
The regime established by this Convention shall apply to the navigable
part of the Danube River between Ulm and the Black Sea through the Sulina
arm, with outlet to the sea through the Sulina channel.
Article 3
The Danubian States undertake to maintain their sections of the Danube
in a navigable condition for river-going and, on the appropriate sections, for
sea-going vessels, to carry out the works necessary for the maintenance and
improvement of navigation conditions and not to obstruct or hinder navigation
on the navigable channels of the Danube. The Danubian States shall consult
the Danube Commission (art. 5) on matters referred to in this article.
The riparian States may within their own jurisdiction undertake works for
the maintenance of navigation, the execution of which is necessitated by
urgent and unforeseen circumstances. The States shall inform the Commission
of the reasons which have necessitated the works, and shall furnish a summary
description thereof.
Article 4
Should a Danubian State be unable itself to undertake works within its
own territorial jurisdiction which are necessary for the maintenance of normal
navigation it shall be bound to allow the Danube Commission ( art. 5 ) to carry
them out under conditions determined by the Commission, which may not
entrust the execution of such works to another State unless the section in question
of the waterway forms the frontier of such State. In the latter case the Com
mission shall decide the conditions on which the works shall be carried out.
The Danubian States agree to afford the Commission or the State
executing the said works all necessary assistance.
CHAPTER II
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Section I. The Danube Commission
Article 5
There shall be established a Danube Commission, hereinafter called "the
  Commission", to consist of one representative of each Danubian State.
Article 6
The Commission shall elect from among its members a chairman, a vicechairman
and a secretary for a term of three years.
Article 7
The Commission shall determine the times of its meetings and its own
rules of procedure.
The first meeting of the Commission shall be held within six months
after the entry into force of the present Convention.
Article 8
The jurisdiction of the Commission shall extend to the Danube as defined
in article 2.
The functions of the Commission shall be:
(a) to supervise the implementation of the provisions of this Convention;
(b) to prepare a general plan of the principal works called for in the
interests of navigation on the basis of proposals and projects presented by the
Danubian States and the Special River Administrations (articles 20 and 21),
and likewise to draw up a general budget in connexion with such works;
(c) to execute the works in the cases provided for in article 4;
(d) to consult with, and make recommendations to, the Danubian States
in respect of the execution of the works referred to in paragraph (b) of this
article, with due consideration for the technical and economic interests, plans
and possibilities of the respective States;
(e) to consult with, and make recommendations to, the Special River
Administrations (articles 20 and 21), and to exchange information with them;
(f) to establish a uniform system of traffic regulations on the whole
navigable portion of the Danube and also to lay down the basic provisions
governing navigation on the Danube, including those governing the pilot service,
with due consideration for the specific conditions obtaining on particular
sections ;
(g) to unify the regulations governing river inspection;
(h) to co-ordinate the hydro-meteorological services on the Danube, and
to publish a single hydrological bulletin and short-term and long-term
hydrological forecasts for the Danube;
(i) to produce statistics on aspects of navigation on th Danube within
the competence of the Commission;
(j) to publish reference works, sailing directions, navigational charts and
atlases for purposes of navigation;
(k) to prepare and approve the budget of the Commission and to fix and
levy the charges provided for in article 10.
Article 9
In order to carry out the tasks referred to in the foregoing article, the
Commission shall have its own secretariat and the necessary office services, the
staff of which shall be recruited from nationals of the Danubian States.
The organization of the secretariat and services shall be determined by
the Commission itself.
Article 10
The Commission shall draw up its budget and approve it by a majority
vote of all its members. The budget shall provide for the expenses for the
maintenance of the Commission and its services, to be met by equal contributions
of the Danubian States payable annually.
In order to defray the cost of executing special works for the maintenance
or improvement of navigability, the Commission may establish special charges.
Article 11
The Commission's decisions shall be taken by a majority of the members
present, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this Convention (articles
10, 12 and 13). '
Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Article 12
The Commission's decisions on matters provided for in article 8, paragraphs
(b), (c), (f) and (g) shall be taken by a majority vote of all members of
the Commission but without outvoting the State of the territory on which the
works are to be carried out.
Article 13
The seat of the Commission shall be at Galatz.
The Commission may, however, by a decision of a majority of all members
change the seat of the Commission.
Article 14
The Commission shall hav^ the rights of a legal entity in accordance with
the laws of the State in which ' the Commission has its seat.
Article 15
The official languages of the Commission shall be Russian and French.
Article 16
Members of the Commission and officers authorized by it shall enjoy
diplomatic immunity. Its official buildings, archives and documents of all kinds
shall be inviolable.
Article 17
Officers of the Commission holding the proper credentials shall inform
the competent authorities of the Danubian States of breaches of the navigation,
sanitation and river inspection regulations which have come to the Commission's
knowledge. The competent authorities must in turn inform the Commission of
the steps taken in connexion with any breaches reported as aforesaid.
Article 18
The Commission shall have its own seal and flag, which it may fly on its
official buildings and vessels.
Article 19
The Danubian States shall afford the Commission, its officers and its
staff the assistance necessary to enable them to carry out their duties under
this Convention.
Such officers and staff shall, subject to compliance with national law,
have the right of free movement while carrying out their official duties on the
river and in ports within the jurisdiction of the Commission.
Section II. Sp cial River Administrations
Article 20
There shall be established a Special River Administration in the lower
Danube (between the mouth of the Sulina channel and Braila inclusive) for
the execution of hydraulic engineering works and the regulation of navigation,
such Administration to consist of the representatives of the adjacent riparian
States (People's Republic of Romania and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).
The Administration shall act on the basis of an agreement between the
Governments of the countries members of the Administration.
The seat of the Administration shall be at Galatz.
Article 21
There shall be established a Special River Administration of the Iron
Gates in the Iron Gates section (between Vince and Kostol on the right bank
and between Moldova-Veche and Turnu-Severin on the left bank of the
Danube) for the execution of hydraulic engineering works and the regulation
of navigation in the said area, such Administration to consist of the
representatives of the People's Republic of Romania and the Federal People's
Republic of Yugoslavia.
The Administration shall act on the basis of an agreement between the
Governments of the countries members of the Administration.
The seat of the Administration shall be at Orsova and Tekija.
Article 22
The Commission shall be notified of the agreements on Special River
Administrations (hereinafter called "the Administrations") referred to in articles
20 and 21.
CHAPTER III
REGIME OF NAVIGATION
Section I. Navigation
Article 23
Navigation on the lower part of the Danube and in the Iron Gates section
shall be carried out in accordance with the regulations on navigation established
by the Administrations of the respective sections. Navigation on other parts
of the Danube shall be carried out in accordance with the regulations established
by the respective Danubian States through whose territory the Danube flows,
and, in those sections where the banks of the Danube belong to two different
States, in accordance with the regulations established by agreement between
such States.
In establishing regulations on navigation the Danubian States and
Administrations shall have regard to the basic provisions governing navigation
on the Danube established by the Commission.
Article 24
Vessels navigating the Danube shall have the right, subject to compliance
with the regulations established by the Danubian States concerned, to enter
ports, to load and discharge, to embark and disembark passengers, to refuel,
to take on supplies, etc.
Article 25
Vessels flying foreign flags may not engage in local passenger and freight
traffic or traffic between ports of the same Danubian State, save in accordance
with the national regulations of that State.
Article 26
Sanitary and police regulations in force on the Danube shall be administered
without discrimination as regards the nationality of vessels, points of departure
and destination, or on any other grounds.
The functions of customs, sanitary, and river inspection on the Danube
shall be discharged by the Danubian States, which shall communicate to the
Commission the regulations issued by them, in order that the Commission may
be able to promote the unification of customs and sanitary regulations and
to unify the regulations governing river inspection (article 8 (g) ).
Customs, sanitary, and police regulations shall be such as not to impede
navigation.
Article 27
When both banks of the Danube belong to the same State, the latter
shall have the right to place goods in transit under seal or in charge of the
customs officers. Such State shall also be entitled to require the master or
owner of a vessel to make a written declaration stating only whether or not
he is carrying goods the importation of which is prohibited by that State but
shall not be entitled to prohibit the transit of such goods. These formalities
shall not entail an inspection of the cargo or delay its transit. The master or
owner of a vessel making a false declaration shall be liable under the law of
the State to which the declaration was made.
When the river Danube forms the frontier between two States, vessels,
rafts, passengers and goods in transit shall be exempt, while afloat, from all
customs formalities.
Article 28
Vessels employed by Danubian States for river inspection (police) work
must fly their national flag and, in addition, bear a distinctive and uniform
mark; the descriptions and number of such vessels shall be communicated to
the Commission. Such vessels, and the customs vessels of all Danubian States,
may navigate the Danube only within the frontiers of the respective States
whose flags they fly, and beyond such frontiers only with the consent of the
Danubian States concerned.
Article 29
Ships on the Danube shall be allowed to use, for purposes of navigation,
ships' wireless sets and shore communication facilities.
Article 30
Navigation of the Danube by the naval vessels of any non-Danubian
country shall be prohibited.
The naval vessels of Danubian States may not navigate the Danube beyond
the frontiers of the respective countries whose flags they fly save by arrangement
between the Danubian States concerned.
Section II. Pilot service
Article 31
On the lower Danube and in the Iron Gates section there shall be
established corps of pilots under the Administrations concerned (art. 22).
The regulations of the pilot service shall be established by the Adminis
trations in accordance with the basic provisions governing navigation on the
Danube (art. 8 (/) ) and shall be communicated to the Commission.
Article 32
Pilotage of vessels on the lower Danube and in the Iron Gates section shall
be carried out by pilots from the appropriate corps of pilots or by pilots who
have passed an examination set by the authorities of the competent River
Administration and who are licensed by such Administration to pilot vessels.
Article 33
The corps of pilots shall be recruited from nationals of the Danubian
countries members of the Administrations concerned. The procedure for
recruiting the corps shall be determined by special agreements between the
aforesaid members of such Administrations (articles 20 and 21).
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE FOR DEFRAYING THE COST OF MAINTENANCE OF NAVIGATION
Article 34
Hydraulic engineering works on the Danube carried out by Danubian
States in accordance with article 3 of this convention shall be financed by the
Danubian States concerned.
The works referred to in article 8, paragraph (c), shall be financed by
the Commission.
Article 35
In order to defray the cost of the maintenance of navigation the Danubian
States may, by agreement with the Commission, levy on vessels navigation
charges the scale of which shall be fixed in relation to the cost of maintenance
of equipment and the cost of the works referred to in article 34.
Article 36
In order to defray the cost of the maintenance of navigation and of
works carried out by the Administrations, the latter shall fix special charges
to be levied on vessels passing through the sections between the mouth of the
Sulina channel and Braila and between Vince and Kostol on the right bank
and between Moldova-Veche and Turnu-Severin on the left bank of the
Danube.
The Administrations shall notify the Commission of the special charges
fixed by the Administrations and of the procedure for levying them.
Article 37
The extraordinary, navigation and special charges levied by the Commission,
the Danubian States, and the Administrations must not be a source of profit.
Article 38
The procedure for levying the extraordinary navigation and special charges
shall be laid down in instructions drawn up by the Commission, the Danubian
States or the Administrations respectively. The instructions issued by the
Danubian States and the Administrations shall be drawn up in agreement
with the Commission.
Charges shall be calculated on the basis of the ships' tonnage.
Article 39
The execution of works on sections of the Danube forming inter-State
frontiers and the apportionment of expenditure therefor shall be settled by
agreement between the adjoining States concerned.
Article 40
Port dues levied on vessels shall be collected by the authorities of the
Danubian States concerned. In doing so no discrimination shall be shown as
regards the nationality of vessels, points of departure and destination, or on
any other grounds.
Article 41
Vessels entering ports for loading or unloading shall be entitled to use
loading and unloading machinery, equipment, warehouses, storage space, etc.,
according to agreements concluded with the appropriate transportation and
forwarding agencies.
There shall be no discrimination in determining the amount charged for
services rendered.
Reductions granted in accordance with commercial usage on the basis of
the volume of services rendered or the nature of the cargo shall not be regarded
as discrimination.
Article 42
No charges shall be levied on vessels, rafts, passengers and goods in respect
merely of transit.
Article 43
Schedules of pilotage fees in the lower Danube and in the Iron Gates
section shall be fixed and communicated to the Commission by the Adminis
trations concerned.
CHAPTER V
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 44
The expression "Danubian State" or "Danubian country" in this convention
shall be taken to mean a State situated on a bank or banks of the Danube as
denned in article 2.
Article 45
Any dispute between the parties to this Convention regarding the applica
tion or interpretation of the Convention which cannot be resolved by direct
negotiation shall, at the request of either party to the dispute, be referred for
settlement to a conciliation commission composed of one representative of
each party to the dispute and one representative appointed by the Chairman
of the Danube Commission from among the nationals of a State not a party
to the dispute, or, if the Chairman of the Commission is a national of a State
party to the dispute, then by the Danube Commission.
The decision of the conciliation commission shall be accepted by the parties
to the dispute as final and binding.
Article 46
The present Convention may be revised at the request of the majority of
the signatory States. This request shall be addressed to the Government of the
Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia, which shall as soon as possible convene
a conference of all the States signatories to the present Convention. The revised
provisions shall come into force only after instruments of ratification have
been deposited by six of the States signatories to the present Convention.
Article 47
The present Convention and its annexes, of which the Russian and French
texts are authentic, shall be subject to ratification and shall come into force
upon the deposit of six instruments of ratification. Instruments of ratification
shall be deposited with the Government of the Federal People's Republic of
Yugoslavia, in the archives of which shall be kept the original of the present
Convention.
The Government of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia shall
furnish certified copies of the original Convention to all the signatories to the
Convention and shall inform them of the deposit of instruments of ratification
as these are received.
LIST OF ANNEXES
Annex I. The admission of Austria to the Danube Commission
Annex II. The Gabcikovo-G nyii sector
ANNEX I
THE ADMISSION OF AUSTRIA TO THE DANUBE COMMISSION
1. A representative of Austria shall be admitted to the Danube Commission
after the question of a treaty with Austria has been settled.
2. The present annex shall corne into force simultaneously with the Convention
regarding the regime of navigation on the Danube and shall be an integral part
thereof.
ANNEX II
THE GABCIKOVO-GONYU SECTOR
Regarding the works necessary to ensure normal conditions of navigation in
the Gabcikovo-G ny sector (from km. 1821 to km. 1791), the Contracting Parties
agree that it is in the general interest to maintain this sector in good navigable
condition and that the works necessary for this purpose far exceed those which
could reasonably be required of the riparian States concerned.
IlTis accordingly agreed that the Danube Commission shall discuss the question
and decide whether, for this purpose, it would be appropriate to set up for this
sector a special river administration similar to those provided for in articles 20
and 21, or whether it would be sufficient to apply to this sector the provisions of
articles 4 and 34, paragraph 2, of the present Convention.
Regulations similar to those of article 20 of the present Convention, of which
this annex is an integral part, shall be applied if such an administration is set up.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned plenipotentiaries have signed1 the
present convention and have affixed their seals thereto.
DONE in the city of Belgrade, this 18th day of August nineteen hundred
and forty-eight.


SUPPLEMENTARY PROTOCOL
TO THE CONVENTION REGARDING THE REGIME OF
NAVIGATION ON THE DANUBE
SIGNED AT BELGRADE, ON 18 AUGUST 1948
1. It is noted that the former regime of navigation on the Danube, and
the instruments providing for the establishment of that regime, in particular
the Convention signed in Paris on 23 July 1921, are no longer in force.
2. All property owned by the former European Danube Commission shall
be transferred to the Special River Administration of the lower Danube
established under article 20 of the Convention, to which the present protocol
refers.
3. It is agreed that all obligations of the former European Danube
Commission to repay credits granted to it by Great Britain, France, Russia or
other States shall be considered cancelled.
4. The obligations of the former International Danube Commission, the
obligations of the former Administration of the Iron Gates and Cataracts, and
the guarantees securing those obligations, shall be considered cancelled.
5. Unliquidated property of the former International Danube Commission
shall be transferred to the Danube Commission provided for in article 5 of
the Convention to which the present protocol refers. The part of the property
of the former International Danube Commission transferred to the former
Administration of the Iron Gates and Cataracts, and all the property of the
former Administration of the Iron Gates and Cataracts, shall be transferred
to the Special River Administration of the Iron Gates established in accordance
with article 21 of the Convention, to which the present protocol refers.
DONE at Belgrade, this 18th day of August 1948. 
