CONVENTION ON THE INTERNATIONAL LEGAL PERSONALITY OF THE PERMANENT COMMISSION OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC Article I. The Permanent Commission of the Conference on the exploitation and conservation of the marine resources of the South Pacific, established by agreement of the Parties on 18 August 1952, shall have legal personality in international law and accordingly shall enjoy, in each of the contracting countries, in accordance with the laws of each country, 
full capacity to enter into contracts of all types, to acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property, to institute legal proceedings and to petition the administrative authorities. Article II. The Commission shall have a Secretary-General who shall be its legal representative in the exercise of all rights and the fulfilment of all obligations pertaining to the Commission. The Secretary-General shall be an international official and as such shall 
be subject to the authority of the Permanent Commission. Article III. The Commission and its property shall enjoy immunity from jurisdiction in each of the contracting countries. Such immunity may be waived by the Commission through its Secretary-General. Waiver of immunity from jurisdiction shall not be understood as implying waiver of immunity in respect of the execution of a judgement, for which a special waiver shall be required. Article IV. The 
premises of the Commission shall be inviolable. The archives of the Commission, wherever they may be and whoever may be in charge of them, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation and any executive, ad ministrative or judicial action, except in the case of waiver, to which article III refers. Article V. The Commission shall not be subject to unilateral inspection or restriction on the part of the Governments of the contracting 
countries in respect of its own activities and of the administration and disposal of its assets. It may hold funds, gold or any kind of foreign currency. It may therefore freely transfer its funds, gold or foreign currency from or to any of the Contracting States and from or to any place in their territories and it may conduct exchange transactions in any currency in those territories. Article VI. The Commission shall co-operate at all times with the 
authorities of the Contracting States to facilitate the proper administration of justice, ensure compliance with police regulations and avoid abuses of the privileges, immunities and facilities to which they are entitled.
Article VII. The Secretary-General and the officials proposed by the Commission
in communication with the Governments and accepted by them shall enjoy immunity
from jurisdiction solely in respect of their official activities in the performance of their
duties. In no case shall they claim such immunity in respect of traffic accidents or payment
of taxes for public services.
Article VIII. This Convention shall be ratified by the Contracting States in accord
ance with their constitutional procedures. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited
with the Ministry of External Relations of Chile, which shall transmit authorized copies
of such instruments to the other signatories. The Convention shall enter into force
30 days after deposit of instruments of ratification by the three Contracting States.
Article IX. Any of the parties may denounce this Convention by notifying the other
parties one year in advance.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, duly authorized by their
respective Governments, sign this Convention in Paracas, Peru, in three equally authentic
copies, on 14 January 1966.
For the Government of Chile:
[Signed]
CARLOS MARDONES RESTAT
For the Government of Ecuador:
[Signed]
EDUARDO SANTOS CAMPOSANO
For the Government of Peru:
[Signed]
MIGUEL CHAVEZ GOYTIZOLO
