AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS CONCERNING
COOPERATION IN COMBATTING POLLUTION IN THE BERING
AND CHUKCHI SEAS IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
The Government ofthe United States of America and the Government ofthe Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ,
hereinafter referred to as the "Parties",
Conscious that exploration , exploitation , and production of natural resources , as well as belated marine
transport, pose a threat of significant pollution by oil or other hazardous substances in the Bering and Chukchi Seas ,
Recognizing that, in the event of a pollution incident or the threat thereof, prompt and effective action should
be taken, to organize and coordinate prevention and pollution combatting activities ,
Taking into account the Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection Between the
United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics , signed May 23, 1972, and desiring to develop
further the principles of mutually beneficial cooperation , and
Desiring to avert, through the adoption of measures to prevent and combat pollution resulting from oil and
other hazardous substance spills , damage to the marine environment of the Bering and Chukchi Seas, including
coastal areas,
Have agreed as follows :
ARTICLE I
The Parties undertake to render assistance to each other in combatting pollution incidents which may affect
the areas of responsibility of the Parties, regardless of where such incidents may occur. Such assistance shall be
rendered consistent with the provisions of this Agreement. To such end the competent authorities ofthe Parties shall
develop the Joint Contingency Plan Against Pollution in the Bering and Chukchi Seas , hereinafter referred to as the
"Plan", which shall enter into force upon their written agreement.
ARTICLE II
For the purposes of this Agreement:
- "Pollution Incident" means a discharge or an imminent threat of discharge of oil or other hazardous substance
from any source of such a magnitude or significance as to require an immediate response to prevent such a discharge
or to contain, clean-up or dispose of the substance to eliminate the threat to or to minimize its harmful effects on
living resources and marine life , public health or welfare.
- "Oil" means oil of any form , including crude oil , fuel oil, sludge and oil wastes, and refined products .
- "Hazardous substances" means elements and compounds which when discharged into the marine environment
could present an imminent and substantial danger to the public health or welfare , harm living resources and marine
life, damage amenities or interfere with other legitimate uses of the sea.
- "Competent Authority" means with respect to the United States of America , the United States Coast Guard
and with respect to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics , the Marine Pollution Control and Salvage Administration
attached to the USSR Ministry of Merchant Marine.
- "Area ofresponsibility of a Party" means the water within the Bering and Chukchi Seas which are the respective
Party's internal waters or territorial sea, and the sea area beyond the territorial sea in which that Party exercises
its sovereign rights and jurisdiction in accordance with international law. Areas of responsibility ofthe Parties where
they are adjacent will be separated by the maritime boundary between the two countries .
- "Response resources" means the personnel , vessels, equipment and other means for combatting pollution.
ARTICLE III
The Parties, consistent with their means, commit themselves to the development of national systems that
permit detection and prompt notification of the existence or the imminent possibility of the occurrence of pollution
incidents, as well as providing adequate means within their power to eliminate the threat posed by such incidents
and to minimize the adverse effects to the marine environment and the public health and welfare.
ARTICLE IV
The Parties shall routinely exchange up-to-date information and consult to guarantee adequate cooperation
between their competent authorities, with regard to activities pertaining to this Agreement and the Plan.
ARTICLE V
The implementation of the Plan shall be the primary responsibility of the competent authorities of the
respective Parties, and of other authorities ofthe Parties to the extent of such other authorities' competence under
applicable law. The Plan may be amended from time to time, consistent with this Agreement and the procedures set
forth in the Plan, by the competent authorities.
ARTICLE VI
The competent authority of the Party in whose area of responsibility a pollution incident occurs, or whose area
of responsibility is affected by such an incident, shall direct response operations within that area.
ARTICLE VII
The Plan may be invoked whenever a pollution incident occurs that affects or threatens to affect the areas of
responsibility of both Parties or, although only directly affecting the area of responsibility of one Party, is of such a
magnitude as to justify a request for the other Party's assistance.
ARTICLE VIII
Thejoint response provided for under the Plan can only be undertaken when the competent authorities of the
Parties agree. The competent authorities of the Parties will determine the appropriate response action required for
each pollution incident.
ARTICLE IX
Requests for assistance will be communicated between the competent authorities of both Parties . Requests for
assistance by telephone shall be confirmed by telex , telegraph or facsimile.
A Party shall endeavor to promptly provide requested assistance as soon as possible to the extent that the
Party determines the resources are available. The availability of response resources for a specific pollution incident
is understood to be dependent upon funding and the requirements of other missions.
The requesting Party shall provide all possible support to the response resources of the assisting Party.
ARTICLE X
The assisting Party may fully or partly terminate its assistance if that Party determines that it is necessary
to do so. Notice of the termination shall be communicated to the competent authority of the requesting Party. The
requesting Party shall release the response resources made available as soon as possible after the termination.
The requesting Party shall promptly inform the assisting Party when the need for assistance no longer exists ,
and release as soon as possible the response resources made available by the assisting Party.
ARTICLE XI
The Parties will periodically conduct joint pollution response exercises and meetings in accordance with the
provisions of the Plan. The competent authorities of the Parties shall alternate in the supervision of the exercises .
ARTICLE XII
The requesting Party shall , to the greatest extent possible, facilitate the arrival and departure of response
resources made available by the assisting Party for response activities pertaining to this Agreement. The Parties
shall cooperate in implementing the provisions of this Article.
ARTICLE XIII
The requesting Party shall reimburse the assisting Party for expenses associated with response resources. The
amount to be reimbursed will be determined by the rates of the assisting Party.
In all other cases and circumstances unless otherwise agreed , each Party will bear the expense of its own
activities pertaining to this Agreement.
The expenses involved in conducting joint exercises shall be borne by each Party respectively.
ARTICLE XIV
Nothing in this Agreement shall affect in any way the rights and obligations of either Party resulting from
other bilateral and multilateral international agreements.
The Parties will implement this Agreement in accordance with rules and principles of general international
law and their respective laws and regulations.
ARTICLE XV
This Agreement shall enter into force upon the date the Parties notify each other in writing that necessary
internal procedures have been completed, and shall remain in force unless terminated by either Party upon six months
advance written notice to the other Party of its intention to terminate this Agreement.
Termination of this Agreement shall not affect response operations which have been taken hereunder and are
not yet completed at the time of termination unless otherwise agreed by the Parties.
This Agreement may be amended by written agreement between the Parties.
DONE at Moscow, in duplicate, this eleventh day of May, 1989, in the English and Russian languages, both
texts being equally authentic.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:
James A. Baker III
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION
OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS:
Edward A. Shevardnadze
