AGREEMENT
ON
SOUTH ASIAN FREE TRADE AREA (SAFTA)

 The Governments of the SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation) Member States comprising the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, the Kingdom of Bhutan, the Republic of India, the Republic of
Maldives, the Kingdom of Nepal, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka hereinafter referred to as
“Contracting States”
Motivated by the commitment to strengthen intra-SAARC economic
cooperation to maximise the realization of the region’s potential for trade
and development for the benefit of their people, in a spirit of mutual
accommodation, with full respect for the principles of sovereign equality,
independence and territorial integrity of all States;
Noting that the Agreement on SAARC Preferential Trading Arrangement
(SAPTA) signed in Dhaka on the 11th of April 1993 provides for the adoption
of various instruments of trade liberalization on a preferential basis;
Convinced that preferential trading arrangements among SAARC Member
States will act as a stimulus to the strengthening of national and SAARC
economic resilience, and the development of the national economies of the
Contracting States by expanding investment and production opportunities,
trade, and foreign exchange earnings as well as the development of
economic and technological cooperation;
Aware that a number of regions are entering into such arrangements to
enhance trade through the free movement of goods;
Recognizing that Least Developed Countries in the region need to be
accorded special and differential treatment commensurate with their
development needs; and
Recognizing that it is necessary to progress beyond a Preferential Trading
Arrangement to move towards higher levels of trade and economic
cooperation in the region by removing barriers to cross-border flow of
goods;
Have agreed as follows:
Article – 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement: 


2
1. Concessions mean tariff, para-tariff and non-tariff concessions
agreed under the Trade Liberalisation Programme;
2. Direct Trade Measures mean measures conducive to promoting
mutual trade of Contracting States such as long and medium-term
contracts containing import and supply commitments in respect of
specific products, buy-back arrangements, state trading operations, and
government and public procurement;
3. Least Developed Contracting State refers to a Contracting State
which is designated as a “Least Developed Country” by the United
Nations;
4. Margin of Preference means percentage of tariff by which tariffs are
reduced on products imported from one Contracting State to another
as a result of preferential treatment.
5. Non-Tariff Measures include any measure, regulation, or practice,
other than “tariffs” and “para-tariffs”.
6. Para-Tariffs mean border charges and fees, other than “tariffs”, on
foreign trade transactions of a tariff-like effect which are levied solely on
imports, but not those indirect taxes and charges, which are levied in
the same manner on like domestic products. Import charges
corresponding to specific services rendered are not considered as
para-tariff measures;
7. Products mean all products including manufactures and commodities in
their raw, semi-processed and processed forms;
8. SAPTA means Agreement on SAARC Preferential Trading
Arrangement signed in Dhaka on the 11th of April 1993;
9. Serious injury means a significant impairment of the domestic industry
of like or directly competitive products due to a surge in preferential
imports causing substantial losses in terms of earnings, production or
employment unsustainable in the short term;
10. Tariffs mean customs duties included in the national tariff schedules of
the Contracting States;
11. Threat of serious injury means a situation in which a substantial
increase of preferential imports is of a nature to cause “serious injury”
to domestic producers, and that such injury, although not yet existing,
is clearly imminent. A determination of threat of serious injury shall be
based on facts and not on mere allegation, conjecture, or remote or
hypothetical possibility.


3
Article – 2
Establishment
The Contracting States hereby establish the South Asian Free Trade
Area (SAFTA) to promote and enhance mutual trade and economic
cooperation among the Contracting States, through exchanging
concessions in accordance with this Agreement.

Article – 3
Objectives and Principles
1. The Objectives of this Agreement are to promote and enhance
mutual trade and economic cooperation among Contracting
States by, inter-alia:
a) eliminating barriers to trade in, and facilitating the crossborder movement of goods between the territories of the
Contracting States;
b) promoting conditions of fair competition in the free trade
area, and ensuring equitable benefits to all Contracting
States, taking into account their respective levels and
pattern of economic development;
c) creating effective mechanism for the implementation and
application of this Agreement, for its joint administration and
for the resolution of disputes; and
d) establishing a framework for further regional cooperation to
expand and enhance the mutual benefits of this Agreement.
2. SAFTA shall be governed in accordance with the following
principles:
a) SAFTA will be governed by the provisions of this Agreement
and also by the rules, regulations, decisions, understandings
and protocols to be agreed upon within its framework by the
Contracting States;
b) The Contracting States affirm their existing rights and
obligations with respect to each other under Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization and
other Treaties/Agreements to which such Contracting States
are signatories; 


4
c) SAFTA shall be based and applied on the principles of overall
reciprocity and mutuality of advantages in such a way as to
benefit equitably all Contracting States, taking into account
their respective levels of economic and industrial
development, the pattern of their external trade and tariff
policies and systems;
d) SAFTA shall involve the free movement of goods, between
countries through, inter alia, the elimination of tariffs, para
tariffs and non-tariff restrictions on the movement of goods,
and any other equivalent measures;
e) SAFTA shall entail adoption of trade facilitation and other
measures, and the progressive harmonization of legislations
by the Contracting States in the relevant areas; and
f) The special needs of the Least Developed Contracting States
shall be clearly recognized by adopting concrete preferential
measures in their favour on a non-reciprocal basis.
Article – 4
Instruments

The SAFTA Agreement will be implemented through the following
instruments:-
 1. Trade Liberalisation Programme
 2. Rules of Origin
3. Institutional Arrangements
4. Consultations and Dispute Settlement Procedures
5. Safeguard Measures
6. Any other instrument that may be agreed upon.

Article – 5
National Treatment
Each Contracting State shall accord national treatment to the products
of other Contracting States in accordance with the provisions of Article
III of GATT 1994.
Article – 6
Components
 SAFTA may, inter-alia, consist of arrangements relating to:
a) tariffs;
b) para-tariffs;
c) non-tariff measures;
d) direct trade measures.


5
Article – 7
Trade Liberalisation Programme
1. Contracting States agree to the following schedule of tariff reductions:
a) The tariff reduction by the Non-Least Developed Contracting States
from existing tariff rates to 20% shall be done within a time frame
of 2 years, from the date of coming into force of the Agreement.
Contracting States are encouraged to adopt reductions in equal
annual installments. If actual tariff rates after the coming into
force of the Agreement are below 20%, there shall be an annual
reduction on a Margin of Preference basis of 10% on actual tariff
rates for each of the two years.
b) The tariff reduction by the Least Developed Contracting States
from existing tariff rates will be to 30% within the time frame of 2
years from the date of coming into force of the Agreement. If
actual tariff rates on the date of coming into force of the
Agreement are below 30%, there will be an annual reduction on a
Margin of Preference basis of 5 % on actual tariff rates for each of
the two years.
c) The subsequent tariff reduction by Non-Least Developed
Contracting States from 20% or below to 0-5% shall be done
within a second time frame of 5 years, beginning from the third
year from the date of coming into force of the Agreement.
However, the period of subsequent tariff reduction by Sri Lanka
shall be six years. Contracting States are encouraged to adopt
reductions in equal annual installments, but not less than 15%
annually.
d) The subsequent tariff reduction by the Least Developed Contracting
States from 30% or below to 0-5% shall be done within a second
time frame of 8 years beginning from the third year from the date
of coming into force of the Agreement. The Least Developed
Contracting States are encouraged to adopt reductions in equal
annual installments, not less than 10% annually.
2. The above schedules of tariff reductions will not prevent Contracting
States from immediately reducing their tariffs to 0-5% or from
following an accelerated schedule of tariff reduction.
3. a) Contracting States may not apply the Trade Liberalisation
Programme as in paragraph 1 above, to the tariff lines included in
the Sensitive Lists which shall be negotiated by the Contracting
States (for LDCs and Non-LDCs) and incorporated in this
Agreement as an integral part. The number of products in the
Sensitive Lists shall be subject to maximum ceiling to be mutually
agreed among the Contracting States with flexibility to Least 


6
Developed Contracting States to seek derogation in respect of the
products of their export interest; and
b) The Sensitive List shall be reviewed after every four years or
earlier as may be decided by SAFTA Ministerial Council (SMC),
established under Article 10, with a view to reducing the number
of items in the Sensitive List.
4. The Contracting States shall notify the SAARC Secretariat all non-tariff
and para-tariff measures to their trade on an annual basis. The
notified measures shall be reviewed by the Committee of Experts,
established under Article 10, in its regular meetings to examine their
compatibility with relevant WTO provisions. The Committee of Experts
shall recommend the elimination or implementation of the measure in
the least trade restrictive manner in order to facilitate intra-SAARC
trade1
.
5. Contracting Parties shall eliminate all quantitative restrictions, except
otherwise permitted under GATT 1994, in respect of products included
in the Trade Liberalisation Programme.
6. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in paragraph 1 of this
Article, the Non-Least Developed Contracting States shall reduce their
tariff to 0-5% for the products of Least Developed Contracting States
within a timeframe of three years beginning from the date of coming
into force of the Agreement.
Article – 8
Additional Measures
Contracting States agree to consider, in addition to the measures set
out in Article 7, the adoption of trade facilitation and other measures
to support and complement SAFTA for mutual benefit. These may
include, among others: -
a) harmonization of standards, reciprocal recognition of
tests and accreditation of testing laboratories of
Contracting States and certification of products;
b) simplification and harmonization of customs clearance
procedure;
c) harmonization of national customs classification based
on HS coding system;
d) Customs cooperation to resolve dispute at customs entry
points;
e) simplification and harmonization of import licensing and
registration procedures;
f) simplification of banking procedures for import financing;

1 The initial notification shall be made within three months from the date of coming into force of the Agreement and
the COE shall review the notifications in its first meeting and take appropriate decisions. 


7
g) transit facilities for efficient intra-SAARC trade,
especially for the land-locked Contracting States;
h) removal of barriers to intra-SAARC investments;
i) macroeconomic consultations;
j) rules for fair competition and the promotion of venture
capital;
k) development of communication systems and transport
infrastructure;
l) making exceptions to their foreign exchange restrictions,
if any, relating to payments for products under the
SAFTA scheme, as well as repatriation of such payments
without prejudice to their rights under Article XVIII of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the
relevant provisions of Articles of Treaty of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF); and
m) Simplification of procedures for business visas.
Article – 9
Extension of Negotiated Concessions
Concessions agreed to, other than those made exclusively to the Least
Developed Contracting States, shall be extended unconditionally to all
Contracting States.
Article – 10
Institutional Arrangements
1. The Contracting States hereby establish the SAFTA Ministerial Council
(hereinafter referred to as SMC).
2. The SMC shall be the highest decision-making body of SAFTA and shall
be responsible for the administration and implementation of this
Agreement and all decisions and arrangements made within its legal
framework.
3. The SMC shall consist of the Ministers of Commerce/Trade of the
Contracting States.
4. The SMC shall meet at least once every year or more often as and
when considered necessary by the Contracting States. Each
Contracting State shall chair the SMC for a period of one year on
rotational basis in alphabetical order.
5. The SMC shall be supported by a Committee of Experts (hereinafter
referred to as COE), with one nominee from each Contracting State at
the level of a Senior Economic Official, with expertise in trade matters.
6. The COE shall monitor, review and facilitate implementation of the
provisions of this Agreement and undertake any task assigned to it by
the SMC. The COE shall submit its report to SMC every six months. 


8
7. The COE will also act as Dispute Settlement Body under this
Agreement.
8. The COE shall meet at least once every six months or more often as
and when considered necessary by the Contracting States. Each
Contracting State shall chair the COE for a period of one year on
rotational basis in alphabetical order.
9. The SAARC Secretariat shall provide secretarial support to the SMC
and COE in the discharge of their functions.
10. The SMC and COE will adopt their own rules of procedure.
Article – 11
Special and Differential Treatment for the Least Developed
Contracting States
In addition to other provisions of this Agreement, all Contracting States shall
provide special and more favorable treatment exclusively to the Least
Developed Contracting States as set out in the following sub-paragraphs:
a) The Contracting States shall give special regard to the situation of the
Least Developed Contracting States when considering the application of
anti-dumping and/or countervailing measures. In this regard, the
Contracting States shall provide an opportunity to Least Developed
Contracting States for consultations. The Contracting States shall, to the
extent practical, favourably consider accepting price undertakings offered
by exporters from Least Developed Contracting States. These
constructive remedies shall be available until the trade liberalisation
programme has been completed by all Contracting States.
b) Greater flexibility in continuation of quantitative or other restrictions
provisionally and without discrimination in critical circumstances by the
Least Developed Contracting States on imports from other Contracting
States.
c) Contracting States shall also consider, where practical, taking direct trade
measures with a view to enhancing sustainable exports from Least
Developed Contracting States, such as long and medium-term contracts
containing import and supply commitments in respect of specific
products, buy-back arrangements, state trading operations, and
government and public procurement.
d) Special consideration shall be given by Contracting States to requests
from Least Developed Contracting States for technical assistance and
cooperation arrangements designed to assist them in expanding their
trade with other Contracting States and in taking advantage of the
potential benefits of SAFTA. A list of possible areas for such technical 


9
assistance shall be negotiated by the Contracting States and incorporated
in this Agreement as an integral part.
e) The Contracting States recognize that the Least Developed Contracting
States may face loss of customs revenue due to the implementation of
the Trade Liberalisation Programme under this Agreement. Until
alternative domestic arrangements are formulated to address this
situation, the Contracting States agree to establish an appropriate
mechanism to compensate the Least Developed Contracting States for
their loss of customs revenue. This mechanism and its rules and
regulations shall be established prior to the commencement of the Trade
Liberalisation Programme (TLP).
Article – 12
Special Provision for Maldives
Notwithstanding the potential or actual graduation of Maldives from
the status of a Least Developed Country, it shall be accorded in this
Agreement and in any subsequent contractual undertakings thereof
treatment no less favourable than that provided for the Least
Developed Contracting States.
Article – 13
Non-application
Notwithstanding the measures as set out in this Agreement its
provisions shall not apply in relation to preferences already granted or
to be granted by any Contracting State to other Contracting States
outside the framework of this Agreement, and to third countries
through bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral trade agreements and
similar arrangements.
Article – 14
General Exceptions
a) Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent any
Contracting State from taking action and adopting measures which
it considers necessary for the protection of its national security.
b) Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a
manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or
unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the similar
conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on intra-regional trade,
nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent any
Contracting State from taking action and adopting measures which
it considers necessary for the protection of :

(i) public morals;
(ii) human, animal or plant life and health; and
(iii) articles of artistic, historic and archaeological value. 


10
Article – 15
Balance of Payments Measures
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Agreement, any Contracting
State facing serious balance of payments difficulties may suspend
provisionally the concessions extended under this Agreement.
2. Any such measure taken pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall
be immediately notified to the Committee of Experts.
3. The Committee of Experts shall periodically review the measures
taken pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article.
4. Any Contracting State which takes action pursuant to paragraph 1 of
this Article shall afford, upon request from any other Contracting
State, adequate opportunities for consultations with a view to
preserving the stability of concessions under SAFTA.
5. If no satisfactory adjustment is effected between the Contracting
States concerned within 30 days of the beginning of such
consultations, to be extended by another 30 days through mutual
consent, the matter may be referred to the Committee of Experts.
6. Any such measures taken pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall
be phased out soon after the Committee of Experts comes to the
conclusion that the balance of payments situation of the Contracting
State concerned has improved.
Article – 16
Safeguard Measures
1. If any product, which is the subject of a concession under this
Agreement, is imported into the territory of a Contracting State in
such a manner or in such quantities as to cause, or threaten to cause,
serious injury to producers of like or directly competitive products in
the importing Contracting State, the importing Contracting State may,
pursuant to an investigation by the competent authorities of that
Contracting State conducted in accordance with the provisions set out
in this Article, suspend temporarily the concessions granted under the
provisions of this Agreement. The examination of the impact on the
domestic industry concerned shall include an evaluation of all other
relevant economic factors and indices having a bearing on the state of
the domestic industry of the product and a causal relationship must be
clearly established between “serious injury” and imports from within
the SAARC region, to the exclusion of all such other factors.
2. Such suspension shall only be for such time and to the extent as may
be necessary to prevent or remedy such injury and in no case, will
such suspension be for duration of more than 3 years. 


11
3. No safeguard measure shall be applied again by a Contracting State to
the import of a product which has been subject to such a measure
during the period of implementation of Trade Liberalization
Programme by the Contracting States, for a period of time equal to
that during which such measure had been previously applied, provided
that the period of non-application is at least two years.
4. All investigation procedures for resorting to safeguard measures under
this Article shall be consistent with Article XIX of GATT 1994 and WTO
Agreement on Safeguards
5. Safeguard action under this Article shall be non-discriminatory and
applicable to the product imported from all other Contracting States
subject to the provisions of paragraph 8 of this Article.
6. When safeguard provisions are used in accordance with this Article,
the Contracting State invoking such measures shall immediately notify
the exporting Contracting State(s) and the Committee of Experts.
7. In critical circumstances where delay would cause damage which it
would be difficult to repair, a Contracting State may take a provisional
safeguard measure pursuant to a preliminary determination that there
is clear evidence that increased imports have caused or are
threatening to cause serious injury. The duration of the provisional
measure shall not exceed 200 days, during this period the pertinent
requirements of this Article shall be met.
8. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Article, safeguard
measures under this article shall not be applied against a product
originating in a Least Developed Contracting State as long as its share
of imports of the product concerned in the importing Contracting State
does not exceed 5 per cent, provided Least Developed Contracting
States with less than 5% import share collectively account for not
more than 15% of total imports of the product concerned.
Article – 17
Maintenance of the Value of Concessions
Any of the concessions agreed upon under this Agreement shall not be
diminished or nullified, by the application of any measures restricting
trade by the Contracting States, except under the provisions of other
articles of this Agreement.
Article – 18
Rules of Origin
Rules of Origin shall be negotiated by the Contracting States and
incorporated in this Agreement as an integral part.
 


12
Article – 19
Consultations
1. Each Contracting State shall accord sympathetic consideration to and
will afford adequate opportunity for consultations regarding
representations made by another Contracting State with respect to
any matter affecting the operation of this Agreement.
2. The Committee of Experts may, at the request of a Contracting State,
consult with any Contracting State in respect of any matter for which
it has not been possible to find a satisfactory solution through
consultations under paragraph 1.
Article – 20
Dispute Settlement Mechanism
1. Any dispute that may arise among the Contracting States regarding
the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Agreement
or any instrument adopted within its framework concerning the rights
and obligations of the Contracting States will be amicably settled
among the parties concerned through a process initiated by a request
for bilateral consultations.
2. Any Contracting State may request consultations in accordance with
paragraph 1 of this Article with other Contracting State in writing
stating the reasons for the request including identification of the
measures at issue. All such requests should be notified to the
Committee of Experts, through the SAARC Secretariat with an
indication of the legal basis for the complaint.
3. If a request for consultations is made pursuant to this Article, the
Contracting State to which the request is made shall, unless otherwise
mutually agreed, reply to the request within 15 days after the date of
its receipt and shall enter into consultations in good faith within a
period of no more than 30 days after the date of receipt of the
request, with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution.
4. If the Contracting State does not respond within 15 days after the
date of receipt of the request, or does not enter into consultations
within a period of no more than 30 days, or a period otherwise
mutually agreed, after the date of receipt of the request, then the
Contracting State that requested the holding of consultations may
proceed to request the Committee of Experts to settle the dispute in
accordance with working procedures to be drawn up by the
Committee.
5. Consultations shall be confidential, and without prejudice to the rights
of any Contracting State in any further proceedings. 


13
6. If the consultations fail to settle a dispute within 30 days after the
date of receipt of the request for consultations, to be extended by a
further period of 30 days through mutual consent, the complaining
Contracting State may request the Committee of Experts to settle the
dispute. The complaining Contracting State may request the
Committee of Experts to settle the dispute during the 60-day period if
the consulting Contracting States jointly consider that consultations
have failed to settle the dispute.
7. The Committee of Experts shall promptly investigate the matter
referred to it and make recommendations on the matter within a
period of 60 days from the date of referral.
8. The Committee of Experts may request a specialist from a Contracting
State not party to the dispute selected from a panel of specialists to
be established by the Committee within one year from the date of
entry into force of the Agreement for peer review of the matter
referred to it. Such review shall be submitted to the Committee within
a period of 30 days from the date of referral of the matter to the
specialist.
9. Any Contracting State, which is a party to the dispute, may appeal the
recommendations of the Committee of Experts to the SMC. The SMC
shall review the matter within the period of 60 days from date of
submission of request for appeal. The SMC may uphold, modify or
reverse the recommendations of the Committee of Experts.
10. Where the Committee of Experts or SMC concludes that the measure
subject to dispute is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this
Agreement, it shall recommend that the Contracting State concerned
bring the measure into conformity with this Agreement. In addition to
its recommendations, the Committee of Experts or SMC may suggest
ways in which the Contracting State concerned could implement the
recommendations.
11. The Contracting State to which the Committee’s or SMC’s
recommendations are addressed shall within 30 days from the date of
adoption of the recommendations by the Committee or SMC, inform
the Committee of Experts of its intentions regarding implementation of
the recommendations. Should the said Contracting State fail to
implement the recommendations within 90 days from the date of
adoption of the recommendations by the Committee, the Committee
of Experts may authorize other interested Contracting States to
withdraw concessions having trade effects equivalent to those of the
measure in dispute.
Article – 21
Withdrawal

1. Any Contracting State may withdraw from this Agreement at any time
after its entry into force. Such withdrawal shall be effective on expiry of 


14
six months from the date on which a written notice thereof is received
by the Secretary-General of SAARC, the depositary of this Agreement.
That Contracting State shall simultaneously inform the Committee of
Experts of the action it has taken.
2. The rights and obligations of a Contracting State which has withdrawn
from this Agreement shall cease to apply as of that effective date.
3. Following the withdrawal by any Contracting State, the Committee shall
meet within 30 days to consider action subsequent to withdrawal.
Article – 22
Entry into Force
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on 1st January 2006 upon
completion of formalities, including ratification by all Contracting
States and issuance of a notification thereof by the SAARC Secretariat.
This Agreement shall supercede the Agreement on SAARC Preferential
Trading Arrangement (SAPTA).
2. Notwithstanding the supercession of SAPTA by this Agreement, the
concessions granted under the SAPTA Framework shall remain
available to the Contracting States until the completion of the Trade
Liberalisation Programme.
Article – 23
Reservations
This Agreement shall not be signed with reservations, nor will
reservations be admitted at the time of notification to the SAARC
Secretariat of the completion of formalities.
Article – 24
Amendments
This Agreement may be amended by consensus in the SAFTA
Ministerial Council. Any such amendment will become effective upon
the deposit of instruments of acceptance with the Secretary General of
SAARC by all Contracting States. 


15
Article – 25

Depository
This Agreement will be deposited with the Secretary General of
SAARC, who will promptly furnish a certified copy thereof to each
Contracting State.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments have signed this Agreement.
DONE in ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN, On This The Sixth Day Of the Year
Two Thousand Four, In Nine Originals In The English Language All
Texts Being Equally Authentic. 

ANNEX TEXT: 

ANNEX-II OF THE SAFTA AGREEMENT
Areas identified for
 Technical Assistance to
Least Developed Contracting States
Under Article 11(d) OF SAFTA Agreement

(finalised by the Second Meeting of the Sub-Group on Technical Assistance
Kathmandu, 31 August – 3 September 2005)
- TO BE INCORPORATED AS ANNEX-II OF THE SAFTA AGREEMENT -
1. Capacity building in the following areas:
a. Mutual recognition of technical regulations and standards, training and
skill development.
b. Product certification, testing laboratories and metrology, standards,
testing, quality management, accreditation and certification (MSTQ) -
for agro-processed products, pharmaceutical products etc.
c. Training and human resource development in trade related areas such
as product development, marketing etc.
d. Training in the areas of statistical data administration, trade
procedures, documentation and computerization of trade data.
e. Development of trade related institutions and upgradation of the
capacity of existing institutions
f. Development of trade negotiating skills
2. Development and improvement of tax policy and instruments
Tax/Tariff related laws, rules, regulations and their administration.
3. Customs procedures related measures:
a. Assistance to improve institutional, managerial, regulatory and
procedural matters relating to customs
b. Assistance for creation of database, training, post clearance audit for
the customs valuation; and automation of customs administrations.
c. HS Nomenclature
d. Rules of Origin
4. Legislative and policy related measures, assistance for improvement
of national capacity on:
a. Legislation on anti-dumping, safeguards, competition etc.
b. Trade Policy Reforms
c. Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) measures/Technical Barriers to Trade
(TBT) measures
d. WTO Agreement on Customs Valuation
e. WTO Agreement on Agriculture and Subsidies 


57
f. TRIPS and Intellectual Property Rights
5. Studies on:
a. Development of trade related physical infrastructure such as road,
railway, Inland Container Depot (ICD), Container Freight Station (CFS)
etc.
b. Improvement of banking and insurance services for promotion of intraSAARC trade
c. Development of export financing mechanism
6. Research and Development:
a. Assistance for product specific R&D particularly in area of fashion and
design, finishing and packaging
7. Export Promotion
a. Support for carrying out studies and providing advisory services for
identifying export niches for the products of the Least Developed
Contracting States.
b. Provision of commercially relevant market information to help exporters:
Assistance to participate in trade fairs and exhibitions, inward and
outward missions
c. Support for product development and market promotion in export
oriented sectors like leather and footwear, jute goods and diversified
jute products, gems and jewellery, ICT, light engineering, agriculture
and agro-based industries, fisheries and livestock etc.
d. Support for improving technical, managerial and entrepreneurial skills of
small and medium size enterprises engaged in export production.
e. Provide information on import-related formalities and procedures on
products of specific export interest to Least Developed Contracting
States.
8. Investment Promotion
a. Support for identifying areas to stimulate intra-SAARC FDI flow to the
Least Developed Contracting States.
9. Training and human resource development in trade
related areas such as product development, marketing
etc.
10. Support for product development and market promotion in
export-oriented sectors 


58
ANNEX III OF SAFTA AGREEMENT
 MECHANISM FOR COMPENSATION OF REVENUE LOSS
FOR LDC MEMBER STATES

(TO BE INCORPORATED AS ANNEX-III OF THE SAFTA AGREEMENT)
(i) Date of coming into force - The Mechanism for Compensation of
Revenue Loss (hereinafter referred to as MCRL) shall come into force from
the date on which the first tranche of Trade Liberalisation Programme (TLP)
under Article 7 of SAFTA Agreement would be implemented.
(ii) Definitions - The following shall be defined in the manner as
given below:
a. “Customs revenue” may be defined as basic customs duty
agreed to be reduced under Trade Liberalisation Programme
(TLP) of SAFTA.
b. “Reference Exchange Rate” may be defined as the average of
the exchange rate of the domestic currency of the respective
Contracting State vis-à-vis US dollar of each of the working day
of the calendar year separately for each LDC Contracting State.
c. “Base Year” may be defined as the average of the calendar
years 2004 and 2005 for the purposes of calculation of revenue
loss. Therefore, hereinafter the references to all variables, other
than the tariff rate of duties, for the calendar year 2005 shall
refer to the average of the relevant variables for calendar year
2004 and 2005.
(iii) Administrative arrangements -
a. Periodicity of release of revenue compensation if quantified to
be due shall be annual.
b. The claim for revenue loss, duly quantified along with
supporting data/documents may be submitted in prescribed
format, to be devised, to the COE to be established under
Article 10 of the SAFTA Agreement within a period of six (06)
months from 31st December of the preceding year.
c. Upon receipt of claims, as also intimation of non-claim by
LDC Contracting States, the COE may meet and settle the
claims within a period that the COE may fix and following the
procedure that the COE may adopt.
d. The non-LDC Contracting States shall release the
compensation due from them to the LDC Contracting States
within a period not exceeding six months from the date of 


59
finalization of quantum of compensation by COE, subject to
completion of due procedure.
e. The due procedure shall be completed within a period of not
exceeding nine months from the date of finalization of
quantum of compensation, failing which the concerned LDC
Contracting States shall have the right to withdraw
concessions given to the concerned Non-LDC Contracting
State.
f. The claim of revenue compensation shall be decided by the
COE the decision of which shall be final.
g. Notwithstanding the above, if the Contracting States so
desire, the claim of revenue compensation could be
conducted on a bilateral basis under intimation to the COE
and the SAARC Secretariat.
(iv) Quantification of revenue loss – The revenue loss for the year
2006 shall be calculated in the following manner.
06 06 05 RL = CRNS − (1+α)×CRNS
Where:
a. RL06 for LDC Contracting State is the quantum of revenue loss
suffered in 2006.
b. CRNS05 = ∑=
n
i 1
[VSAFTA (05) X TAPL (05)] - to be summed up
separately for each of the three non-LDC Contracting States.

c. ‘i’ is non-sensitive item covered under the TLP of SAFTA;

d. VSAFTA (05) refers to CIF value [in USD] of import of non-sensitive
items covered under TLP of SAFTA from non-LDC Contracting
States in 2005;
e. TAPL (05) refers to applied rate of basic customs duty (BCD)
under SAPTA covered for reduction under TLP of SAFTA,
provided it is ≤ applied BCD under any bilateral agreement with
non-LDC Contracting States. For items not covered under
SAPTA, MFN applied rate shall apply.
f. CRNS06 = ∑=
n
i 1
 [VSAFTA (06) X T SAFTA(06)], provided VSAFTA (06)
≥ VSAFTA (05). In case VSAFTA (06) < VSAFTA (05), VSAFTA (06) = VSAFTA
(05) shall be assumed. This would be summed up separately for
each of the three non-LDC Contracting States.
g. VSAFTA (06) refers to CIF value [in USD] of import of items covered
under TLP programme from non-LDC Contracting States in
2006;
 


60
h. T SAFTA (06) refers to applied rate of basic customs duty (BCD)
covered for reduction under SAFTA TLP, provided it is ≤ applied
BCD under any bilateral agreement with non-LDC Contracting
States.
i. α is the annual trend rate of growth of customs revenue (basic
customs duty) of non-sensitive items covered under TLP of SAFTA from
Non-LDC Contracting States to the respective LDC Contracting State over
previous five years i.e. from 2001 to 2005. This factor may be quantified
and would remain unchanged for the duration of the Mechanism.
(v) The quantification of revenue loss of LDC Contracting State for
calendar year 2007 and subsequent years would be calculated in the
following manner:

RL07 = CRNS07 – (1+α)
2
 CRNS05
RL08 = CRNS08 – (1+α)
3
 CRNS05
RL09 = CRNS09 – (1+α)
4
 CRNS05 and so on.
(vi) Sharing of revenue compensation to any LDC Contracting State by
the Non-LDC Contracting States shall be on the basis of quantified loss of
customs revenue, if any, on bilateral basis.

(vii) Extent of compensation – The extent of compensation for each of
the LDC Contracting State shall not exceed the following percentage of the
basic customs duty collected on imports of non-sensitive items from
concerned Non-LDC Contracting States in the base year –
(a) First year – 1%;
(b) Second year – 1%;
(c) Third year – 5%;
(d) Fourth year – 3%; and
(e) Fifth & sixth year – 5% [applicable only in the case of claims by
Maldives].
Provided that the above restriction on the extent of compensation shall not
apply in case of claims of compensation by Maldives from India in the event
of the loss of revenue being higher than the above annual ceilings.
(viii) Form of Compensation: The compensation equal to the extent of
revenue loss quantified under clause (iv) above subject to the ceiling
prescribed under clause (vii) above shall be paid in cash in US dollars.

(ix) Exchange of Data - The Contracting States may provide the
following information by 31st December 2005 through the SAARC
Secretariat:-
 


61
a. Product-wise and country-wise breakdown of statistics on
imports (value in US dollars) from Non-Least Developed
Contracting States (from 2000 to 2005 – latest available);

b. Latest Customs Tariff Guide containing import tariff (both MFN
and SAPTA) and other levies;

c. Formula for calculating other levies contained in the Customs
Tariff Guide; and
d. The similar data in prescribed format, shall be submitted by the
Contracting States by a date not later than 31 December in
subsequent calendar years.
(x) Duration of Mechanism: The Mechanism shall be in place for a
period of four years from the date of coming into force.
Provided that the Mechanism in respect of claims by the Maldives shall
be in place for an additional period of one year i.e. for a period of five years;
Provided further that the Mechanism in respect of claims by the
Maldives from India shall be in place for an additional two years, i.e. for a
period of six years.
Provided further that the Mechanism in respect of payment of revenue
compensation by Sri Lanka shall be in place for a shorter period of three
years to LDC Contracting States other than to the Maldives to which Sri
Lanka would provide compensation, if due, for an additional period of one
year i.e. for a period of four years.
 __________ 


62
ANNEX IV OF THE SAFTA AGREEMENT
SAFTA RULES OF ORIGIN
Rule 1 : Title
These Rules may be called the Rules of Determination of Origin of Goods
under the Agreement on SAFTA hereinafter referred to as the
“Agreement”.
Rule 2 : Application
These Rules shall apply to products eligible for preferential treatment
under SAFTA.
Rule 3 : Determination of Origin
No product shall be deemed to be the produce or manufacture of any
Contracting State unless the conditions specified in these rules are
complied with in relation to such products, to the satisfaction of the
designated Authority.
Rule 4 : Originating products
Products covered by the Agreement imported into the territory of a
Contracting State from another Contracting State which are consigned
directly within the meaning of Rule 12 hereof, shall be eligible for
preferential treatment if they conform to the origin requirement under
any one of the following conditions:
(a) Products wholly produced or obtained in the territory of the
exporting Contracting State as defined in Rule 5; or
(b) Products not wholly produced or obtained in the territory of the
exporting Contracting State provided that the said products are
eligible under Rule 6. 


63
Rule 5 : Wholly produced or obtained
Within the meaning of Rule 4(a), the following shall be considered as
wholly produced or obtained in the territory of the exporting Contracting
State
(a) raw or mineral products2
 extracted from its soil, its water
extending upto its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), or its sea bed
extending upto its seabed or continental shelf;
(b) Agriculture, vegetable and forestry products harvested there;
(c) animals born and raised there;
(d) products obtained from animals referred to in clause (c) above;
(e) products obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there,
(f) products of sea fishing and other marine products from the high
seas by its vessels3,4
;
(g) products processed and/or made on board its factory ships
exclusively from products referred to in clause (f) above 3,5
;
(h) raw materials recovered from used articles collected there;
(i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing operations
conducted there;
(j) products taken from the seabed, ocean floor or subsoil thereof
beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, provided it has the
 2 Includes mineral fuels, lubricants and related materials as well as mineral or metal ores.
3
 “Vessels” shall refer to fishing vessels engaged in commercial fishing, registered in the country of the
Contracting State and operated by a citizen or citizens of the Contracting State or partnership, corporation or
association, duly registered in such country, at least 60 per cent of equity of which is owned by a citizen or
citizens and/or Government of such Contracting State or 75 per cent by citizens and/or Governments of the
Contracting States. However, the products taken from vessels, engaged in commercial fishing under Bilateral
Agreements which provide for chartering/leasing of such vessels and/or sharing of catch between
Contracting State will also be eligible for preferential treatment.
4
 In respect of vessels or factory ships operated by Government agencies, the requirements of flying the flag
of the Contracting State do not apply.
5
 For the purpose of this Agreement, the term “factory ship” means any vessel, as defined used for
processing and/or making on board products exclusively from those products referred to in clause (f) of Rule
6. 


64
exclusive rights to exploit that sea bed, ocean floor or subsoil
thereof;
(k) goods produced there exclusively from the products referred to in
clauses (a) to (j) above.
Rule 6 : Not wholly produced or obtained
Within the meaning of Rule 4 (b), products not wholly produced or
obtained shall be subject to Rule 7 and any of the conditions prescribed
under Rule 8, Rule 9 or Rule 10.

Rule 7 : Non-qualifying Operations
The following shall in any event be considered as insufficient working or
processing to confer the status of originating products, whether or not
there is a change of heading:
1) operations to ensure the preservation of products in good
condition during transport and storage (ventilation,
spreading out, drying, chilling, placing in salt, Sulphur
dioxide or other aqueous solutions, removal of damaged
parts, and like operations).
 2) simple operations consisting of removal of dust, sifting or
screening, sorting, classifying, matching (including the
making-up of sets of articles), washing, painting, cutting up;

3) (i) changes of packing and breaking up and assembly of
consignments,
 (ii) simple slicing, cutting and repacking or placing in
bottles, flasks, bags, boxes, fixing on cards or boards,
etc., and all other simple packing operations.
4) the affixing of marks, labels or other like distinguishing
signs on products of their packaging;
5) simple mixing of products, whether or not of different kinds,
where one or more components of the mixture do not meet
the conditions laid down in these rules to enable them to be
considered as originating products; and mere dilution with
water or another substance that does not materially alter the
characteristics of the product;
6) simple assembly of parts of products to constitute a
complete product; 


65
7) a combination of two or more operations specified in (1) to
(6);
Rule 8 : Single Contracting State Content
(a) Products originating in the exporting Contracting State shall be
considered to be sufficiently worked or processed for the
purposes of granting originating status if they fulfill the
following conditions:
(i) The final product is classified in a heading at the four
digit level of the Harmonised Commodity Description and
Coding System differently from those in which all the
non-originating materials6
 used in its manufacture are
classified and
(ii) Products worked on or processed as a result of which the
total value of the materials, parts or produce originating
from other countries or of undetermined origin used does
not exceed 60% of the FOB value of the products
produced or obtained and the final process of
manufacture is performed within the territory of the
exporting Contracting State.
(b) Notwithstanding the condition laid down in paragraph (a) of this
Rule, the products listed in Annex-A shall be eligible for
preferential treatment if they comply with Rule 8 (a) or they
fulfill the condition corresponding to those products as
mentioned in the Annex-A.
Rule 9 : Regional Cumulation
Unless otherwise provided for, products worked on or processed in a
Contracting State using the inputs originating in any Contracting
States within the meaning of Rule 4 shall be eligible for preferential
treatment provided that
(a) the aggregate content (value of such inputs plus domestic value
addition in further manufacture) is not less than 50 percent of
the FOB value;
(b) the domestic value content (value of inputs originating in the
exporting Contracting State plus domestic value addition in
further manufacture in the exporting Contracting State), is not
less than 20 percent of the FOB value; and

6
 Non-originating material means material originating from countries other than Contracting States and
material of undetermined origin. 


66
(c) the final product satisfies the condition of
(i) change in classification at the four digit level (CTH) as
provided under Rule 8 (a) (i); or
(ii) change in classification at the six digit level (CTSH) as
agreed upon in the Product Specific Rules reflected in
Rule 8 (b).

Rule 10 : Special Treatment to Least Developed Contracting
 States
The products originating in the Least Developed Contracting
States shall be allowed a favourable 10 percentage points applied
to the percentage applied in Rule 8.
The products originating in Sri Lanka shall be allowed a
favourable 5 percentage points applied to the percentage applied
in Rule 8.
Rule 11 : Method for Valuation of non-originating materials
(a) The value of the non-originating materials, parts or produce shall
be:
(i) The CIF value at the time of importation of the materials,
parts or produce where this can be proven or
(ii) The earliest ascertainable price paid for the materials,
parts or produce of undetermined origin in the territory of
the Contracting States where the working or processing
takes place.
(b) In order to determine whether or not a product originated in the
territory of a Contracting State it shall not be necessary to
establish whether the power and fuel, plant and equipment, and
machines and tools used to obtain such products, originate in
third countries.
Rule 12 : Direct consignment
The following shall be considered as directly consigned from the
exporting Contracting State to the importing Contracting State:
 (a) if the products are transported without passing through the
territory of any non-Contracting State:
 (b) the products whose transport involves transit through one or
more intermediate non-Contracting States with or without
transshipment or temporary storage in such countries, provided
that: 


67
 (i) the transit entry is justified for geographical reason or by
considerations related exclusively to transport
requirements;
 (ii) the products have not entered into trade or consumption
there;
 (iii) the products have not undergone any operation there
other than unloading and reloading or any operation
required to keep them in good condition;
(iv)the products have remained under the customs control in
the country of transit.
Rule 13 : Treatment of packing
When determining the origin of products, packing should be considered
as forming a whole with the product it contains. However, packing may
be treated separately if the national legislation so requires.
Rule 14 : Procedures for Issuance and Verification of
Certificate of origin
Detailed operational certification procedures for implementation of these
Rules of Origin are at Annex-B.
 Rule 15 : Prohibitions
Any Contracting State may prohibit importation of products containing
any inputs originating from States with which it does not have economic
and commercial relations.
Rule 16 : Consultation and Co-operation between
Contracting States
(a) The Contracting States will do their best to co-operate in order
to specify origin of inputs in the Certificate of origin.
(b) The Contracting States will take measures necessary to
address, to investigate and, where appropriate, to take legal
and/or administrative action to prevent circumvention to these
Rules through false declaration concerning country of origin or
falsification of original documents.
(c) The Contracting States will co-operate fully, consistent with
their domestic laws and procedures, in instances of
circumvention or alleged circumvention of these Rules to
address problems arising from circumvention including
facilitation of joint plant visits, inspection and contacts by 


68
representatives of Contracting States upon request and on a
case-by-case basis.
(d) If any Contracting State believes that the rules of origin are
being circumvented, it may request consultation to address the
matter or matters concerned with a view to seeking a mutually
satisfactory solution. Each State will hold such consultations
promptly.
Rule 17 : Review
These rules may be reviewed as and when necessary upon request of any
Contracting State and may be open to such modifications as may be
agreed upon by the SAFTA Ministerial Council.
______ 


69
ANNEX I
 (WITH REFERENCE TO SAFTA RULES OF ORIGIN)

PRODUCT SPECIFIC RULES
UNDER SAFTA RULES OF ORIGIN
Explanatory Notes:
1. For the purposes of Rule 8 (b) of the SAFTA Rules of Origin, the
products listed under column (3) and corresponding to heading mentioned
under column (2) would be subject to Rule specified under column (4) in
the following Table.
2. The term “CTH” in column (4) below shall mean that the final product
is classified in a heading at the four-digit level of the Harmonised Commodity
Description and Coding System differently from those in which all the nonoriginating materials used in its manufacture are classified.
3. The term “CTSH” in column (4) below shall mean that the final
product is classified in a heading at the six-digit level of the Harmonised
Commodity Description and Coding System differently from those in which
all the non-originating materials used in its manufacture are classified.
4. The DVA mentioned in percentage in column (4) below shall mean the
minimum value addition in the Exporting Contracting State, calculated as per
the following formula: 
ANNEX II
 (WITH REFERENCE TO SAFTA RULES OF ORIGIN)
OPERATIONAL CERTIFICATION PROCEDURES
FOR SOUTH ASIAN FREE TRADE AREA (SAFTA)
RULES OF ORIGIN

For the purposes of implementing the Rules of Origin as provided for
in Rule 14 of SAFTA Rules of Origin, the following operational
certification procedures shall be followed:
AUTHORITY
ARTICLE 1
The Certificate of Origin shall be issued by authority designated by the
Government of the exporting Contracting State (hereinafter referred to as
Issuing Authority) and notified to the other Contracting States.
ARTICLE 2
(a) Each Contracting State shall inform the other Contracting States of the
names and addresses of the officials authorised to issue the
Certificate of Origin and shall provide their specimen signatures and
official seals.
(b) Any change in their names, addresses, or official seals shall be
promptly notified to the other Contracting States.
ARTICLE 3
For the purpose of verifying the conditions for preferential treatment, the
Issuing Authority shall have right to call for any supporting documentary
evidence or to carry out any check considered appropriate.
PRE-EXPORTATION VERIFICATION
ARTICLE 4
The Issuing Authority, upon a written request by the manufacturer
and/or exporter of the products desirous for availing preferential
treatment, shall conduct pre-exportation verification of the
manufacturing premise(s). The result of the verification, subject to
review periodically or whenever appropriate, shall be accepted as
the supporting evidence in verifying the origin of the said products
to be exported thereafter. Pre-exportation verification may not
apply to the products, origin of which, by their nature, can be easily
verified. 


79
REQUEST FOR ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ORIGIN
ARTICLE 5
At the time of carrying out the formalities for exporting the products under
preferential treatment, the exporter or his authorized representative shall
submit the Certificate of Origin duly filled together with appropriate
documents supporting that the products to be exported qualify for the
issuance of a Certificate of Origin.

PRE-EXPORTATION EXAMINATION
ARTICLE 6
The Issuing Authority shall, to the best of their competence and ability, carry
out proper examination upon each application for the Certificate of Origin to
ensure that:
(a) The Certificate of Origin is duly completed and signed by the
authorized signatory;
(b) The origin of the product is in conformity with the Rules of Origin of
this Agreement;
(c) The other statements/entries of the Certificate of Origin correspond to
supporting documentary evidence submitted;
(d) HS Code, f.o.b. value, description, quantity and weight of goods,
marks, number and kinds of packages, as specified, conform to the
consignment to be exported.
ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ORIGIN
ARTICLE 7
(a) The validity of the Certificate of Origin shall be 12 months from the
date of its issuance.
(b) The Certificate of Origin must be on ISO A4 size paper in conformity to
the specimen shown in Appendix-1. It shall be in English.
(c) The Certificate of Origin shall comprise one original and one duplicate
in the following colours:
Original - light orange
Duplicate - white

(d) Each Certificate of Origin shall bear a reference number given
separately by each office of issuance at different places.
(e) The original shall be forwarded by the exporter to the importer for
submission to the Customs Authority at the port or place of 


80
importation. The duplicate shall be retained by the Issuing Authority
of the exporting Contracting State.
(f) After issuance of the Certificate of Origin, the Issuing Authority of the
exporting Contracting State shall electronically send the information
on issuance of certificate of origin on a weekly basis as per format
provided in Appendix -2 to the Issuing Authority of respective
importing Contracting State.
ARTICLE 8
The Certificate of Origin issued by the Issuing Authority shall indicate the
applicable Rules of Origin and the value of non-originating material
expressed as a percentage of the f.o.b. value of the products, or the sum of
the aggregate content originating in the territory of the exporting
Contracting State expressed as a percentage of the f.o.b. value of the
exported product; where applicable, in Box 8.
ARTICLE 9
Neither erasures nor superimpositions shall be allowed on the Certificate of
Origin. Any alteration shall be made by striking out the erroneous entries
and making any addition required. Such alterations shall be approved by an
authorized signatory of the applicant and certified by the Issuing Authority.
Unused spaces shall be crossed out to prevent any subsequent addition.
ARTICLE 10
(a) The Certificate of Origin shall be issued by the relevant Issuing
Authority of the exporting Contracting State at the time of
exportation, or within 3 working days from the date of shipment
whenever the products to be exported can be considered originating in
that Contracting State within the meaning of the Rules of Origin of this
Agreement.
(b) In exceptional cases where a Certificate of Origin has not been issued
at the time of exportation or within 3 working days from the date of
shipment due to involuntary errors or omissions or other valid causes,
the Certificate of Origin may be issued retrospectively but no longer
than 45 days from the date of shipment, bearing the word “ISSUED
RETROSPECTIVELY” in Box 4.
ARTICLE 11
In the event of theft, loss, damage or destruction of a Certificate of Origin,
the exporter may apply in writing to the Issuing Authority, which issued it,
for the certified true copy of the original to be made on the basis of the
export documents in their possession bearing the endorsement “CERTIFIED
TRUE COPY” (in lieu of the Original Certificate) in Box 13. This copy shall
bear the date of the original Certificate of Origin. The certified true copy of a
Certificate of Origin shall be issued within the validity period of the original
Certificate of Origin. 


81
PRESENTATION
ARTICLE 12
The Original Certificate of Origin shall be submitted to the Customs Authority
at the time of lodging the import entry for the products concerned.
ARTICLE 13
The following time limit for the presentation of the Certificate of Origin shall
be observed:
(a) Certificate of Origin shall be submitted to the Customs Authority of the
importing Contracting State within its validity period;
(b) Where the Certificate of Origin is submitted to the Customs Authority
of the importing Contracting State after the expiration of the validity
of the Certificate of Origin, such Certificate is still to be accepted when
failure to observe the time-limit results from force majeure or other
valid causes beyond the control of the exporter; and
(c) In all cases, the relevant Government authority in the importing
Contracting State may accept such Certificate of Origin provided that
the products have been imported before the expiration of the validity
of the Certificate of Origin.
ARTICLE 14
The discovery of minor discrepancies between the statements made in the
Certificate of Origin and those made in the documents submitted to the
Customs Authority of the importing Contracting State for the purpose of
carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not ipso-facto
invalidate the Certificate of Origin, if it does, in fact, correspond to the said
products.
ARTICLE 15
(a) The importing Contracting State may request to the Issuing Authority of
the exporting Contracting State for a retrospective check at random and/or
when it has reasonable doubt as to the authenticity of the document or as to
the accuracy of the information regarding the true origin of the products in
question or of certain parts thereof.
(b) The request shall be accompanied with the Certificate of Origin
concerned and shall specify the reasons and any additional information
suggesting that the particulars given on the said Certificate of Origin may be
inaccurate, unless the retroactive check is requested on a random basis.
(c) The Customs Authority of the importing Contracting State may suspend
the provisions on preferential treatment while awaiting the result of
verification. However, without prejudice to the national legislations the 


82
competent authority of the importing Contracting State shall not suspend the
customs clearance of the consignment subject to a guarantee in any of its
modalities in order to preserve fiscal interests, as a pre-condition for
completion of customs clearance.
(d) The Issuing Authority receiving a request for retrospective check shall
respond within three (3) months after the receipt of the request.
ARTICLE 16
(a) The application for Certificates of Origin and all documents related to
such application shall be retained by the Issuing Authority for not less
than two (2) years from the date of issuance.
(b) Information relating to the validity of the Certificate of Origin shall be
furnished upon request of the importing Contracting State.
(c) Any information communicated among the government authorities
shall be treated as confidential and shall be used only for the
validation purposes of Certificates of Origin.
SPECIAL CASES
ARTICLE 17
When destination of all or parts of the products exported to specified port is
changed, before or after their arrival in the importing Contracting State, the
following procedures shall be observed:
(a) If the products have already been submitted to the Customs Authority
in the specified importing port, the Certificate of Origin shall, by a
written application of the importer, be endorsed to this effect for all or
parts of products by the said authority and the original returned to the
importer.
(b) If the changing of destination occurs during transportation to the
importing Contracting State as specified in the Certificate of Origin,
the exporter shall apply in writing, accompanied with the issued
Certificate of Origin, for the issuance of new Certificate/s of Origin for
all or parts of products.
ARTICLE 18
For the purpose of implementing Rule 12 of SAFTA Rules of Origin where
transportation is effected through the territory of one or more nonContracting States, the following shall be produced to the Government
authorities of the importing Contracting State:
(a) A through Bill of Lading/ Airway bill or corresponding transport
document issued in the exporting Contracting State;
(b) A Certificate of Origin issued by the Issuing Authority of the exporting
Contracting State; 


83
(c) A copy of the original commercial invoice in respect of the product; and
(d) Supporting documents in evidence that the requirements of Rule 12 of
SAFTA Rules of Origin are being complied with.
ARTICLE 19
(a) Products sent from one Contracting State for exhibition in another
Contracting State and sold during or after the exhibition shall benefit from
the preferential tariff treatment provided in this Agreement, on the condition
that the products meet the requirements of Rule 4 of the SAFTA Rules of
Origin and provided it is shown to the satisfaction of the relevant
Government authorities of the importing Contracting State that:
(i) An exporter has dispatched those products from the territory of
the exporting Contracting State to the importing Contracting
State where the exhibition is held and has exhibited them there,
(ii) The exporter has sold the goods or transferred them to a
consignee in the importing Contracting State; and
(iii) The products have been sold during the exhibition or
immediately thereafter to the importing Contracting State in the
state in which they were sent for the exhibition.
(b) For the purpose of implementing the above provisions, the Certificate
of Origin must be produced to the relevant Government authorities of the
importing Contracting State.
(c) Paragraph (a) shall apply to exhibitions, fairs or similar shows
or displays where the products remain under Customs control during
these events.
ACTION AGAINST FRAUDULENT ACTS
ARTICLE 20
(a) When it is suspected that fraudulent acts in connection with the
Certificate of Origin have been committed, the Issuing Authorities
concerned shall co-operate in the action to be taken in the territory of
each Contracting State against the persons involved.
(b) Each Contracting State shall be responsible for providing legal sanctions
for fraudulent acts related to the Certificate of Origin.
ARTICLE 21
In the case of a dispute concerning origin determination, classification of
products or other matters, the Government authorities concerned in the
importing and exporting Contracting States shall consult each other with a
view to resolving the dispute. 
I. General Conditions
 To qualify for preference, products must:
a) fall within a description of products eligible for preference in the
schedule of concessions of SAFTA country of destination;
b) comply with SAFTA Rules of Origin. Each article in a consignment
must qualify separately in its own right; and
c) comply with the consignment conditions specified by the SAFTA
Rules of Origin. In general, products must be consigned directly
within the meaning of Rule 12 hereof from the country of
exportation to the country of destination.
II. Entries to be made in Box 8
Preference products must be wholly produced or obtained in the
exporting Contracting State in accordance with Rule 5 of the SAFTA Rules of
Origin, or where not wholly produced or obtained in the exporting
Contracting States must be eligible under Rule 6.
a) Products wholly produced or obtained; enter the letter "A" in Box
8.
b) Products not wholly produced or obtained: the entry in Box 8
should be as follows:
1. Enter letter "B" in Box 8, for products which meet the origin
criteria according to Rule 8. Entry of letter would be followed by
the value of non-originating material expressed as a percentage
of the f.o.b. value of the products; (example "B" 50 per cent);
2. Enter letter "C" in Box 8 for products which meet the origin
criteria according to Rule 9. Entry of letter "C" would be
followed by the sum of the aggregate content originating in the
territory of the exporting Contracting State expressed as a
percentage of the f.o.b. value of the exported product;
(example "C" 60 per cent);
3. Enter letter "D" in Box 8 for products which meet the special
origin criteria according to Rule 10. Entry of letter would be
followed by the value of non-originating material expressed as a
percentage of the f.o.b. value of the products; (example "D" 40
per cent);
III. Entries to be made in Box 4
In case of issuance of certificates retrospectively Box 13 should bear the
words “ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY”.
IV. Entries to be made in Box 13
In case of issuance of certified true copies Box 13 should bear the words
“CERTIFIED TRUE COPY”. 
Agreement on South Asia Free Trade Area (SAFTA)
The Agreement on South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) came into force from 1st January,
2006. India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are categorized as Non-Least Developed Contracting
States (NLDCS) and Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives and Nepal are categorized as Least
Developed Contracting States (LDCS).

Afghanistan which became the eighth member of SAARC during the 14th SAARC Summit
held on 3-4 April 2007 in New Delhi is due to become a party to the SAFTA Agreement as
an LDC member.
Article 7 of the SAFTA Agreement provides for a phased tariff liberalization programme
(TLP) under which, in two years, NLDCS would bring down tariffs to 20%, while LDCS
will bring them down to 30%. Non-LDCS will then bring down tariffs from 20% to 0-5% in
5 years (Sri Lanka 6 years), while LDCS will do so in 8 years. NLDCs will reduce their
tariffs for L.D.C. products to 0-5% in 3 years. This TLP would cover all tariff lines except
those kept in the sensitive list (negative list) by the member states.
The salient features of the four Annexes of SAFTA Agreement are as under:
i. Rules of Origin:
a. For giving preferential access to the Member Countries under SAFTA, the goods
shall have undergone substantial manufacturing process in the exporting
countries. The substantial manufacturing process are defined in terms of twin
criteria of Change of Tariff Heading (CTH) at four-digit Harmonized Coding
System (HS) and value content of 40% (30% for LDCSs).
b. Apart from the general rules, to provide for Products-Specific Rules (PSR) for 191
tariff lines to accommodate the interest of LDCSs given their limited base for
natural resources and undiversified industrial structure. The Products Specific
Rules have been provided clearly on technical grounds i.e. where both inputs and
outputs are at the same four-digit HS level. 
iii. Mechanism for Compensation of Revenue Loss (MCRL) for the Least Developed
Contracting States:
a. The compensation to LDCSs, except to Maldives, would be available for four years;
to Maldives it would be for six years. The MCRL to Afghanistan, which is due to
become a party to the SAFTA, will also be at par with Maldives.
b. The compensation would be in the form of grant in US dollar.
c. The compensation shall be subject to a cap of 1%, 1%, 5% and 3% of customs
revenue collected on non sensitive items under bilateral trade in the base year, i.e.,
average of 2004 and 2005.
The compensation shall be administered by the SAFTA Committee of Experts as per the
Administrative Arrangements defined in this Annex.
iv. Technical Assistance to Least Developed Contracting States in agreed areas.
The main areas covered are - capacity building in standards, product certification, training
of human resources, data management, institutional upgradations, improvement of legal
systems and administration, customs procedures and trade facilitation, market
development and promotion.
Implementation of SAFTA Agreement:
Tariff Concessions granted under the SAARC Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA)
would cease for the LDC Member States once the Non-LDCSs complete the Trade
Liberalization Programme (TLP) for LDCSs within three years. If any items, on which
SAPTA concessions are available to LDCSs, appear in the Sensitive List of Non-LDCSs,
they shall maintain the same level of concessions through derogation under Article 7(3)(a)
and indicate the same in their respective Sensitive Lists, and if the items under TLP enjoy
tariff preferences under SAPTA, the Non-LDCS shall reduce their tariff on those items to a
rate not higher than the rate applicable for LDCS under SAPTA on the date agreed for base
rate for TLP.
The base rate for the purpose of tariff reduction would be MFN applied rate existing as on 1st
January 2006.
Commencement of SAFTA Trade Liberalization Programme (TLP):

The TLP became operational from 1st July 2006 with the condition that the TLP for the
first two years would be completed by 31st December, 2007, i.e. within two years of SAFTA
coming into force.
India, with a view to providing greater market access to its neighbouring least developed
countries, unilaterally reduced tariffs to zero per cent for LDCS countries of SAFTA with
effect from 1.1.2008 thereby completing the SAFTA tariff liberalization for these countries
one year ahead of 31.12.2008 stipulated in the SAFTA Agreement. The notifications
regarding tariff concessions granted by India under SAFTA can be accessed in the website
http://cbec.gov.in.
The notifications issued by Pakistan for SAFTA tariff concessions have an India specificrider that Indian imports into Pakistan would continue to be as per their Positive List of
importable items from India which at present consists of 1938 item.
For more details of this Agreement Visit SAARC website http://www.saarc-sec.org. 