Agreement

in the form of an Exchange of Letters on the provisional application of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Agreement between the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and the European Community for the period from 1 June 2006 to 31 May 2010

A. Letter from the Government of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe

Sir,

Referring to the Protocol initialled on Thursday 25 May 2006 setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution for the period from 1 June 2006 to 31 May 2010, I have the honour to inform you that the Government of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe is willing to apply this Protocol provisionally from 1 June 2006 pending its entry into force in accordance with Article 12 thereof, provided that the European Community is prepared to do likewise.

This is on the understanding that the first instalment of the financial contribution, laid down by Article 2 of the Protocol, must be paid before 15 May 2007.

I should be grateful if you would confirm the agreement of the European Community to such a provisional application.

Please accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest consideration.

For the Government of Sao Tome and Principe

B. Letter from the Community

Sir,

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of today's date which reads as follows:

"Referring to the Protocol initialled on Thursday 25 May 2006 setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution for the period from 1 June 2006 to 31 May 2010, I have the honour to inform you that the Government of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe is willing to apply this Protocol provisionally from 1 June 2006 pending its entry into force in accordance with Article 12 thereof, provided that the European Community is prepared to do likewise.

This is on the understanding that the first instalment of the financial contribution, laid down by Article 2 of the Protocol, must be paid before 15 May 2007."

I am pleased to confirm the agreement of the European Community to a provisional application.

Please accept, Sir, the assurance of my highest consideration.

On behalf of the European Community

