THE ASSOCIATION AGREEMENT
ESTABLISHING A FREE TRADE AREA
BETWEEN
THE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
AND
THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY 
2
The Association Agreement Establishing a Free Trade Area between the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Republic of Turkey
PREAMBLE
The Syrian Arab Republic and the Republic of Turkey (hereinafter referred to as
“the Parties” or Turkey and Syria where appropriate.)

CONSIDERING the importance of existing traditional links between the Parties,
and the common values they share;
DESIROUS to develop and strengthen friendly relations, especially in the fields
of economic co-operation and trade between the Parties and to enhance the scope
of mutual trade;
CONFIRMING their intention to participate actively in the process of economic
integration in Europe and in the Mediterranean Basin in accordance with the
Barcelona Declaration;
EXPRESSING their preparedness to co-operate in seeking ways and means to
strengthen this process;
CONSCIOUS of the importance of this Agreement based on co-operation and
dialogue in order to achieve permanent security and stability in the region;
CONSCIOUS of determination of the two countries to develop the interaction of
their economies with the world economy and their co-operation in this context;
TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION the Agreement Establishing an Association
between Turkey and the European Economic Community and the Cooperation
Agreement between the Syrian Arab Republic and the European Economic
Community.
HAVING regard to the experience gained from the co-operation developed
between the Parties to this Agreement as well as between them and their main
trading partners;
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the need to intensify existing efforts to promote
economic and social development in the two countries;
DECLARING their readiness to undertake activities with a view to promoting
harmonious development of their trade and investment as well as to expanding
and diversifying their mutual co-operation in the fields of joint interest, including
fields not covered by this Agreement, thus creating a framework and supportive
environment based on equality, non-discrimination, and a balance of rights and
obligations;
CONSIDERING the importance of free trade for the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Republic of Turkey, as guaranteed by the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
3
Trade 1994 (“GATT 1994”) and by the other multilateral agreements annexed to
the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation (“the WTO”);
RESOLVED to lay down for this purpose provisions aimed at the progressive
abolition of the obstacles to trade between the Parties in accordance with the
provisions of these instruments under the WTO, in particular those concerning the
establishment of free trade areas,
HAVE DECIDED, in pursuance of these objectives, to conclude the following
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as "this Agreement").
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Article 1
Objectives
1. The Parties, by taking into account Turkey’s obligations arising from the
Customs Union with the European Community and the Cooperation
Agreement between the Syrian Arab Republic and the European Economic
Community, shall gradually establish a free trade area on substantially all their
trade over a transitional period lasting a maximum of 12 years starting from the
entry into force of this Agreement in conformity with the provisions of this
Agreement and in conformity with Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the
other multilateral agreements annexed to the Agreement establishing the WTO.
2. The objectives of this Agreement are:
a. to increase and enhance the economic co-operation and to raise the
living standards of people in both countries;
b. to gradually eliminate difficulties and restrictions on trade in goods,
including agricultural products;
c. to promote, through the expansion of reciprocal trade, the harmonious
development of the economic relations between the Parties;
d. to provide fair conditions of competition in trade between the Parties;
e. to contribute by the removal of barriers to trade, to the harmonious
development and expansion of world trade;
f. to create conditions for further
encouragement of investments particularly
for the development of joint investments in
both countries;
g. to promote trade and co-operation between
the Parties in third country markets. 
4
CHAPTER II
FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
Article 2
Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to products originating in the territory
of each Party falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonised Commodity
Description and Coding System with the exception of the products listed in
Annex I of this Agreement.
Article 3
 Abolition of Customs Duties on Imports and Charges Having Equivalent
Effect
1. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect applicable on imports
into Turkey to products originating in Syria shall be abolished on the date of
entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Customs duties and charges having equivalent effect applicable on imports
into Syria to products originating in Turkey shall be submitted to a linear
dismantling to zero according to the following scheme and schedule:
a) All duties at 1%, 1,5%, 1.7%. 3% and 3,5% listed in Annex II
shall be abolished at the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement.
b) Except for products covered by paragraphs g and h, all duties at
5% and 7% listed in Annex II shall be abolished in three years
after the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
c) Except for products covered by paragraphs g and h, all duties at
10%, 11,75% and 14,5% listed in Annex II shall be abolished in
six years after the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
d) Except for products covered by paragraphs g and h, all duties at
20% and 23,5% listed in Annex II shall be abolished in nine
years after the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
e) Except for products covered by paragraphs g and h, all duties at
29%, 35% and 47% listed in Annex II shall be abolished in
twelve years after the date of the entry into force of this
Agreement. 
5
f) Except for products 8703.23.91 and 8703.23.92, all duties above
50% listed in Annex II shall be brought down to 50% at the entry
into force of this Agreement and shall be abolished in twelve
years after the date of the entry into force of this Agreement.
g) For products covered by the Annex of the Ministerial Declaration
on Trade in Information Technology Products signed in
Singapore on 13 December 1996 (Information Technology
Agreement of the World Trade Organisation), all duties listed in
Annex II shall be abolished at the date of the entry into force of
this Agreement.
h) For products of the categories HS 28, 29, 30, 31, 35, 36, 37 and
38, all duties listed in Annex II shall be abolished at the date of
the entry into force of this Agreement.
i) For product 8703.23.91 as specified in Annex II, the duty shall
be brought down in a linear manner from 145% to 65% in three
years after the entry into force of this Agreement, and then be
abolished in the nine remaining years of the transition period.
j) For product 8703.23.92 as specified in Annex II, the duty shall
be brought down in a linear manner from 255% to 150% in three
years after the entry into force of this Agreement, and then be
abolished in the nine remaining years of the transition period.
3. In the event of serious difficulties for a given product, the schedule
applicable under paragraph (2) above may be reviewed by the Association
Committee by common accord on the understanding that the schedule may
not be extended in respect of the product concerned beyond the maximum
transitional period of 12 years. If the Association Committee has not taken
a decision within thirty days of an application by Syria to review the
schedule for a given product, Syria may suspend the concerned schedule
provisionally for a period that may not exceed one year.
Article 4
Customs Duties of a Fiscal Nature
The provisions concerning the abolition of customs duties on imports shall also
apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
Article 5
Structural Adjustment

1. Exceptional measures of limited duration that derogate from the provisions of
Article 3 may be taken by Syria in the form of an increase or reintroduction of
customs duties during the transition period. 
6
a) These measures may only concern infant industries, or certain sectors
undergoing restructuring or facing serious difficulties, particularly where
these difficulties produce major social problems.
b) Customs duties applicable on imports into Syria of products originating in
Turkey introduced by these measures may not exceed 25% ad valorem
and shall maintain an element of preference for products originating in
Turkey. The total yearly average value of imports of the products that are
subject to these measures may not exceed 20% of the total yearly average
value of imports of industrial products originating in Turkey during the
last three years for which statistics are available.
c) These measures shall be applied for a period not exceeding five years
unless a longer duration is authorised by the Association Council. They
shall cease to apply at the latest on the expiration of the maximum
transitional period of twelve years.
d) No such measures may be introduced in respect of a product if more than
three years have elapsed since the elimination of all duties and
quantitative restrictions or charges or measures having equivalent effect
concerning that product.
e) Syria shall inform the Association Council of any exceptional measures it
intends to take. Within thirty days after this notification, Turkey may
request consultations on such measures and the sectors to which they
apply before they are implemented. When taking such measures, Syria
shall provide the Council with a timetable for the elimination of the
customs duties introduced under this Article. This timetable shall provide
for a phasing out of these duties in equal annual instalments starting at the
latest two years after their introduction. The Association Council may
decide on a different timetable.
2. By way of derogation from the sub-paragraph c) of the paragraph 1, the
Association Council may exceptionally, in order to take account of the
difficulties involved in setting up a new industry, authorise Syria to maintain
the measures already taken pursuant to paragraph 1 for a maximum period of
three years beyond the twelve years transitional period.
 BASIC AND PROCESSED AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS AND
FISHERIES

Article 6
Scope
1. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to basic and processed agricultural
products and fisheries originating in the territory of each Party. 
7
2. The term "basic and processed agricultural products and fisheries" means,
for the purpose of this Agreement, the products falling within Chapters 01 to
24 of the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System and the
products listed in Annex I of this Agreement.
3. Taking into account the role of agriculture in their respective economies, the
development of trade in agricultural products, the high sensitivity of
agricultural products and the rules of their respective agricultural policy, the
Parties shall examine in the Association Committee the possibilities of
granting further concessions to each other in trade in agricultural products.
Article 7
Exchange of Concessions
The Parties shall mutually grant concessions set forth in Protocol I in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
Article 8
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
1. The Parties shall co-operate in the area of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures (SPS) with the objective of facilitating trade. The Parties
will be bound by the principles set out in the WTO Agreement on the
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, when applying
SPS-measures.
2. On request, the Parties shall identify and address problems that may
arise from the application of specific SPS-measures with a view to
reaching mutually acceptable solutions.
Article 9
Specific Safeguards on Agricultural Products
1. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Agreement and in particular Article
22, if imports of products originating in the territory of either Party, which are
subject to concessions granted under this Agreement, cause serious
disturbance to their markets or domestic regulatory mechanisms, both Parties
shall enter into consultations immediately to find an appropriate solution.
Pending such solution, the Party concerned may take the measures it deems
necessary, in accordance with the relevant WTO rules.
2. In the selection of appropriate measures, priority must be given to those least
disturbing the functioning of this Agreement. The safeguard measures shall be
notified immediately to the Association Committee and shall be subject to
periodic consultations within that Committee, particularly with a view to their
abolition as soon as circumstances permit. 
8
COMMON PROVISIONS
Article 10
Classification of Goods
The Parties shall apply their respective Customs Tariffs on the classification of
goods in their bilateral trade covered by this Agreement.
Article 11
Basic Duties
1. For each product, the basic customs duty to which the tariff elimination and
successive reduction provisions are to be applied shall be:
a) the actual applied rates that are prevailing in Turkey on the day of entry
into force of this Agreement;
b) the Syrian tariff set out in Annex II.
2. Any favourable treatment that may be accorded by Syria to the European
Union shall automatically be extended to Turkey.
3. Syria shall also ensure that any rearrangement of the Syrian tariff is not to
bring about increases in the basic duties as a whole set out in Annex II.
4. If following the entry into force of this Agreement, any tariff reduction is
applied on an erga omnes basis; in particular, reductions resulting from the
tariff negotiations in the WTO, such reduced duties shall replace the basic
duties referred to in paragraph 1 as from that date when such reductions are
applied.
5. The Parties shall communicate to each other their respective applied rates on
the day of conclusion of the negotiations.
Article 12
Customs Duties on Imports or Exports and Charges Having Equivalent
Effect
1. No new customs duties on imports or any other charge having equivalent
effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties.

2. All customs duties on exports and any charges having equivalent effect
shall be abolished between the Parties upon entry into force of this
Agreement.
3. No new customs duties on exports or any other charges having equivalent
effect shall be introduced in trade between the Parties. 
9
Article 13
Quantitative Restrictions and Prohibitions on Imports or Exports and
Measures Having Equivalent Effect
1. All quantitative restrictions and prohibitions on imports or exports and
measures having equivalent effect shall be abolished between the Parties upon
the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. From the date of the entry into force of this Agreement no new quantitative
restriction or prohibition on imports or exports and measure having equivalent
effect shall be introduced.
Article 14
Internal Taxation
1. The Parties shall refrain from any measure or practice of an internal fiscal
nature establishing, whether directly or indirectly, discrimination between the
products of one Party and like products originating in the other Party.
2. Products exported to the territory of the Parties may not benefit from
repayment of internal taxes in excess of the amount of direct or indirect taxes
imposed on them.
Article 15
 Customs Unions, Free Trade Areas, Frontier Trade and Other Preferential
Agreements
1. The Agreement shall not preclude the maintenance or establishment of
customs unions, free trade areas or arrangements for frontier trade, except in
so far as they alter the trade arrangements provided for in the Agreement.
2. Consultations between Syria and Turkey shall take place within the
Association Council concerning agreements establishing customs unions or
free trade areas and, where appropriate, on other major issues related to
their respective trade policy with third countries.
Article 16
Dumping and Subsidies
1. If either of the Parties finds that dumping, within the meaning of
Article VI of the GATT 1994, is taking place in trade governed by
this Agreement, it may take appropriate measures against this
practice in accordance with the WTO Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the GATT 1994.
2. If either of the Parties finds that subsidisation, within the meaning
of Articles VI and XVI of GATT 1994, is taking place in trade
governed by this Agreement, it may invoke appropriate measures 
10
against this practice in accordance with the WTO Agreement on
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Paragraph 1 and 2 of this Article,
the procedures laid down in Article 22 shall apply with regard to the
measures taken by any Party.
Article 17
Emergency Action on Imports of Particular Products
1. The provisions of Article XIX of the GATT 1994 and the WTO
Agreement on Safeguards are applicable between the Parties, as regards
concessions granted under this Agreement.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 1 of this Article, the
procedures laid down in Article 22 shall apply with regard to the safeguard
measures taken by any Party.
Article 18
Re-export and Serious Shortage
1. Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 12 and 13 leads to:
a) re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Party to this
Agreement maintains for the product concerned quantitative export
restrictions, export duties or measures or charges having equivalent effect;
or
b) a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting
Party;
and where the situations referred to above give rise or are likely to give rise to
major difficulties for the exporting Party, that Party may take appropriate
measures under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid
down in Article 22 of this Agreement. In the selection of the measures,
priority must be given to those which least disturb the functioning of the
arrangements in this Agreement. The measures shall be non-discriminatory
and shall be eliminated when conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
In addition, the measures that may be adopted shall not operate to increase the
exports of or the protection afforded to domestic industry processing the
goods concerned by the measures.
2. Any measures applied pursuant to this Article shall be immediately notified to
the Association Committee and shall be subject of period of consultations
within that body, particularly with a view to establish a timetable for their
elimination as soon as circumstances permit. 
11
Article 19
General Exceptions
This Agreement shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports
or goods in transit justified by the international agreements the Parties take part
and on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection
of health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures
possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; the protection of intellectual,
industrial and commercial property. Such prohibitions or restrictions must not,
however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction
on trade between the Parties.
Article 20
Rules of Origin and Co-operation between the Customs Administrations
1. The Parties agree to apply the actual harmonised preferential rules of origin in
the context of the System of Pan-Euro-Med Cumulation of Origin in the
mutual trade.
2. Protocol II lays down the rules of origin and methods of administrative cooperation.
Article 21
Balance of Payments Difficulties
Where either Party is in a serious balance of payments difficulty or under threat
thereof, the Party concerned may in accordance with the conditions laid down
within the framework of WTO/GATT 1994 and with Articles VIII and XIV of
Agreement of International Monetary Fund, adopt restrictive measures, which
shall be of limited duration and may not go beyond what is necessary to remedy
the balance of payments situation. The Party concerned shall inform the other
Party forthwith of their introduction and submit to the other Party, as soon as
possible, a time schedule of their removal.
Article 22
Notifications and Consultations Procedure for the Application of Measures
1. Before initiating the procedure for the application of measures set out in this
Article, the Parties shall endeavour to solve any difference between themselves
through direct consultations, and shall inform each other thereof.
2. In the cases specified in Articles 9, 16, 17, 18, 24 and 43, a Party, which
considers resorting to any measure, shall promptly notify the Association
Committee thereof. The Party concerned shall provide the Association
Committee with all relevant information and give it the assistance required to
examine the case. Consultations between the Parties shall take place without 
12
delay in the Association Committee with a view to finding a commonly
acceptable solution.
3. If, within one month of the matter being referred to the Association Committee,
the Party in question fails to put an end to the practice objected to or to the
difficulties notified and in the absence of a decision by the Association
Committee in the matter, the concerned Party may adopt the measures it
considers necessary to remedy the situation.
4. The measures taken shall be notified immediately to the Association
Committee. They shall be restricted, with regard to their extent and duration, to
what is strictly necessary in order to rectify the situation giving rise to their
application and shall not be in excess of the damage caused by the practice or
the difficulty in question. Priority shall be given to such measures that will
least disturb the functioning of this Agreement.

5. The measures taken shall be the subject of regular consultations within the
Association Committee with a view to their relaxation, or abolition when
conditions no longer justify their maintenance.
6. Where exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action make prior
examination impossible, the Party concerned may, in the cases of Articles 9,
16, 17, 18, 24 and 43 apply forthwith the precautionary measures strictly
necessary to remedy the situation. The measures shall be notified without delay
to the Association Committee and consultations between the Parties to this
Agreement shall take place within the Association Committee.
CHAPTER III
TRADE-RELATED PROVISIONS
Article 23
Payments and Transfers
1. Payments relating to trade between the Parties and the transfer of such
payments to the territory of the Party where the creditor resides shall
be free from any restrictions.
2. The Parties shall refrain from any restrictions on currency exchange or
on the repayment or acceptance of short and medium-term credits
covering commercial transactions in which a resident participates.
3. No restrictive measures shall apply to transfers related to investments and in
particular to the repatriation of amounts invested or reinvested and of any kind
of revenues stemming there from. 
13
4. It is understood that the provisions in this Article are without prejudice to the
equitable, non-discriminatory application of their respective legislation in
connection with criminal offences and orders or judgements in administrative
and ad judicatory proceedings.
Article 24
Rules of Competition Concerning Undertakings, State Aid
1. The following are incompatible with the proper implementation of this
Agreement, in so far as they affect trade between the Parties:
a) all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of
undertakings and concerted practices between undertakings which have as
their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of
competition;
b) abuse by one or more undertakings of dominant position in the territories
of the Parties as a whole or in a substantial part thereof;
c) any state aid which distorts or threatens to distort competition by
favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods.
2. Each Party shall ensure transparency in the area of state aid. Upon request by
one Party, the other Party shall provide information on particular individual
cases of state aid.
3. If either of the Parties considers that a particular practice is incompatible with
the terms of the first paragraph of this Article, it may take appropriate measures
after consultation within the Association Committee or after thirty working
days following referral for such consultations.
4. In the case of practices incompatible with paragraph 1 (c), such appropriate
measures may, where the WTO/GATT 1994 applies thereto, only be adopted in
conformity with the procedures and under the conditions laid down by the
WTO/GATT 1994 and any other relevant instrument negotiated under its
auspices, which are applicable between the Parties.
5. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary adopted in conformity with this
Article, the Parties shall exchange information taking into account the
limitations imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy.
Article 25
Intellectual, Industrial and Commercial Property
1. The Parties shall grant and ensure adequate and effective protection of
intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights in line with the WTO
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs)
and other international Agreements. This shall encompass effective means of
enforcing such rights. 
14
2. The Parties shall regularly review the implementation of this Article. If
difficulties, which affect trade, arise in connection with intellectual, industrial
and commercial property rights, either Party may request urgent consultations
to find mutually satisfactory solutions within the framework of the Association
Committee.
Article 26
 State Monopolies
1. The Parties shall progressively adjust any state monopoly of a commercial
character so as to ensure that by the end of the fifth year following the entry
into force of this Agreement, no discrimination regarding the conditions under
which goods are procured and marketed will exist between nationals of the
Parties.
2. The Association Committee shall be informed about the measures adopted to
implement this objective.
Article 27
Public Procurement
1. The Parties consider the opening of the public procurements on the basis of
non-discrimination and reciprocity, to be a desirable objective.
2. As of the entry into force of this Agreement, both Parties shall grant each
other’s companies’ access to contract award procedures a treatment no less
favourable than that accorded to companies of any other country.
Article 28
Technical Regulations
1. The Parties shall co-operate in the field of technical regulations, standards and
conformity assessment; and notwithstanding the respective bilateral and
international obligations shall take appropriate measures to ensure that this
Agreement will be applied effectively and harmoniously to the mutual
interests of both Parties.
2. The Parties agree to hold immediate consultations in the framework of the
Association Committee in case a Party considers that the other Party has taken
measures which are likely to create, or have created, a technical obstacle to
trade, in order to find an appropriate solution in conformity with the WTO
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade.
3. The extent of the Parties' obligations to notify draft technical regulations shall
be applied in accordance with the provisions of the WTO Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade. Turkey will make its notifications of draft
technical regulations to the WTO available to Syria. Syria shall notify draft
technical regulations to Turkey. 
15
CHAPTER IV
ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION
Article 29
Objective
1. Both Parties will exert all necessary efforts to develop Economic, Scientific,
Technical and Commercial Cooperation between the two sides.
2. Both Parties will promote and facilitate continuously the enhancement and
diversification of trade exchanges and economic and technical cooperation
between their economic establishments, enterprises, organisations and
institutions within the framework of their respective rules and regulations as
well as their international obligations.
3. Turkey shall give priority for providing Syria with technical assistance in the
primary fields of economic co-operation referred in Article 32.
4. Parties will encourage operations designed to develop co-operation among the
countries of the region and particularly the ones taking part within the EuroMediterranean Partnership.
Article 30
Scope
1. Co-operation and technical assistance shall;
a) focus primarily on infant industries, sectors suffering from
internal difficulties or affected by the overall process of
liberalization of the Syrian economy and in particular by
the liberalisation of trade between Syria and Turkey.
b) focus on areas likely to bring the economies of the Parties
closer together.
c) focus on capacity building and training programs, which
would assist in creating the necessary institutions and
human resources for implementation of this Agreement
with Syria.
d) encourage the implementation of measures designed to
develop intra-regional co-operation.
e) support joint-ventures, twinning initiatives and joint
investments amongst the private sector institutions.
2. The Parties agree to extend economic co-operation to other areas not
covered by the provisions of this Chapter such as and not inclusive to
irrigation, transportation, communication, higher education, tourism,
development and planning. 
16
Article 31
Methods and Modalities
1. The Agreements concluded between the Parties in the fields of the
economic, commercial, technical and scientific co-operation shall be
implemented without prejudicing the provisions of this Agreement.
2. The Parties shall further determine the methods and modalities for
economic co-operation and technical assistance; in particular within
the work of the Association Council referred in Article 39. In this
regard, the Association Council may decide to establish subcommittees.
3. Economic co-operation and technical assistance shall be implemented
in particular by:
a) regular exchange of information and ideas in every sector
of co-operation including meetings of officials and experts;
b) encouragement of reciprocal participation in fairs and
exhibitions;
c) transfer of advice, expertise and training;
d) implementation of joint actions such as seminars and
workshops;
e) technical, administrative and regulatory assistance;
f) encouragement of joint ventures;
g) dissemination of information on co-operation.

Article 32
Primary Fields of Economic Co-operation
The co-operation under the scope of this Agreement shall primarily involve the
following fields referred in detail between Articles 33 to 36 of the Agreement:
a) Industry;
b) Agriculture;
c) Services;
d) Small and medium-sized enterprises. 
17
Article 33
Industrial Co-operation
The main aim of industrial co-operation will be to support Syria, in its efforts to
modernize and diversify industry and, in particular, to create an environment
favourable to private sector and industrial development by enhancing co-operation
between the two Parties' economic operators.
Article 34
Co-operation in the Agriculture and Fisheries
Taking into account the importance of co-operation in agriculture and fisheries
towards the enhancement of bilateral relations, the Parties determined the
following as the desired fields of co-operation:
a) exchange of scientific and technical information and
expertise relating to agriculture, forestry, water resources
and rural development;
b) reciprocal exchange of experts;
c) organization of training, seminars, conferences and
meetings, in either of the Parties;
d) establishment of direct joint activities between the
respective institutions;
e) encouragement of investment and trade on agricultural
production, processing and marketing in both countries
and in other markets.
Article 35
Co-operation in Services
1. The Parties to this Agreement recognize the growing importance of trade in
services. In their efforts to gradually develop and broaden their co-operation,
in particular in the context of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, they will
cooperate with the aim of achieving a progressive liberalization and mutual
opening of their markets for trade in services, taking into account relevant
provisions of the WTO-General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) and
multilateral trade negotiations with that respect.
2. The Parties will discuss the means of co-operation in the area of services at the
Association Council.
Article 36
Co-operation between Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
1. With the view to further enhance trade and economic activities, the Parties
shall give priority to promoting business and investment opportunities as well 
18
as joint ventures between small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) of the
two countries. Within this context, the Parties will;
a) exchange expertise on entrepreneurship, management, research and
management centres, quality and production standards;

b) provide market information to create investment opportunities;
c) furnish published documents concerning SMEs.
2. Turkey shall support Syria's efforts towards capacity building for the related
private sector institutions.
CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL, GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 37
Establishment of the Syria - Turkey Association Council
An Association Council is hereby established which as a rule shall be headed by
Ministers in charge of foreign trade and meet at least once a year in accordance
with the conditions laid down in its rules of procedure.
Article 38
Duties of the Association Council
The Association Council shall review the progress made in the implementation of
this Agreement and in the cooperation to support Syrian economic reform and
development efforts. It shall also examine any major issues arising within the
framework of this Agreement including its economic and social impact and any
other bilateral or international issues of mutual interest.
Article 39
Procedures of the Association Council
1. The Association Council shall consist of officials, public and private sector
representatives of both Parties.
2. The Association Council shall establish its rules of procedure.
3. The Association Council shall, for the purpose of attaining the objectives of
this Agreement, have the power to take decisions in the cases provided for
therein.
4. The decisions taken shall be binding on the Parties that shall take the
measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. The Association
Council may also make appropriate recommendations. 
19
5. The Association Council may upon necessity establish working groups or
bodies for the implementation of the Agreement.
6. It shall draw up its decisions and recommendations by agreement between the
two Parties.
Article 40
Establishment of the Association Committee
1. Subject to the powers of the Association Council, an Association
Committee is hereby established which shall be responsible for the
implementation of the Agreement.
2. The Association Council may delegate to the Association Committee, in full
or in part, any of its powers.
Article 41
Procedures of the Association Committee
1. The Association Committee shall convene at Under-secretarial/Deputy
Ministerial level at least twice a year alternatively in Turkey and Syria.
2. The Association Committee shall establish its rules of procedure.
3. The Association Committee shall have the power to take decisions for the
implementation of the Agreement as well as in the areas in which the
Council has delegated its powers to it.
4. It shall draw up its decisions by agreement between the two Parties. These
decisions shall be binding on the Parties that shall take the measures
necessary to implement the decisions taken.
Article 42
Security Exceptions
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Parties from taking any measures,
which they consider necessary:
1. to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to their essential security
interests;
2. for the protection of their essential security interests or for the implementation
of international obligations or national policies:
a) relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to
such traffic in other goods, materials and services as is carried on directly
or indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
b) relating to the non-proliferation of biological and chemical weapons,
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices; or 
20
c) in time of war or other serious international tension constituting threat of
war.
Article 43
Fulfilment of Obligations
1. The Parties shall take all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the
objectives of this Agreement and the fulfilment of their obligations under this
Agreement.
2. If either Party considers that the other Party has failed to fulfil an obligation
under this Agreement, the Party concerned may take the appropriate measures
under the conditions and in accordance with the procedures laid down in
Article 22 of this Agreement.
Article 44
Dispute Settlement
1. Either Party may refer to the Association Council any dispute relating to the
application or interpretation of this Agreement.
2. The Association Council may settle the dispute by means of a decision.
3. Each Party shall be bound to take measures involved in carrying out the
decision referred to in paragraph 2.
4. In the event of it not being possible to settle the dispute in accordance with
paragraph 2, either Party may notify the other of the appointment of an
arbitrator; the other Party must then appoint a second arbitrator within two
months.
5. The two arbitrators shall agree on a third arbitrator being a citizen of a third
country of which both Parties have diplomatic relations. In case of failure to
agree on the third arbitrator within two months, the necessary appointment
shall be made by the Association Council.
6. The arbitrators’ decisions shall be taken by majority vote.
7. Each Party to the dispute must take the steps required to implement the
decision of the arbitration.
Article 45
Evolutionary Clause
1. Where either Party considers that it would be useful and in the interest of the
economies of the Parties to develop the relations established by this
Agreement by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a
reasoned request to the other Party. The Association Council may instruct the
Association Committee to examine this request and, where appropriate, to
make recommendations to it, particularly with a view to opening negotiations. 
21
2. Agreements resulting from the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 will be
subject to ratification or approval by the Parties to this Agreement in
accordance with their national legislation.
Article 46
Amendments
Amendments to this Agreement, as well as to its Annexes and Protocols, shall
enter into force upon the exchange of written notifications through diplomatic
channels, by which the parties inform each other that all necessary requirements
foreseen by their national legislation for the entry into force of this Agreement
have been fulfilled.
Article 47
Protocols and Annexes
Protocols and Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof. The
Association Council may decide to amend the Protocols and Annexes in
accordance with the national legislation of the Parties.
Article 48
Duration and Denunciation
1. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.
2. Either party may denounce this Agreement by a written notification to the
other Party. The Agreement shall terminate on the first day of the seventh
month following the date when the other Party received the denunciation
notice.
Article 49
Entry into Force
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second
month, following the date on which the Parties have notified each
other through diplomatic channels, that their internal legal
requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been
fulfilled.
2. Upon its entry into force, this Agreement shall replace the
following Agreements between the Parties:
a) Accord de Commerce Entre Le Gouvernement de la
République Arabe Syrienne et le Gouvernemet de la
République de Turquie (Commercial Agreement
between the Government of The Syrian Arab
Republic and the Government of the Republic of
Turkey -signed on 17 September 1974).
b) Agreement between the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the Government of the Republic of 
22
Turkey concerning the establishment of the Syrian -
Turkish Joint Committee for Economic, Scientific,
Technical and Commercial Co-operation (signed on
23 March 1982).
c) Long-Term Economic Co-operation Agreement
between the Government of the the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Government of the Republic of
Turkey (signed on 23 March 1982).
3. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorised thereto, have signed this Agreement.
4. DONE at ---- day of----- two thousand and four in duplicate copies in the
Arabic, Turkish and English languages, all texts being equally authentic.
In case of divergence the English text shall prevail.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC 