AGREEMENT
between the Government of Ukraine and the Government
of the Republic of Uzbekistan on free trade
The Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan hereinafter
called Parties to the Agreement
 confirming their adherence to free development of mutual economic cooperation,
 considering set integration economic relations of Ukraine and the Republic of
Uzbekistan,
 aspiring to the development of trade and economic cooperation between Ukraine and the
Republic of Uzbekistan based on equality and mutual benefit,
 admitting that free movement of goods and services requires conducting of mutually
agreed measures,
 confirming adherence of Ukraine and the Republic of Uzbekistan to the principles of
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and World Trade Organization (WTO),
agreed on the following:
ARTICLE 1
1. Parties to the Agreement establish free trade regime for each other.
The Parties to the Agreement do not apply customs duties, taxes and collections which are of
equivalent force and also quantitative limitations for export and/or import of goods originated
from the customs territory of one of the Parties to the Agreement and intended for customs
territory of another Party to the Agreement. Exceptions from this trade regime on agreed
commodities nomenclature are regulated with the documents which are inalienable part to this
Agreement.
2. According to paragraph 1 of this article the Parties to the Agreement each year work out and
conform the general list of exceptions from free trade regime and also methods of application of
such exceptions.
3. For the purposes of this Agreement and for a period of its operation the goods originated from
the territories of the Parties to the Agreement mean goods determined with Instructions for
determining the country of goods origin of September 24, 1993 confirmed by the Resolution of
the Council of Heads of Governments of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
ARTICLE 2
Each Party to the Agreement shall not: 
 directly or indirectly levy internal taxes and collections exceeding correspondent taxes
and collections applied for the same goods of domestic production or goods originated from the
third countries for the goods which are subject to this Agreement;
 apply for stockpiling, reloading, storage, transportation of goods originated from the
territory of other Party to the Agreement and also for payments and transfer of payments rules
other than those applied in the same cases for domestic goods or goods originated from the third
countries.
ARTICLE 3
The Parties to the Agreement in their mutual trade shall keep from applying towards each other
discriminatory measures, introducing quantitative limitations or other equivalent measures for
export and/or import of goods according to this Agreement.
The Parties to the Agreement may introduce quantitative or other special limitations in unilateral
order but only for reasonable limits and strictly definite period.
Such limitations shall be of exclusive nature and can apply only in cases determined with the
agreements within GATT/WTO.
The Party to the Agreement applying limitations under this Article shall provide well in advance
to another Party to the Agreement full information including the main reasons of introduction,
forms and supposed terms of applying the above limitations, afterwards the consultations are to
be set.
ARTICLE 4
This Agreement does not prevent the right of any Party to the Agreement to apply unilaterally
measures of state regulation in sphere of foreign economic relations generally accepted by the
international practice and which it considers necessary for protection of its interests or which
unconditionally necessary for execution of international treaties to which it is a member or
intends to become a member, if such measures deal with:
 protection of human life and health; environment; animal and plant protection;
 protection of public moral and public order;
 ensuring of national security;
 trade in weapons, ammunition and military equipment;
supply of decomposable materials and sources of radioactive elements, utilization of radioactive
waste;
 trade in gold, silver or other precious metals and stones;
 protection of exhaustible natural resources; 
 breach of balance-of-payments;
 export restrictions for goods internal prices for which are lower than world prices due to
programs of state support;
 protection of industrial and intellectual property;
 protection of values of national property;
 measures applied in international relations during wartime or other cases of emergency;
 acts to meet commitments subject to UN Charter for keeping international peace and
security.
The Party to the Agreement applying such measures under this Article shall provide well in
advance to another Party to the Agreement full information including the main reasons of
introduction, forms and supposed terms of applying the above limitations, afterwards the
consultations are to be set.
ARTICLE 5
The Parties to the Agreement shall exchange information on a regular basis about:
 internal legal regulation of foreign economic relations including trade issues,
investments, taxation, banking and insurance activity issues and other services, transport and
customs matters including customs statistics.
The Parties to the Agreement shall immediately advise each other of any changes in the national
legislation which can influence execution of this Agreement.
The authorized bodies of the Parties to the Agreement shall conform the order of exchanging of
such information.
The provisions of this Article shall not:
 be interpreted as binding the competent bodies of any Party to the Agreement to provide
information which cannot be obtained under legislation or as a result of common administrative
practice of one of the Parties to the Agreement;
 provide information which can disclose any trade, entrepreneur, industrial, commercial or
professional secret or trading process, or other information disclosure of which would contradict
the state interests of the Party to the Agreement.
ARTICLE 6
The Parties to the Agreement acknowledge unfair business practice as inconsistent with the
purposes of this Agreement and undertake not to do the following: 
 agreements between enterprises, resolutions made by amalgamation of enterprises and
general methods of business practice directed to prevent or restrict competition or break
conditions for it within the territories of the Parties to the Agreement;
 acts due to which one or several enterprises use their dominant position thus restricting
competition within all or considerable part of the territory of the Parties to the Agreement.
ARTICLE 7
To realize measures of tariff and non-tariff regulation of bilateral economic relations, to
exchange statistical information, conduct customs procedures the Parties to the Agreement shall
use a single nine-digit Commodities Nomenclature of foreign economic activity (CN FEA) based
on harmonized system of goods description and coding and Combined tariff and statistical
nomenclature of the European Economic Community. And for their own needs the Parties to the
Agreement if necessary develop Commodities nomenclature other than of nine-digit.
Introduction of standard sample is carried on mutually agreed basis via existing representatives
of the relevant international organizations.
ARTICLE 8
1. The Parties to the Agreement agree that following the principle of free transit is the most
important prerequisite for achieving the purposes of this Agreement and essential element of the
process of their introduction into the system of international division of labor and cooperation.
In this connection each Party to the Agreement shall provide free transit through its territory for
goods from customs territory of other Party to the Agreement and/or the third countries and
intended for customs territory of other Party to the Agreement or any third country, and also
shall provide to the exporters, importers or carriers for transit all existing and necessary means
and services under conditions not worse than those provided to domestic exporters, importers or
to exporters, importers or carriers of any third country.
2. The order and terms of cargoes transit through the territory of states are regulated according to
the international Regulations of carriages.
ARTICLE 9
Each Party to the Agreement shall not allow unsanctioned reexport of goods to the export of
which another Party to the Agreement, where these goods are originated from, applies measures
of tariff and/or non-tariff regulation. The Parties to the Agreement determine the list of goods
which are subject to prohibition for unsanctioned reexport and also exchange the lists of goods to
which measures of tariff and non-tariff regulation are applied.
Such goods can be reexported to the third countries only with the written consent and under the
terms determined by an authorized body of the state of origin of these goods. 
ARTICLE 10
With the purpose of conducting the agreed policy of export control towards the third countries
the Parties to the Agreement shall hold regular consultations in order to determine measures for
creation of the effective system of export control.
ARTICLE 11
The provisions of this Agreement substitute provisions of bilateral agreements previously
concluded between the Parties to the Agreement to the extent to which the latter ones are either
inconsistent with the former ones or identical with them.
ARTICLE 12
Each Party to the Agreement according to its legislation and international commitments shall
provide equal court protection of rights and legal interests to the entities of economic activity of
another Party to the Agreement.
ARTICLE 13
Disputes between the Parties to the Agreement regarding interpretation or application of the
provisions of this Agreement shall be settled through negotiations or other way acceptable for
the Parties to the Agreement.
The Parties to the Agreement shall tend to avoid conflict situations in mutual trade.
ARTICLE 14
To realize the purposes of this Agreement and elaborate recommendations on improving trade
and economic cooperation between two countries the Parties to the Agreement agreed to
establish joint Ukrainian-Uzbek commission.
ARTICLE 15
This Agreement comes into force from the date of exchange of notices on finishing the necessary
internal state procedures by the Parties to the Agreement and shall be valid for twelve months
from the date when one of the Parties to the Agreement sent written notice to another Party to the
Agreement about its intention to terminate the Agreement.
In case of termination of this Agreement its provisions shall be applied towards the contracts
between enterprises and organizations of both Parties to the Agreement, concluded but not
executed during the period of its validity, until they are fully executed. 
Executed in Tashkent this 29 day of December 1994 in two original copies each in Ukrainian,
Uzbek and Russian languages and all texts have equal force.
For the purposes of interpretation of the provisions of this Agreement the text in Russian
language shall prevail.
On behalf of On behalf of the Government
the Government of Ukraine of the Republic of Uzbekistan 
PROTOCOL
of exceptions from free trade regime to the Agreement between the Government of Ukraine
and the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan on free trade of December 29, 1994
 The Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan
(hereinafter called "Parties to the Agreement"),
 according to Article 1 of the Agreement between the Government of Ukraine and the
Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan on free trade of December 29, 1994 (hereinafter
called "Agreement"),
 agreed to the following:
ARTICLE 1
The Parties to the Agreement not preventing the right stipulated with Article 4 of the Agreement
to apply unilaterally measures of state regulation in sphere of foreign economic relations
generally accepted by the international practice establish exceptions from free trade regime on
commodities nomenclature indicated in Annexes 1 and 2 to this Protocol.
ARTICLE 2
Regarding the goods indicated in Annexes 1 and 2 to this Protocol, the Parties to the Agreement
introduce for each other free trade regime as to the application of customs duties, taxes and
collections which are of equivalent force and most favorable treatment as to the quantitative
limitations for export and/or import of these goods.
This Protocol is inalienable part of the Agreement and becomes valid after all internal state
procedures necessary for this have been performed. This Protocol shall be valid for the period
until the new Protocol stipulated with Article 1 of the Agreement is concluded.
The Protocol of exception from free trade regime of February 18, 1995 to the Agreement
between the Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan on free
trade of December 29, 1994 shall terminate after this Protocol becomes valid.
Executed in Kiev this 18 day of April, 1997 in two original copies each in Ukrainian, Uzbek and
Russian languages and all texts have equal force.
For the purpose of interpretation of the provisions of this Protocol the text in Russian language
shall prevail.
On behalf of On behalf of the Government
the Government of Ukraine of the Republic of Uzbekistan 

ANNEX TEXT: 

Annex 1 to the Protocol of exceptions from free trade regime between the Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan on free trade of December 29, 1994 Nomenclature of commodities which are subject to exception by Ukraine from free trade regime with the Republic of Uzbekistan while exported from Ukraine to the Republic of Uzbekistan 
Annex 2 to the Protocol of exceptions from free trade regime between the Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan on free trade of December 29, 1994 Nomenclature of commodities which are subject to exception by the Republic of Uzbekistan from free trade regime with Ukraine 
